22
is the 2 → N cross section (σ ≥ 0). After analytically
continuing s to the complex plane, the analytic structure
of A(s) is determined by isolated poles, due to intermediate single-particle on-shell production, and branch cuts,
due to multi-particle on-shell production. This allows
for
P
a power expansion of the amplitude: A(s) = k λk sk .
To isolate individual expansion coefficients, we can then
apply Cauchy’s integral formula
I
1
ds
λn =
A(s) ,
(2.45)
2πi γ sn+1
where we integrate along a suitable contour γ as indicated
by the green/inner dashed line in Fig. 4. For simplicity,
we consider only a branch cut on the real axis for |s| > s0
(gray shaded regions). Enlarging the radius of our contour γ (green/inner dashed line), we can deform it to a
new contour containing a circle γ ′ (blue/outer dashed
line) and an integration around the branch cuts (orange
dashed lines marked by “Disc”). We find
I
ds
1
A(s)
λn =
2πi γ ′ sn+1
(2.46)
Z −s0 Z ∞ 
1
ds
+
Disc A(s) ,
+
2πi
sn+1
−∞
s0
where we defined the discontinuity on the real axis by
Disc A(s) = limϵ→0 [A(s + iϵ) − A(s − iϵ)] = 2i Im A(s),
using the Schwarz reflection principle, A(s∗ ) = A(s)∗ .
Assuming that A(s) falls off sufficiently rapidly at infinity,
such that the integral along γ ′ vanishes when the radius
of the circle is taken to infinity, we obtain
Z
 ∞ ds
1
1 + (−1)n
λn =
Im A(s)
n+1
π
s0 s
(2.47)
Z
 ∞ ds
1
=
1 + (−1)n
σ(s)
,
n
π
s0 s

where we changed variables s → −s in the first integral
of the second line in Eq. (2.46) and used A(−s) = A(s),
which holds due to the crossing symmetry of the forward scattering amplitude, from which we can deduce
Disc A(−s) = −Disc A(s). Furthermore, we directly applied the optical theorem (2.44) in the second equality.
We thus find λn = 0 for odd n, whereas
Z
2 ∞ ds
λn =
σ(s) ≥ 0
(2.48)
π s0 sn
holds for even n. The latter condition provides a positivity
constraint on a combination of Wilson coefficients. For
more details on this topic see (Adams et al., 2006).

As a concrete but simple example, consider an EFT
of a real massless scalar ϕ, whose Lagrangian contains a

s

Disc

Disc

γ
γ0
Figure 4 Analytical structure of a scattering amplitude containing a branch cut (gray shaded region) on the real s axis.
We also show certain integration contours that we use to determine positivity constraints on the coefficients entering the
amplitude. See text for more details.

single d = 8 interaction term:
L=

1
C8
2
(∂µ ϕ)(∂ µ ϕ) +
[(∂µ ϕ)(∂ µ ϕ)] .
2
2Λ4

(2.49)

The 2 → 2 scattering amplitude M for this theory reads
2
2
8
M(s, t) = 2 C
Λ4 (s + t + st), where we used s + t + u = 0.
Thus, we obtain the forward amplitude
A(s) = lim M(s, t) = 2
t→0

C8 2
s .
Λ4

(2.50)

Realizing that λ2 = 2C8 /Λ4 and using our previous result
in Eq. (2.48) we find C8 > 0. Therefore, we find that
the Wilson coefficient C8 must be positive based only on
unitarity and analyticity. More details on this specific
example can be found in (Remmen and Rodd, 2019).
This type of bounds can also be exploited for more
complicated theories, such as the SMEFT. Of course, in
general the λn depend on several different coefficients
and we can thus only determine certain combinations of
Wilson coefficients that must be positive. In fact, there
has been a lot of progress on this front recently (Bellazzini
et al., 2021; Chala and Santiago, 2022; Dvali et al., 2012;
Remmen and Rodd, 2019, 2022; Yamashita et al., 2021;
Zhang and Zhou, 2019), narrowing down the possible
range of SMEFT coefficients, at both dimension six and
eight.

23
3. Gauge anomalies and reparametrization invariance

To conclude this section, we mention two additional
aspects of the SMEFT coefficients related to the symmetry
properties of the underlying theory.
The first aspect deals with gauge anomalies. As is
well known, in (classically) renormalizable theories the
criterion for the absence of gauge anomalies relies entirely on the charges of the fermion fields under the local
symmetry (Georgi and Glashow, 1972). When moving
from the renormalizable case to the non-renormalizable
one, this property is less obvious. In particular, doubts
have been raised if the request of anomaly cancellations
does impose any additional constraint on the SMEFT
Wilson coefficients. This issue has been clarified recently
in (Feruglio, 2021), where it has been shown that the
dependence of the anomaly on the non-renormalizable
part of the Lagrangian can be removed by adding a local
counterterm to the theory. As a result, the condition
for gauge anomaly cancellation is controlled only by the
charge assignment of the fermion sector, exactly as in
the renormalizable theory. In other words, no additional
constraints can be derived on the SMEFT by requesting
anomaly cancellations.
The second aspect is the so-called reparametrization
invariance of the dimension-six coefficients appearing in
ψ̄ψ → ψ̄ψ scattering amplitudes (Brivio and Trott, 2017).
In the Warsaw basis, the operators contributing ψ̄ψ → ψ̄ψ
scattering give rise to a flat direction. For some time,
this created confusion in global SMEFT fits, given the
central role played by ψ̄ψ → ψ̄ψ data in constraining the
parameter space. As pointed out in (Brivio and Trott,
2017), this fact is a consequence of the combined action of
a field redefinition (for the vector fields) together with a
shift of the vector–fermion couplings. This transformation
leaves all the (physical) ψ̄ψ → ψ̄ψ amplitudes unchanged.
However, this is not a complete degeneracy of the theory,
and indeed it is lifted when considering other amplitudes,
such as ψ̄ψ → ψ̄ψ ψ̄ψ. This property illustrates well the
importance of considering complete sets of data, and
a complete operator basis, when performing bottom-up
analyses of the SMEFT parameter space.

III. GLOBAL SYMMETRIES
A. The role of accidental symmetries

A key concept in any EFT is that of accidental symmetries, i.e., symmetries that arise in the lowest-dimensional
operators as indirect consequences of the field content
and the symmetries explicitly imposed on the theory.
Within the SMEFT, two well-known examples are baryon
number (B) and lepton number (L). These are exact
accidental global symmetries of the d = 4 part of the
Lagrangian, or the SM: they do not need to be imposed

in the SM because gauge invariance forbids to write any
d = 4 operator violating B or L.
If the accidental symmetries are not respected by the
underlying UV completion, we expect them to be violated by the higher-dimensional operators. The strong
bounds on B-violating terms from proton stability, and
the tiny coefficient of the L-violating Weinberg operator
in Eq. (2.2) from neutrino masses, indicate that such
symmetries remain almost unbroken in the SMEFT. This
observation can be interpreted in a natural way assuming
that the fundamental interactions responsible for B and L
violation appear at very high energy scales, therefore, assuming a very high cutoff scale for these operators. This is
not in contradiction with the possibility of having a lower
cutoff scale for the d = 6 SMEFT operators preserving
B and L, since the symmetry-preserving sector cannot induce violations of the global symmetries. In other words,
accidental global symmetries allow us to define a stable
partition of the tower of effective operators into different
sectors characterized by different cutoff scales, reflecting
a possible multi-scale structure of the underlying theory.
The key point is that this partition is stable with respect
to quantum corrections.
Besides B and L, the SM Lagrangian (or better the
SMEFT at d = 4) has two additional exact accidental
global symmetries related to the individual lepton flavor,
that we can conventionally choose as Le−µ and Lµ−τ
(combined with L, these correspond to the conservation
of each individual lepton flavor). However, a much larger
number of approximate accidental symmetries appears in
the limit where we neglect the tiny Yukawa couplings of
the light families and the small off-diagonal entries of the
Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa matrix. These approximate
flavor symmetries are responsible for the smallness of
flavor-changing neutral-current (FCNC) processes, such
as B–B and K–K mixing, which are severely constrained
by data. Despite the precision and the energy scales involved are very different, the situation is similar to that
of B and L: the experimental bounds on FCNC processes imply high cutoff scales for the d = 6 operators
violating the approximate SM flavor symmetries. Similarly to the case of exact accidental symmetries, also
the approximate accidental symmetries allow us to conceive an underlying multi-scale structure, separating the
symmetry-preserving and symmetry-breaking sectors of
the theory (the maximal scale separation being limited by
the size of the explicit symmetry-breaking terms). This
implies that the scale of the symmetry-preserving sector
of the SMEFT can be as low as few TeV, if at that scale
not only B and L, but also the tightly constrained accidental flavor symmetries, remain valid, or are broken only
by small symmetry-breaking terms.
The technical implementation of the concept of small
symmetry-breaking terms, in presence of approximate
(or exact) symmetries in the low-energy sector of the
EFT, is obtained via the spurion technique, discussed

