PMID 16592255
TITLE: Observational validation of the chronometric cosmology: I. Preliminaries and the redshift-magnitude relation.
ABSTRACT: Results of comprehensive observational tests of the cosmological theory proposed by Segal in 1972 are summarized in this and succeeding notes. Within a framework of natural and general causality and symmetry considerations, the theory is mathematically essentially unique. It implies definite relations between directly observed quantities (redshift, apparent magnitude and diameter, number counts, and the like) which are entirely free of adjustable parameters, such as the q(0) and Lambda of general relativistic cosmologies. Rigorous statistical analysis of large ( greater, similar100) or systematically defined samples of galaxies or quasars accepts these relations at substantial probability levels. Note I establishes uniform statistical procedures and compares the redshift-magnitude relations of major samples with the theoretical relations of the present and expansion theories.

PMID 16578743
TITLE: Theoretical foundations of the chronometric cosmology.
ABSTRACT: The derivation of the redshift (z)-distance (r) relation in the chronometric theory of the Cosmos is amplified. The basic physical quantities are represented by precisely defined self-adjoint operators in global Hilbert spaces. Computations yielding explicit bounds for the deviation of the theoretical prediction from the relation z = tan(2)(r/2R) (where R denotes the radius of the universe), earlier derived employing less formal procedures, are carried out for: (a) a cut-off plane wave in two dimensions; (b) a scalar spherical wave in four dimensions; (c) the same as (b) with appropriate incorporation of the photon spin. Both this deviation and the (quantum) dispersion in redshift are shown to be unobservably small. A parallel classical treatment is possible and leads to similar results.

PMID 11607440
TITLE: Geometric derivation of the chronometric redshift.
ABSTRACT: The chronometric redshift-distance relation z = tan 2(1/2rho), where rho is the distance in radians in the Einstein metric, is derived by an elementary geometric analysis comparable to that in traditional analysis of the expanding universe model. The differential dTt of Einstein time evolution Tt through time t, as applied to the local Minkowski coordinates x, takes the form sec2(1/2t). At the point of observation t = rho, implying that for a sufficiently localized source, observed wave lengths are a factor of sec2(1/2rho) greater than the corresponding emitted wave lengths.

PMID 16592745
TITLE: Some recent tests of the chronometric cosmology.
ABSTRACT: Two papers comparing particular samples of galaxies and quasars with certain predictions of the chronometric cosmology, and reporting significant deviations, are shown not to be altogether correct in their theoretical procedures. It is shown in addition that although the data employed in these papers are in part privately held, published data on similar samples fit the chronometric predictions satisfactorily, and fail to fit nonevolutionary Friedmann models with conventional values for q(0). As a check on and a refinement of our statistical analysis, the magnitude bias was removed from several well-documented samples by maximum-likelihood estimation of the individual probabilities in the differential luminosity function, without constraint on its form. The same conclusions as earlier follow, both in the classic regime of bright low-redshift galaxies and that of quasars.

PMID 16592487
TITLE: Observational validation of the chronometric cosmology: The redshift-magnitude relation for quasi-stellar objects.
ABSTRACT: A statistical study is made of the redshift-magnitude relation for a recent comprehensive catalogue of quasi-stellar objects. The chronometric theory, although devoid of free parameters such as the q(0) and Lambda of the expansion theory, provides an excellent fit to the observed relation. The expansion theory does not provide an empirically meaningful fit.
