1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                        The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 100:307-324,1995 October
                        © 1995. The American Astronomical Society. All rights reserved. Printed in U.S.A.




                                  MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS IN THE EINSTEIN UNIVERSE AND CHRONOMETRIC COSMOLOGY
                                                                                   I. E. Segal2 and Z. Zhou3
                                                                         Received 1993 October 29; accepted 1995 February 21
                                                                                     ABSTRACT
                                    The theoretical basis for chronométrie cosmology is developed from general physical principles of causality,
                                 cosmic uniformity, and quantum phenomenology. Empty spacetime M is assumed to be the unique alternative
                                 to Minkowski space Mo that enjoys similar properties of causality, isotropy, and separability into time ® space.
                                 At any given point in Mo there is a unique Poincare-invariant imbedding of Mo into M, and every normalizable
                                 free photon wave function on Mo extends uniquely to the same on M. These features provide a basis for the
                                 comparison of astronomical observables in the respective spacetimes.
                                    Temporal evolution on a cosmic timescale differs greatly in M from temporal evolution in Mo, but on a mi-
                                 croscopic scale the difference appears unobservably small. M is conformally equivalent to the Einstein universe
                                 E = Æ1 X S3, (where R1 denotes the time axis and S3 the space consisting of a three-dimensional sphere). Tem-
                                 poral evolution in M is equivalent to that in E; i.e., simple translation along the time axis R1. This is materially
                                 inequivalent to time evolution in Mo. The “Einstein” and “Minkowski” energies in M and Mo (i.e., conjugate
                                 quantities to the respective times) are correspondingly materially different on a cosmic timescale, although mi-
                                 croscopically they differ by unobservably little. Chronometrie cosmology (CC) proposes that the Einstein energy
                                 is the driving energy of the universe, while the Minkowski energy is the locally observed energy, as required for
                                 coincidence with the local frequency of oscillation. The redshift is correspondingly the excess of the Einstein over
                                 the Minkowski energy. CC is devoid of adjustable cosmological parameters, luminosity, or density evolution,
                                 implies conservation of the Einstein (but not Minkowski) energy, and predicts that remnant radiation will be in
                                 an isotropic Planck-law state.
                                    The redshift-distance law in CC, which takes the form z = tan2 (p/2), where p is the distance in radians on S3,
                                 is derived rigorously for photons of localized spatial support. This relation departs locally from the Hubble law,
                                 which, however, appears seriously flawed (e.g., Segal 1993; Segal et al. 1993, 1994a,b). The chronométrie redshift
                                 is directly proportional to the space curvature, exemplifying the proposal by Hubble & Tolman ( 1935), for an
                                 alternative to the Doppler explanation.
                                 Subject headings: cosmology: theory — distance scale — MHD


                                                                 1. CAUSALITY AND SYMMETRY IN SPACETIME MODELS
                                                                                         1.1. Introduction
                            Chronometrie cosmology (CC) is basically an adaptation of principles expressed by Mach, Einstein, and Minkowski to the
                        formulation of a non-Doppler, temporally homogeneous, “essentially static” model for the redshift. In his seminal paper “Space
                        and Time,” Minkowski ( 1908) explained special relativity as a logical deduction from symmetry principles. In modem terms, his
                        point was essentially that the boost (Lorentz) generators x0dj + {xj/c^do (where dj = d/dx/, 7 = 0, 1, 2, 3) converge as c ^ oo to
                        the corresponding Galilean generators XqSj and suggest thereby a more fundamental character for the Poincaré than for the Galilean
                        group, particularly in view of the Poincaré invariance of the Maxwell equations. In CC, the temporal evolution generator d0 in the
                        Poincaré group is similarly obtained from the temporal evolution generator dt in the Einstein universe E as its radius R -► oo ( where
                        t is the time in E). The inclusion of the Einstein temporal evolution among the fundamental symmetries gives rise to the conformal
                        group, under which the Maxwell equations were shown to be invariant by Bateman (1910) and Cunningham (1910). The Einstein
                        temporal evolution generator dt differs from the Minkowski generator d0 by a fixed differential operator proportional to the space
                        curvature 1 /R, thus exemplifying the suggestion by Hubble & Tolman (1935) that a more natural origin for the redshift than by a
                        cosmic motion would be a space curvature effect.
                           The predictions of CC for observable relations in objectively selected samples of extragalactic sources at both high and low
                        redshifts have been consistent with observation, without luminosity or density evolution, in a wide range of published samples (cf.
                        Segal 1993; Segal et al. 1993, 1994a, b, and references therein). The theoretical basis for CC is, however, technically somewhat
                        sophisticated, involving group theory and Hilbert space considerations. This article is devoted to the clarification of the basic
                        principles of CC, in particular its formulation of cosmic uniformity and the derivation of its redshift-distance law.

                          1
                          2
                            Dedicated to the memory of Oswald Veblen, who first explored the physical relevance of conformal spacetime.
                          3
                            Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139.
                           Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824.
                                                                                                 307



                                     © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                        308                                                                 SEGAL & ZHOU                                                                     Vol. 100
                           Section 1.2 surveys the principal ideas. The universal cosmos, on which CC is based, is described in § 1.3. The meaning and
                        observational significance of cosmic uniformity is developed in § 1.4. The derivation of unique local Minkowski coordinates from
                        cosmic uniformity is treated in § 1.5. The microscopic form of CC in the limit of an infinite cosmic distance scale is identified with
                        relativistic quantum mechanics in § 1.6.
                           Section 2 treats cosmic aspects of normalizable photons. Section 2.1 sets up the photon Hilbert spaces in Minkowski and universal
                        spacetimes. Section 2.2 clarifies the structure and physical interpretation of the energy operators in these spacetimes. Section 2.3
                        develops the analytic relations between photons in the respective spacetimes.
                           Section 3 treats redshift theory in CC. The key ideas are first developed in two spacetime dimensions, via the Schrôdinger and
                        Heisenberg pictures, in §§3.1 and 3.2, respectively. Section 3.3 treats the redshift as a perturbation by an interaction Hamiltonian.
                        The physical case of four dimensions is treated via the Schrôdinger and Heisenberg pictures in §§ 3.4 and 3.5. Section 4 provides
                        discussion and conclusions.
                          The papers by Paneitz & Segal ( 1982a, b) and Paneitz ( 1983) will be referred to as PI, P2, and P3.
                          Among a number of excellent reviews of the topics involved in the following, we note especially those of Hoyle & Narlikar
                        (1974), Wesson (1980), and Will (1992).

                                                                                        1.2. Preliminary Survey
                           In CC, energy is defined in correspondence to the temporal evolution group in the Einstein universe and is conserved, as in
                        traditional microphysics. The redshift arises because this group differs from the corresponding one in the osculating flat Minkowski
                        space at the point of observation, in terms of which the simplest observations are made and reduced. The generator of temporal
                        evolution in this local Minkowski space corresponds to the usual relativistic energy that is measured by extant local apparatus but it
                        is fundamentally inequivalent to the generator of temporal evolution in the global Einstein universe. The latter generator necessarily
                        exceeds the former, not by theoretical fiat but in an intrinsic mathematical way, giving rise to a spectral shift to the red for the energy
                        as measured by the former. But in relation to phenomena of small temporal duration and spatial extent, the two energies are almost
                        identical.
                           CC arose originally as a natural application of the Ansatz that Minkowski ( 1908 ) advanced to explain the essential idea of special
                        relativity (cf. Segal 1951). In modem terms, e.g., of Lichnerowicz (1988) & Faddeev (1989), special relativity is essentially a
                        deformation of Newtonian physics, to which it tends as c -► oo (briefly put). Quantum theory is a similar deformation, of classical
                        physics, as ñ      0. If we take into account the fact that physics requires three fundamental units, it is natural to consider the
                        introduction of a fundamental length, as emphasized by Heisenberg ( 1946 ). CC exemplifies Minkowski’s Ansatz, to the effect that
                        improved physics may require the introduction of a new symmetry group, which tends to the traditional one in the extreme limit
                        of a new fundamental parameter. This new parameter however, is, the cosmic distance scale            rather than the microscopic length
                        that Heisenberg contemplated, to the end of eliminating the ultraviolet divergences of quantum field theory. Somewhat paradoxi-
                        cally, the introduction of this cosmic length effectively removes these divergences in quantum electrodynamics and other nonlinear
                        quantum field theories (see, e.g., Segal & Zhou 1992, 1994).4
                           Indeed, the intractability of the ultraviolet divergences in quantum field theory had earlier led Schwinger ( 1958 ) to conclude that
                         “a convergent [nonlinear local quantum field] theory cannot be formulated within the framework of present spacetime concepts,”
                         somewhat foreshadowing such a result. More specifically, CC basically postulates that the proper spacetime arena for fundamental
                        physics is a variant of Minkowski space that has been called the Einstein-Maxwell cosmos. This spacetime M is conformally
                        equivalent to the Einstein universe E at the same time that it is the maximal spacetime to which Maxwell’s equations canonically
                        extend. In the language of quantum field theory, it is a bare spacetime, meaning that conceptually it precedes the introduction of
                        interactions; in classical terms, it is an empty, free, or reference spacetime, whose metric, moreover, is specified only within con-
                        formal equivalence. In mathematical terms, the Einstein-Maxwell cosmos M is the homogeneous space consisting of the simply
                        connected form of the quotient of the conformal group G* = SU(2,2) by its maximal parabolic subgroup P*, as endowed with the
                        unique locally Minkowskian causal structure that is invariant under G *. There is no invariant metric under the conformal group G
                        ofM.
                           However, there is an invariant fundamental length. This is the distance between antipodal points, when M is represented by the
                        Einstein universe as the conjunction of a time axis represented by the real line Rl with a three-dimensional spherical space S3.
                        There is an eight-parameter family of such representations of M as E, which are distinct but conformally equivalent. Although
                        conformal transformations on E cannot, and do not, leave invariant the Einstein metric dt2 — ds2 mYi (where units are chosen so
                        that c = R= \,R being the radius of S3, and t the time and ds the element of arc length on S3 ), they map antipodal points in space
                        (irrespective of the time) into points whose distance is tt.
                           The “bare” spacetime M acquires structure from the energetic contents of the universe by a natural interpretation of Mach’s
                        principle in this context. ( In quantum field theoretic terms, M becomes “clothed” and takes the form of the Einstein universe E.
                        More specifically, the contents of the universe, i.e., its state, determine a time® space frame in which the energy (which is definable
                        as the expectation value in this state of the infinitesimal generator of time evolution) is minimal. In this way, the contents of the

                           4
                             There is little direct observational evidence of a fundamental length scale. Its main justification is that its introduction leads to accurate and informa-
                        tionally efficient predictions of observed redshift phenomena. It may be noted, however, that while other basic constants such as G could equally be used to
                        complete the set of fundamental units, the distance scale R is unique in its conformal invariance ( Segal 1982).




                                      © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                        No. 2, 1995                                MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS IN EINSTEIN UNIVERSE                                                                          309
                        universe break down its symmetry from the 15 parameter conformal group G applicable to empty spacetime M to the seven-
                        dimensional essential isometry group K of physical spacetime, as represented by the Einstein universe E. The group K is character-
                        ized in purely mathematical terms as the maximal essentially compact subgroup of G ; there is an eight-parameter family of such
                        subgroups, all of which are obtainable from any particular one by a conformal transformation.
                           This framework may appear to depart from the philosophical principle that spacetime exists only as a manifestation of its ener-
                        getic contents. However, CC essentially coordinates this principle with the standpoint introduced into quantum field theory by the
                        advent of renormalization theory. Just as there is a mathematical equivalence between bare and free physical particles, there is one
                        between bare (theoretical) spacetime and free (physical) spacetime, i.e., that in which active interaction is insignificant (cf. also
                        Fock 1964). The Einstein equation represents in CC the simplest causal equation for the propagation of the local versions of the
                        Einstein universe that would arise from perturbations of the bare” Minkowskian causal structure by local concentrations of matter
                        and energy. The local causal structure determines the local metric, apart from a local scale factor. Globally this scale factor is the
                        cosmic distance scale R, or radius of space S3, but it attains a microscopic interpretation from the fact that the minimal energy of
                        Maxwell photons in M (the energy spectrum being discrete) is 2R~l, i.e., twice the space curvature, in units in which c = ft = l.5
                           The absence of an invariant metric under G may appear at first glance as a blemish, but in fact it is an advantageous feature that
                        facilitates the reconciliation of the Newtonian with the Huygens-Leibniz standpoints regarding space and time. It makes possible
                        an objective distinction between reference, or free spacetime, which has a highly symmetrical causal structure, and physical space-
                        time, which has a metric structure reflective of the actual state of the universe and so is symmetrical only to a reduced extent and
                        on the largest scale. On the cosmic scale, this state is represented in CC by E. But on a smaller scale, e.g., of the solar system, there
                        will be perturbations that reduce or eliminate symmetries, which in principle could affect the redshift in CC as well as in FLC. It
                        will be assumed here—as usually done in cosmological theories—that this relatively small scale effect is negligible relative to the
                        cosmic redshift in free space, which in clothed form is represented as E. (See also Segal 1984a.6)
                           The position of Huygens and Leibniz was updated by Mach and Einstein and is generally considered correct from a fundamental
                        position. However, the Newtonian position is essential for practical purposes and is in effect adopted by modern quantum field
                        theory. This deals with “free” physical particles whose freedom is inexact, from a fundamental position. In particular, the interac-
                        tion of these particles with the background universe is neglected, and the free particles inhabit a Poincare group invariant spacetime
                        whose structure is unaffected by the particles. Similarly, in CC, photons inhabit the conformally invariant spacetime M, whose free
                        structure is considered substantially independent of any microscopic system of particles. In a more exact theory local variations in
                        spacetime metric deriving from isolated concentrations of matter and energy would also be involved, but we operate here on the
                        assumption that they do not have a presently measurable affect on the general cosmic redshift, much as gravitational forces are
                        usually neglected in particle theory.
                           Hubble & Tolman ( 1935 ), among others, expressed doubts about the Doppler explanation for the redshift and suggested that it
                        would be more intelligible as a space curvature effect. In fact, the expression for the chronométrie redshift in terms of Minkowski
                        coordinates, as the difference between the Einstein and Minkowski energies, shows that it varies directly as the space curvature, in
                        literal exemplification of this idea.
                           As special relativity applies to all of physics and not merely to electromagnetic radiation, the theory from which it developed, so
                        the role of the Einstein energy would be expected to drive temporal evolution not merely for the Maxwell field, but for all fields,
                        massive or massless. Detailed consideration of massive fields is beyond the scope of the present article, and we note here only an
                        apparent possible physical interpretation of the analog to the redshift for such fields. We observe the following:
                           1. The excess E - Eqoï the Einstein energy E over the Minkowski energy EQ vanishes to second order in the distance from the
                        point of observation and so represents locally a type of superweak force that would not be expected to contribute significantly to
                        local particle production;
                           2. E - E0 is inherently positive, and vanishes only in the limit of a pointlike system, indicating that E - E0 represents an
                        attractive force;
                           3. E- E0 transforms identically to the Newtonian gravitational potential under scaling and Euclidean transformations.
                        One is thereby led to the proposal that the diffuse energy E- E0 may primarily represent what is otherwise familiar as gravitational
                        energy. However, the absence of any large systematic nontrivial body of measurements on large-scale gravity implies that the
                        validation of any theory of gravity on the cosmic scale cannot be directly empirical. Nevertheless, the analysis thus far suggests that
                        the chronométrie redshift may be regarded as gravitational in a generalized sense and thus in a direction similar to that proposed by
                        Zwicky (1929).
                           In its more developed form applicable to massive particles, CC appears coherent with the Einstein equivalence principle as well
                        as with Mach’s principle. More specifically, since local accelerations may be represented up to a certain order of approximation as

                            5
                              Both the Maxwell and the neutrino equations, and their solutions, extend uniquely and Lorentz-covariantly from Mo to M (PI, P2, P3). Although the
                        ( relativistic ) energy spectrum of the photon and neutrino extend down to zero in Mo, the ( Einstein ) energy spectrum in M has a strictly positive lowest level.
                        In units in which h = c = R= 1, the lowest neutrino energy is 3/2, and the lowest photon energy is 2 (PI, P2, P3). If mass is understood as rest energy, these
                        particles have nonvanishing mass in M. The value of this “Einstein” mass is, however, far below the threshold of observability, if R is of the order of
                        magnitude
                            6
                                      of any recent estimates of the cosmic distance scale.
                              The well-known theory of N. Rosen involves two metrics, a feature that is also present in chronométrie theory. Rosen’s theory has, however, little if any
                        connection with redshift observations and, unlike chronométrie theory, is not conformally covariant, among other differences.




                                      © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                        310                                                                  SEGAL & ZHOU                                                                      Vol. 100
                        infinitesimal conformal transformations, the equivalence principle may be correspondingly formulated as the infinitesimal confor-
                        mal invariance of the fundamental forces. From a modem standpoint it is then natural to exponentiate this infinitesimal law,
                        arriving at the global conformal invariance of the (bare) fundamental fields and their interactions. Of course, in their physically
                        observed form, which is structured by the mutual interactions of all particles on the longest time and distance scale, in accordance
                        with the present more specific form of Mach’s principle, invariance is restricted to that represented by the cosmos on this very large
                        scale, i.e., to the isometry group K of E.7
                          This interpretation of the equivalence principle may appear in conflict with the noninvariance of the wave equations for particles
                        of given non vanishing mass under scaling (not to mention special conformal transformations). However, invariance of the funda-
                        mental forces under given symmetries by no means automatically implies invariance of the vacua or equilibrium states of their
                        corresponding interacting quantized field. Thus physically, the cosmic microwave background cannot even be Lorentz, or a fortiori
                        conformally, invariant. In this context, Mach’s principle has a natural formulation, essentially to the effect that the mass of a stable
                        massive particle is the expected value of its interaction energy with the background universe, as it has evolved over a cosmic time
                        period.8

                                                                                         1.3. Universal Spacetime
                            The principal features of the spacetime in which CC takes place will now be specified. This spacetime is universal in several
                         senses, e.g., it contains as submanifolds all other four-dimensional manifolds endowed with causal structure admitting symmetries
                         that implement spatial and temporal isotropy ( e.g., Segal 1976b ). It will be called the universal cosmos ( for greater clarity, “cosmos”
                         is used to indicate the inclusion of time and “universe” to refer primarily to space) and denoted as M. It can be defined succinctly as
                         the conformal manifold represented by the Einstein universe E; however, it differs fundamentally from E in having a 15 parameter
                         symmetry group, in contrast to the seven-parameter symmetry group of E. In CC, E is only approximately fixed, and may evolve
                         in time (i.e., the factorization of M as iU ® S3 may evolve), in accordance with conformal transformations generated by “cosmic
                         interactions (e.g., Segal 1984a). However, within the limits of present measurability, the simple fixed version of E is consistent with
                         objective direct observations. The theoretical small fluctuations in the inertial frame of the universe, as represented by E, have no
                        effect on the theoretical empty ( “bare” ) spacetime M, which has no invariant separation into time and space components.
                            The Einstein universe E (Einstein 1917; Möller 1972) is the manifoldRX®S3, whereR1 denotes the one-dimensional time axis
                        consisting of the real line, and S3 denotes the space component consisting of a three-dimensional sphere, with the metric c2 dt2 —
                        R2 ds2, where c and R are positive constants, t is the time coordinate, and ds is the element of arc length on S'3 in radians. In units
                        in which c = \ = R, the metric is simply dt2 — ds2. E admits a 15 parameter family of transformations that change its metric only
                        by a positive spacetime dependent factor ; these are the conformal transformations on E.
                            Conformality is a technical mathematical concept, and in order to emphasize the directly observed aspect and clarify the notions
                        of time that are involved below, we formulate our treatment in terms of the physical concept of causality. In the present context,
                        the two notions of causality and conformality are virtually equivalent, so that nothing is lost thereby, while the physical interpreta-
                        tion becomes more explicit and the formalism adaptable to generalizations.9
                            To explain the role of causality in the present connection, we begin with the simpler case of Minkowski space, whose causal
                        structure is well known. At each point of Mo, there is a future cone and a past cone, which are interchanged by time reversal. This
                        gives rise to a notion of temporal precedence, according to which a point p precedes a point q in case q is in the future of /?, defined
                        specifically as /? + C, where C is the cone of all points x: in Mo whose coordinates Xj satisfy the inequalities Xq> 0,Xo — x2 - x2 —
                        x2 > 0. We denote this relation asp <q. This binary physical relation completely determines Mo, including its linear structure and
                        metric, within a scale factor, and is entirely independent of the coordinate system or choice of origin. In particular, let T denote a
                        one-to-one transformation that maps every point of Mo into another point of Mo, and such that every point of Mo is included in
                        the range of T. Suppose also that whenever p<q, then T(p) T(q) and vice versa. Then T is necessarily a transformation of the
                           7
                             The Einstein equivalence principle, that observation of the laws of physics is unaffected by a local acceleration, is effectively tantamount to infinitesimal
                        conformal invariance of the fundamental laws, inasmuch as infinitesimal local accelerations may be represented by infinitesimal conformal transformations.
                        Normally in theoretical physics, if a symmetry appears valid infinitesimally, it is considered likely to hold globally. This is not readily formulated in
                        Minkowski space, in which there are singularities in the action of global conformal symmetries. However, it is quite possible in the larger universal spacetime
                        that underlies chronométrie theory. The conformal group operates without singularities on universal spacetime, and the singularities in its action on
                        Minkowski space arise because it is carried into universal spacetime by all transformations other than those of the 11 parameter Weyl subgroup. The
                        connection between the infinitesimal and global invariance here is identical to that between infinitesimal and global transformation groups, whose theory
                        was8 initiated by S. Lie more than a century ago.
                             Invariance of the fundamental forces” is understood here in the same sense as in quantum field or particle theory. In these subjects, the forces are
                        represented by an interaction Lagrangian. These forces are said to be invariant under a given transformation if the action integral of the Lagrangian is a
                        scalar invariant. Compare more specifically Paneitz, Segal, & Yogan ( 1987), where a possible unified conformally invariant interaction Lagrangian for
                        chronométrie
                           9
                                        theory is presented.
                             The conformal group of spacetime, of 15 parameters, must be distinguished from the conformal group of space, of 10 parameters. Only the former group
                        represents causal transformations, i.e., those that leave invariant the relation of temporal precedence in spacetime. Moreover, conformal transformations
                        on the space component of spacetime are not necessarily extendable to conformal transformations on spacetime. The most familiar ones, such as six-
                        parameter isometry groups of Euclidean or spherical space, have this property, but it is not generically possible to causally extend conformal transformations
                        on space to all of spacetime.
                           The conformal group has played a role in other cosmological theories, such as that of Hoyle & Narlikar ( 1974), but without essential use of transforma-
                        tions that mix space and time, such as the imbedding of Mq into M. The steady state theory resembles chronométrie theory in its temporal homogeneity and
                        infinite timescale, but differs in its Doppler source for the redshift and in its lack of energy conservation, which features it shares with the big bang theory.




                                       © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                         No. 2, 1995                         MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS IN EINSTEIN UNIVERSE                                                        311
                        form Tx = \Ax + y, where X is is a positive constant, ^ is a Lorentz transformation, and y is a fixed vector. This theorem is due to
                        Alexandrov & Ovchinnikova (1953) and was rediscovered by Zeeman ( 1964 ) ; cf. also Alexandrov (1967).
                           The set of all causal transformations T thus forms a group P, of all scale-extended Poincare transformations on Minkowski space
                        that are connected to the identity, where the scaling operation is defined as the transformation x -► \x. This is an 11 parameter
                         group of which the usual Poincare group P0 is a 10 parameter subgroup. Discrete (time or space reversing) symmetries are excluded
                         here, and we use the terms “conformal” or “isometry” groups of a manifold to refer only to the connected component, unless
                         otherwise indicated.
                           It is natural to presume that any bona fide physical transformation T will preserve causality, but physical observation is a local
                        process, and there exist transformations that preserve causality locally and are not in the group P. It will be seen that time evolution
                        in E appears locally in Mo, as imbedded in E, as one of these transformations. Such locally causal transformations, constituting the
                        local conformal group in Mo, ultimately become singular as they act on regions at large distances in Mo, i.e., they cannot be defined
                        on all of Mo as a transformation into Mo. It will be seen, however, that they can be represented in a precise and invariant way as
                        mapping M© into M, into which it will be seen Mo may be causally and covariantly imbedded. In this representation, the group P
                        operates in the usual way on Mo, leaving it invariant, but no other nontrivial conformal transformations leave Mo setwise invariant.
                           Now consider the causal structure in E, where the future of a point /? in E is defined to consist of all points q that are connected
                        to by a timelike path, meaning one whose forward tangent at every point of the path points inside the infinitesimal future cone
                        corresponding to the Einstein metric. The tangent space at each point of E is a Minkowski space relative to the restriction of the
                        Einstein metric, and the future cone in it is defined correspondingly. This notion of temporal precedence has the properties that if
                        (\) p < q, and q < then p < r; (2) p < q, then q is not < p. Condition (2) is a form of global” causality. The group of all
                        transformations T on E that preserve this notion of temporal precedence, in the sense that whenever p < q9 then Tp < Tg, and
                        conversely, will be denoted as G.
                           The isometry group (again restricted to its connected component) of E will be denoted as K. K is a seven-parameter group
                        consisting of all transformations of the form t-+ t + s, which we call Einstein time evolution, multiplied with transformations of
                        the form u -► Su, where w is a point of S3, and S is arbitrary in the rotation group 0(4), on S3. The transformations of G that are
                        not in the subgroup K are less easily described explicitly, except as local transformations, although they are everywhere defined and
                        entirely regular. Fortunately, the local description includes the specification of how the transformations act on Minkowski space, as
                        imbedded in E, which suffices here.
                           To describe explicitly the local action of G, the space E must be reduced by a covering transformation (which is conformal and
                        locally but not globally one-to-one). Convenient also is a reformulation of the space S3 as the group SU(2) of all 2 X 2 unitary
                        matrices. We represent S3 by the points « = (mj , u2, u3, u4) in real four-dimensional space R4 that satisfy the equation wi + W2 +
                        z/3 + W4 = 1. To any such point u there corresponds a unitary matrix Vdefined by the equation F = w4 + /( Wj ai + w2 072 + w3 03).
                        This mapping is an isometry relative to a suitable metric on SU(2), which is, moreover, invariant under left and right group
                        translations on SU(2), which correspond on S3 to certain rotations. Accordingly, E may be represented as Rl ® SU(2). In this
                        form, the requisite covering transformation W takes the form t<8)V-> exp (it)V, which maps E into the group C/( 2) of all 2 X 2
                        unitary matrices.
                           In addition, a similar reduction must be made of the group G. We denote as          2, 2 ) the group of all 4 X 4 matrices of the form

                                                                                         A B
                                                                                         C D

                        in whichy4, B, C, Dare 2 X 2 complex matrices, that leave invariant the complex Hermitian form zV* + z2z2* - z3z3* - z4z4*,
                        where the asterisks denote complex conjugation. If g is in SU(2,2) and Zis in U(2), then (AZ + B)(CZ + D)~l exists, is again in
                        U(2), and will be denoted gZ. Then there exists a covering transformation C, g            g' that carries every element g in G into an
                        element g' of SU(2,2 ) ; preserves group multiplication, C(£i g? )= C(gi )€(£?) ; and is such that every element of SU( 2,2 ) is covered
                        by some transformation in G. Finally, if/? is an arbitrary point ofEandgisan arbitrary element of G then W{gp) = C(g)W(p).
                           Transformations that are sufficiently close to the identity in G may be explicitly computed as regards their effects on points of E
                        that are sufficiently close to an origin represented by 0 ® <r0 in Æ1 ® SU(2), where a0 denotes the 2X2 identity matrix. The
                        transformations of K correspond in SU(2,2) to those elements for which B = C = 0. For example, Einstein time evolution through
                        the time ^ is represented by the corresponding matrix with^4 = exp(/s/2)andZ) = exp(-/5/2). Rotations are represented by those
                        transformations for which D = A~x and A is in SU(2). It will be seen that G effectively includes the full scale-extended Poincare
                        group P, and the action of this group on M© is included in these transformation rules. Alternatively, every transformation in P may
                        be uniquely extended to a conformal transformation on all of M or E and not only on M0 as imbedded in M.
                           There is an alternative description of E, which shows more explicitly the connection between Poincare transformations on Mo
                        and on E. Let the Xj (7 = 0, 1, 2, 3) denote the usual coordinates in M©, where x0 denotes the time and (Xi, x2, x3) = x denotes the
                        space position. Let H(2) denote the space of all 2 X 2 complex Hermitian matrices. We recall a useful one-to-one correspondence
                        between M© and H(2) that will be used here. First, we introduce a notion of causality in H (2) by defining the future of any matrix
                        // in //(2) as the set of all matrices of the form H + K, where K is in the cone of all positive matrices in H (2), where positive is
                        defined to mean that both eigenvalues are positive. Next we define a mapping ./from Mo onto H(2)as follows: x x0(To + Xi<7i +
                        x2<t2 + x3a3, where the 0) (7 = 1,2,3) are the Pauli matrices. Then it is known ( and easily seen ) that / is a one-to-one mapping from
                        Mo onto all of H(2), which preserves causality: x< yin Mo if and only if Jx <£Jy in H (2).




                                    © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                        312                                                        SEGAL & ZHOU                                                           Vol. 100
                           Next, we map H{2) into £/(2), by the Cayley transform. We set c for the mapping from the matrix H '\nH(2) into the matrix U
                        in f/( 2) given by the equation £/ = [02 +              [a2 — (/7/)/2]_1. This matrix U maybe uniquely expressed in the form exp (/OU,
                        where t is real and Fis in SU(2), t being made unique by the constraints that the map from U\ot® Fbe continuous, and / = 0 if
                        // = 0. Now replacing F by the corresponding point on S3, we have constructed a one-to-one mapping T0 of Mo into E. This
                        mapping T0 is causal (e.g., Segal 1976b). Thus, points p and q of Mo are in the relation p<q\î and only if T0p < T0q.
                            If g is any scale-extended Poincare (i.e., “Weyl” ) transformation on Mo, there will be a corresponding transformation g' on the
                         submanifold r0(Mo) = Mo in E, such that T0(gx) = g'(T0x) for all points x of Mo. There is a unique conformal transformation g’'
                         on all o/E that coincides with the transformation g' on the submanifold MÓ. We have thus constructed a causal mapping from M©
                         into E that is co variant with respect to the operations of the group P, as defined on Mo, and extended to all of M. This mapping
                         carries the origin in M© into the point 0® <70 of E, but there is a corresponding mapping that will carry any given point po of M©
                         into any given point p of E by the application of suitable transformations in P or the conformal group G(E) on E that exchange the
                         points O and pQ and the points 0® 00 and p. This defines a local Minkowski space at any given point # of E.
                           To treat the unicity of this space it will suffice to consider the special case in which Po = O and /? = 0 ® 00. The most general causal
                        and Po-covariant mappingfrom Mo into E that carries O intoO® a0 differs from the given transformation T only by a scalefactor in
                        M0. For given two such transformations T and T\ then T^'T' = S will be a causal mapping of M© into itself that leaves the point 0
                        fixed, and by virtue of the covariance of T and T! commutes with Lorentz transformations S in Mo. The theorem of Alexandrov &
                        Ovchinnikova implies that S is in P, and since it leaves O fixed it is homogeneous. Since it commutes with all Lorentz transforma-
                        tions, it must be multiplication by a nonvanishing constant, which must be positive to preserve causality.
                           The given causal imbedding of Mq into M is in fact not merely covariant with respect not only to the six-dimensional Lorentz
                        group, but also with respect to the 11 dimensional scale-extended Poincaré group P (PI ). This is in the direction of establishing a
                        physically meaningful concept of cosmic uniformity, to which issue we now turn.

                                                                     1.4. Cosmic Uniformity and Local Observers
                           We begin by noting a crucial difference between the fundamental units in M0 and in M. This is relevant to the question of what
                        it means for theoretical physics or its fundamental constants to be the same in all parts of the universe. It is intuitively plausible that
                        this is the case, and it has traditionally been assumed on a philosophic basis. Our aim here is to formulate cosmic uniformity in a
                        general and explicit way that is in principle physically meaningful and foundationally complete.
                           First, if local observers at different points of E observe or analyze physical events in terms of local Minkowski coordinates, there
                        is no a priori specification of a common scale, at different points of observation, on the basis of causality and covariance alone. A
                        common scale, or set of units, is needed, however, if the question of the identity of physical laws at different points is to be well
                        defined.
                           There is no intrinsic length scale in Mo, whereas the radius of the space S3 in E provides such a scale. Although the Einstein
                        metric in E is invariant only under the subgroup K, the distance between antipodal points on S* is invariant under arbitrary
                        conformal transformations onE. In other terms, this particular distance is invariant under the full 15 parameter group G, and
                        thereby provides an invariant length scale in M. This has no counterpart in Mo.
                           This observation is correlated with a difference in the natures of the respective fundamental causal symmetry groups. (A causal
                        symmetry is defined as a one-to-one transformation that preserves the relation of temporal precedence.) The Poincare group P0
                        admits a continuum of “outer automorphisms,” defined by changes of scale in Mo. The group of all causal symmetries of M, i.e.,
                        G, is, however, a semisimple group, for which no continuum of outer automorphisms can exist.
                           The units are involved in and determine the quantum mechanical commutation relations of the fundamental dynamical vari-
                        ables that are represented by generators of the groups. In the case of the Poincaré group, the choice of units such that h = c = \
                        produces unit or zero coefficients in the commutation relations of the 10 fundamental dynamical variables (energy-momentum,
                        angular momenta, generators of Lorentz boosts), irrespective of the choice of the third fundamental unit, which is thus uncon-
                        strained by the commutation relations. In the case of the conformal group, the coefficients in the commutation relations of its 15
                        fundamental dynamical variables (represented by generators of G) are ± 1 or 0 only in conjunction with the further stipulation that
                        Æ = 1. Thus, in this case the fundamental units may be specified by the commutation relations of the theoretical observables,
                        consisting of the Minkowski and Einstein energy-momenta, the angular momenta, and their commutators, which are all repre-
                        sentable by the generators of the underlying symmetry group G.
                           Local observers at different points of M can identify their respective basic dynamical variables (definable as those corresponding
                        to generators of the fundamental symmetry group), or derived variables (e.g., corresponding to polynomials in the generators),
                        only by additional considerations. Thus, even if fundamental units were the same throughout the universe, say the Einstein units,
                        there is no a priori well-defined way to compare the microscopic variables at one spacetime point of the cosmos with those at
                        another such point. One might think of imposing the requirement that these basic variables have the same expressions in terms of
                        local coordinates at each point, but this only shifts the problem to the specification of comparable local coordinates at different
                        points. But at any given point there is an 11 parameter group of conformal transformations that will transform any given local
                        Minkowskian coordinates at the point into another such set of coordinates (with possible changes of scale), and there is no a priori
                        invariant basis in M for preferring any particular such set.
                           In order to give physical meaning to the identity of the laws of physics at different points of the cosmos, a common class of well-
                        defined observables appears necessary. If quantum phenomenology is accepted as a universal principle, as done here, all local




                                    © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                         No. 2, 1995                          MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS IN EINSTEIN UNIVERSE                                                           313
                         observation is reducible to elementary particle observation. The fundamental observables in particle theory are the particle
                         quantum numbers. These in turn are represented basically by certain of the generators of the fundamental symmetry group, as well
                         as various functions of these generators. In particular, the energy, linear and angular momenta, and helicity are the primary
                         quantum numbers in relativistic theory based on Mo as the physical spacetime arena for the fundamental interactions.
                           The quantum numbers are observable within the limitation of commutativity required for simultaneous observability. The
                         expectation values, etc., of other observables are then indirectly determined, since the underlying state is determined from the
                         observation of the quantum numbers, from which the general rules of quantum mechanics determine the rest.
                           The same principles can be applied to any spacetime whose causal symmetry group is sufficiently extensive, and CC proposes
                        their application to M. The fundamental symmetry group G includes P0 as a subgroup, in consequence of which all of the generators
                        of P0 are also generators of G. There are five additional independent generators, which do not materially enlarge the number of
                        direct observables, due in part to the restriction to commutativity for appropriate quantum numbers. They remain (apart from
                        internal quantum numbers) energy, linear momentum, angular momentum, and helicity. Maxwell’s equations define a pair of
                        irreducible unitary representations of G on a Hilbert space, which are interchanged by space reversal, and which remain irreducible
                        on restriction to the subgroup P0. The underlying principles of quantum phenomenology remain the same as in Mo, but the
                        analytical form of the basic quantum numbers (and features such as their spectra) are subject to some change. It is basic for CC that
                        the energy in M is different from, and fundamentally inequivalent to, the energy in Mo; e.g., the former has a discrete and the latter
                        a continuous spectrum.
                           To label the generators of G so that they most closely resemble those of P0, it is convenient to represent G in the form of the
                        pseudo-orthogonal group SO(2, 4). The six-dimensional space on which SO(2,4) operates is only an auxiliary one, and devoid of
                        direct physical existence; we denote it as E and its coordinates as £,, where7 = -1,0, 1,2, 3,4. Setting

                                                                  e = (¿-i, ¿o, ¿i, ¿2, e3, *4) = (1, 1, -1, -1, -1, -1),

                        then the inner product between two vectors £ and £' in E is ££' = €/£/£/. Setting Dj = d/d£;, the generators of the conformal
                        transformation group G may be expressed as Ly = el^l Dj - ej^Di. These L'ij represent the conformal infinitesimal transformations
                        in E, relative to a Lorentzian metric in E. For clarity we make an explicit distinction between a generator of the group G as an
                        abstract group, i.e., an element of the Lie algebra of G, and a corresponding infinitesimal transformation on Mo. Abstract generators
                        of the group G, i.e., vectors in its Lie algebra G, will be denoted by boldface letters, and the corresponding infinitesimal transfor-
                        mation on E by the same nonboldface letter, primed. The unprimed notation Lÿ will denote the corresponding infinitesimal trans-
                        formation on M. Note that the mapping L/, -► L/, is an ««//representation rather than a representation:

                                                                    [L/y, Ly^] —   tjhjk,     but [Lÿ, Ljk\ ~ tjLjk ♦                                        ( 1.1 )

                           The transformations L/, on M that extend the L^ on Mo may be obtained as follows. First make E projective by identifying
                        vectors that are the same within proportionality. The transformations in SO(2,4) then act on this five-dimensional projective space
                        P5. Consider the quadric surface Q in P5 defined by the equation €/£/ = 0. The infinitesimal generators L/y of SO(2, 4) give rise to
                        infinitesimal transformations        on Q. These are then lifted up to the universal covering space of Q, providing the canonical
                        extensions of the L'^ to all of M.
                           The Liy are abstract elements of G, but give rise to self-adjoint operators representing the dynamical variables as follows. If Wis
                        any unitary representation of G on a Hilbert space, there is a corresponding operator defined as the self-adjoint generator of the
                        one-parameter unitary group IT[(exp (//L/y)]; we denote this as dIT(Liy), and note that idW = wis an isomorphism, i.e., [w(X),
                        w( Y )] and w( [X, Y ] ) coincide on a common domain on which each of these operators is essentially skew-adjoint. In these terms,
                        the basic chronométrie variables are as follows, in the Einstein units h = c = R = 1: ( 1 ) Einstein energy: vv(L_10); (2) Einstein
                        linear momenta: w(L_iy) (j = 1, 2, 3); (3) angular momenta: w(L,y) (i,j = 1, 2, 3); (4) Lorentz boosts: w(Lo/)(7 = 1» 2, 3); (5)
                        Minkowskian energy-momentum: { w(L_iy + Ly4); and (6) scaling: —w(L_l54).
                           These 15 operators are linearly independent and span the full space w(G). The infinitesimal transformations L/y corresponding
                        to the angular momenta, the Lorentz boosts, the flat energy-momenta, and scaling all vanish on the boundary of M« as imbedded
                        in M, and in exponentiated form the corresponding conformal transformations in G all leave Mo invariant. Within Mo, they
                        coincide with the usual relativistic quantities, i.e., they generate the usual Weyl group.

                                                                     1.5. Covariant Global and Local Coordinates

                           Global Einstein coordinates that are uniquely determined by the L/y, apart from the zero point of time are definable as follows.
                        Let          w4 be the functions on M that are uniquely defined by the equations: ( 1 ) L_ 10My = 0; ( 2 ) Li2Mi = «2 ? and variants derived
                        from cyclic permutations of 1, 2, 3,4; (3) w? + «2 + W3 + w4 = 1. To show that such functions exist, define u) = £y(£-i + £o)-1/2 on
                        Q and lift these up to corresponding quantities wy on M. To show their unicity, note that the difference between any two sets of
                        solutions of these equations is annihilated by the L/, involved in their definition. But these infinitesimal transformations span the
                        full tangent space at each point of M. Accordingly, all infinitesimal transformations on M annihilate the differences, which must
                        therefore be constants. But if the constraint u] + ul + ul + ul = 1 is satisfied for one solution of these differential equations, it




                                    © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                         314                                                      SEGAL & ZHOU                                                          Vol. 100
                        cannot be satisfied identically on M for any other non vanishing set of constants. For if also

                                                                (h, + Ci)2 + (n2 + C2)2 + (n3 + G)2 + (»4 + C4)2 = 1                                       (1.2)

                        for suitable constants Cj(j = 1, 2, 3, 4), then       + w2£2 + u3c3 + W4C4 = const, which is impossible since (ux, u2, u3, uA) ranges
                        over all of S3.
                           The Einstein time t is determined in a similar way. Specifically, it is the function on M that is determined, uniquely modulo
                        constants, by the constraints: L-uot = 1;       = 0(i,j = 1, 2, 3, 4). The zero point of t is arbitrary and conventional; each observer
                        has the option to set his time coordinate as ¿ = 0 at a convenient instant. Having essentially uniquely defined coordinates in terms
                        of the basic observables, the definitional cycle may now be completed and the observables in terms of these coordinates; cf. PI.
                           Having derived global Einstein coordinates from the fundamental microscopic dynamical variables, we may now do the same
                        for local Minkowski coordinates. We set Tj for             + ^4) and define the x,, uniquely modulo constants—not on all of M but
                        only within M0 (which is the orbit of the putative point of observation under the subgroup of G generated by the Tj)—by the
                        constraints T¡Xj = àij(ij = 0, 1, 2, 3). All four additive constants are here entirely conventional, and each local observer again has
                        the option of choosing coordinate zero points conveniently. Again, all the generators of P, and not merely the Tj, may be given
                        their usual expressions in terms of such coordinates. However, the conventional choice that the Minkowski coordinates vanish at
                        the time and place of observation imposes constraints on the physical interpretation of the Lÿ.
                           For an observer at a given point /?, this point is invariant under rotations, Lorentz boosts, and scaling. Accordingly, the infini-
                        tesimal rotations ^(Z, 7 = 1, 2, 3), boosts Lq/(7 = 1,2, 3), and the infinitesimal scaling generator ~L-lA must vanish at/7. If this is
                        not the case, these mathematical quantities cannot be identified with the indicated physically relevant quantities. But in addition,
                        four more independent generators must vanish at /?, if the coordinates are to be the canonical ones involved in the construction of
                        a set of the Liy indicated above. For the subgroup Gp of G that leaves fixed the point /? is 11 dimensional, while only seven constraints
                        have thus far been imposed.
                           The additional four generators are the ^(L_ l7 — Lj4) (7 = 0, 1,2,3 ). These vanish at p to second order and thus have approximately
                        vanishing expectation value in local measurement, for which reason they do not appear in conventional relativistic kinematics.
                        When all 11 infinitesimal transformations vanish at p, physically appropriate local coordinates at p are uniquely fixed by the
                        indicated actions of the Tj. They will in general not be physically appropriate at any other time or place. However, they serve to
                        specify uniquely, within transformation by an element of G^, an appropriate notion of local observer at p. Thus, if the Lÿ form an
                        appropriate basic set of microscopic dynamical variables at p in the foregoing sense, and if g is any transformation in G such that
                        g(p) = P, then the giLÿ) = gLÿg'1 form another appropriate such set at p. Conversely, every basic set of microscopic dynamical
                        observables at p that is physically appropriate in the indicated sense is obtained in this way from any given one, i.e., by conjugation
                        with some element £ of G such that g{p) = 1.
                           However, the observer represented by the g(Lq) will not in general be at rest relative to the observer represented by Li7, as is
                        required in order that the observations be directly comparable. Similarly, a redshift observer must be essentially at rest or in known
                        motion relative to the sources observed in order to compare theory and observation.
                           The concept of mutual rest positions in M involves the maximal essentially compact ( MEC ) subgroup K of G. All such subgroups
                        are conjugate in G, and thus representable by the Einstein isometry group. In E, an observer must be fixed in space and evolving in
                        accordance with Einstein time in order to be at rest relative to E, according to normal physical interpretation. Generalizing from
                        this, an ensemble of observers (or sources, where hypothetical observers may be located) is mutually at rest in case their respective
                        Lÿ (sets of microscopic dynamical variables) have the same MEC subgroup K (physically, same Einstein frame, within choice of
                        time zero point and coordinates on S'3).
                           K is isomorphic to the group          S£/(2)® SU{2). The R1 factor, which represents time evolution, is unique, so that any two
                        observers who are mutually at rest must have the same L_ j j0. The subgroup of K that represents spatial transformations, or rotations
                        on S3, is also unique; however, its decomposition in the form SU(2) ® SU(2) is observer dependent. If the observer is at the point
                        I of S£/(2), in terms of the representation of S3 as SU(2), there is a unique decomposition of this spatial subgroup such that if U
                        and Vare in SU(2), then (7® Vtransforms JFinto UWV~l. In particular, if £/ = F, then / is left fixed, and the transformation
                        represents a rotation about the point /, both in M and in Mo. It is then possible, and natural in conjunction with the physical
                        interpretation, to choose coordinates so that the rotations (which leave fixed /) act only on        w2, and w3, and leave w4 fixed. This
                        determines the angular momenta, and also Einstein spatial translation generators.
                           At any given point /? of M, there is one and only one observer who is physically appropriate (in the sense of the vanishing of the
                        II cited generators Lÿ at /?) and has a given K. For the K determines the spatial subgroup, which together with the spatial position
                        of the observer determines the rotation group at this position. This in turn leads not only to unique Lÿ for /, 7 = 1,2,3, but also L/ 4,
                        within a choice of basis, or arbitrary spatial rotation at the point. In extension of the idea of the Lorentz frame concept applicable
                        in M0, we define an Einstein frame at a given point /? of M as a labeled set of generators Lÿ for G satisfying the commutation
                        relations given above, and such that the 11 generators indicated above vanish at p. This determines unique coordinates wz and t as
                        described above that are global in M, and such that at the point p,ux = u2 = u3 = 0, and w4 = 1. Conversely, such a specification of
                        coordinates determines an Einstein frame at p.
                           The analogy between the concepts of Lorentz and Einstein frame is limited by the rigidity of the Einstein length scale and the
                        essential conventionality of the Minkowski length scale. Defining a normalized Lorentz frame as one having a specified length unit,




                                    © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                        No. 2, 1995                         MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS IN EINSTEIN UNIVERSE                                                        315
                        there is then a corresponding relation between the Einstein and Minkowski coordinates, relative to any given observer. This is the
                        relation that derives from the definitions in terms of the L/, of the t and uk(k = 1, 2, 3, 4), and of the Jt/ (/ = 0, 1, 2, 3), and is
                        observer dependent.
                           In this way, the CC provides a conformally covariant and unique framework for treating the relation between physics in different
                        parts of the universe. The fundamental dynamical variables are the microscopic quantities w(Liy), where the Lÿ generate the
                        fundamental symmetry group. The quantities L0 are the same at all points and for all observers, within conjugation by a causality
                        preserving transformation g, or transformation in G. For observers who are mutually at rest in M, this transformation g from the
                        Einstein frame of one to the other is merely a change in the temporal zero point, together with a choice of different coordinates Uj
                        on S3, i.e., g must be in the MEC of the observers.

                                                       1.6. Relativistic Quantum Mechanics as the Microscopic Limit of CC
                           We retain the particle units h = c = \ and take only R in laboratory units. In terms of the Minkowski coordinates xM, the
                        fundamental dynamical variables L’^ whose expression depends on R may be expressed in Einstein units as follows at points of Mo
                        (cf., e.g., PI ), where denotes d/dxM

                                                 (U = 0, 1, 2, 3),      X2 = Xq- x\- X2 - X2,        S = X0do + Xidi + X2^2 + *3^3 •
                                                                                                                                                          (1.3)
                                                         = ( 1 - (x2/4))¿)„ + (x/2\eßS,            = [1 + (*2/4)R - (x2/!)^.

                        Now introducing R explicitly, and denoting the Minkowski coordinates in laboratory units also as xM (so that in Einstein units the
                        former coordinates are now xJR), these dynamical variables take the form

                                                                     Z/_Im = R[l + (R/4y2x2]dfl + (i?/2)“1xMeM5,                                          (1.4)

                                                                      L’0,» = R[l - (R/4y2x2]d, - (R/iy'x^S.                                              (1.5)
                        The L^forji, v = 0, 1,2, 3 are independent ofR. It follows that in the limit R        oo, both /^(R) = R £-i,m and<7M(R) = R~lLotfl
                                                                                                                                   -1

                        converge to d„, i.e., the relativistic energy-momentum variables. The L'^ for p, v = 0, 1, 2, 3 are of course identical to the cor-
                        responding relativistic variables associated with the homogeneous Lorentz group. In summary, the Lie algebra of all the infinites-
                        imal transformations         converges, after a change in the unit of length in Mo by the factor R, to the Lie algebra of the basic
                        dynamical variables of relativistic quantum mechanics, consisting of generators of the Poincare group and scaling. Scaling plays
                        only a passive role, as the transformation between different sets of units, e.g., as often specified in relativistic quantum mechanics
                        by taking as the third unit the mass of the primary particle under consideration. As a dynamical variable its expectation value
                        approximates 0 in free photon states. The procedure here is closely parallel to that showing the effective convergence of classical
                        relativistic mechanics to classical nonrelativistic mechanics as c -► oo, and is known as a limiting case ( Segal 1951 ) or contraction
                        (Inonu & Wigner 1953).
                           A Lie algebra is a limiting case of another Lie algebra in case the constants of structure of the latter relative to some sequence of
                        bases converges to those of the former. In terms of the basis for G consisting of the L//( R), where

                                                         L-\j{R) = R~XL-Xj,         LjA{R) = R~xLj4,        for / = 0, 1, 2, 3 ,                          (1.6)

                        while the other seven L/,( R) are unchanged, we may state the following:
                          Theorem. The direct sum of the Weyl group and a four-dimensional Abelian Lie algebra is a limiting case of G. G is itself
                        "terminal’ in the sense that it is not a limiting case ofany inequivalent Lie algebra.
                          The first statement follows by computation of the commutators of the LifR). The terminal character of G was shown by
                        Segal (1951).
                          Similar results apply in the theoretical context of the abstract group generators. The chronométrie interpretation of the four-
                        dimensional Abelian subgroup in the limit is that they represent superweak, or generalized gravitational, contributions to the
                        energy-momentum vector that are neglected in conventional relativistic quantum mechanics.

                                                             2. COSMIC ASPECTS OF THE PHOTON HILBERT SPACES

                                                                       2.1. Photon Hilbert Spaces in M and Mo

                           In the scalar approximation often used in photon calculations, a photon is represented by a solution </> of the wave equation
                        □o</> = 0 in Mo, where Do denotes the usual wave operator. The inner product in the photon Hilbert space is most simply described
                        in terms of the Fourier transform $ of </>, being nonlocal in physical space Mo. Setting X = (xb, x1,x2, x3) for the position vector




                                    © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                        316                                                        SEGAL & ZHOU                                                            Vol. 100
                        and K = (k0, ki, k2, ki) for the energy-momentum vector, (f>(X ) takes the form

                                                                        MX) = (2ir)-2 J expiiX.KWfOdJi,                                                      (2.1)

                        where X K = XqIcq - x^kx - x2k2 - x3k3.
                          4>( AT) may be expressed in the form

                                                                 <ï>(K) = [ô(k0- \k\)f+(k) + ô(k0+ \k\)f-(k)]k~l,                                            (2.2)

                        where k = (ki,k2,k3) and | A: | = (k] + k2 + k3)l/2. The reality of $ is equivalent to the condition that /L ( A:) = /^ ( -k) *.
                         The Poincare-invariant inner product between two photon wave functions 0 and y may be expressed as

                                                            = j [fAk)g+(k)*+Uk)g-(k)*]\k\-'d3k                   (d3k = dkldk2dk3),                          (2.3)

                        the integration being confined to the region A:0 > 0. A normalizable photon 0 is one for which <0, 0) is well defined and finite; this
                        condition is satisfied, e.g., if 0 is smooth and has bounded spatial support at any time, and the photon Hilbert space H© is properly
                        defined as the completion of the space of all such photons, relative to the given inner product (note that the wave function 0(jc) =
                         1 is not normalizable in this sense). The action of the complex unit on wave functions is also defined in terms of the Fourier
                        transform as multiplication by ±i applied to the respective positive and negative frequency components. The indicated inner
                        product is not only Poincare invariant but invariant under the full conformal group G. Thus for any transformation £ in G, there
                        is a unitary operator U(g) on Ho, taking the form 0(X) -► m(g, X)0[g-1 (X)], where the “multiplier” m(g, X) is independent of
                        0 and is identically one when gis in P0. Compare, e.g., Gross ( 1964) and Jakobsen & Vergne ( 1977).
                            The counterpart H to the Hilbert space Ho in the universal cosmos M takes the following form. A scalar photon wave function is
                        definable as a solution 0 of the “conformal wave” equation D0 + 0 = 0, where □ denotes the d’Alembertian operator in M,
                        expressible in terms of any representation of M as E in the form □ = d2/dt2 - A, where A denotes the Laplace-Beltrami operator
                        on S3. Setting C = ( 1 - A)1/4, a normalizable photon wave function 0 is one such that at any fixed Einstein time, C<j> and C'xdt<¡)
                        are square-integrable over the space S3. The action of the complex unit is multiplication by ±i as earlier, applied to the positive and
                        negative frequency components in terms of the Einstein time. The real part of the inner product, from which the imaginary part
                        may be derived from the action of/, takes the form (0, 7) = ((C0(O), C7(0)) + ((C^d^O), C-1dr7(0)), where ((0, 7))
                        for any two functions on S3 is defined as J/( x)g(x)*¿x, and dx denotes the usual volume element on S3, while 0(0) denotes the
                        wave function in space at time 0. This inner product is conformally invariant.
                           It is important that ( 1 ) every normalizable solution 0O of the wave equation on Mo extends uniquely to a normalizable solution
                        0 of the conformal wave equation on M, and conversely every solution 0 arises in this way; (2) the mapping 0O -► 0 is local and
                        unitary. These features indicate that the only physical difference between the Minkowski and Einstein descriptions of the present
                        wave functions arise from the difference in some of the quantum numbers, notably the respective energy-momentum operators.
                           In the case of the photon Hilbert spaces, the situation is essentially the same, and the inner products take a similar form. The only
                        significant difference is the presently immaterial one that photon wave functions are invariant under the central transformation f :
                        t —► / + Tr, F      — F, which commutes with all other conformal transformations and maps the infinite Minkowski past into the
                        infinite Minkowski future, whereas solutions of the conformal wave equation are mapped by f into their negatives.
                           The photon Hilbert space H, and the photon quantum number operators on H that represent the observables accessible to local
                        measurement, are thus the same for all observers throughout M, within a local unitary equivalence, which does not affect physically
                        observable features. A photon emitted from a source in the solar system and observed on Earth is represented by a wave function in
                        the local photon Hilbert space which is observed at a later time. The local observation of the photon quantum numbers permit the
                        inference of an approximate form of the photon wave function. By continuity, the same applies to photons emitted from sources at
                        various distances, including ultimately, cosmic distances. However, the quantum numbers presently accessible to measurement are
                        normally taken as the Minkowski rather than the Einstein quantum numbers, and this is reinforced by theoretical considerations.
                           For example, the energy of light may be inferred from interferometric measurement of its wavelength, or apparent oscillation
                        frequency, via Planck’s law. This is of course rigorously applicable only to eigenstates of the energy. Now microscopic local obser-
                        vations are of freshly emitted photons whose wave functions are presumptively localized. It has always been assumed, and is
                        supported by rigorous computations in the photon Hilbert space, that they are, in general, within the limits of present observational
                        methods effective eigenstates of the Minkowski energy. However, the measurement of the Einstein energy is another matter. As
                        noted below, it possesses normalizable eigenstates, but these are necessarily of cosmic spatial support. Accordingly, a direct mea-
                        surement of the Einstein energy of an extragalactic photon may depend on more than the pointwise oscillation frequency of the
                        photon wave. Indeed, mathematical analysis (e.g., Segal 1976a) shows that the Einstein energy of a photon depends not only on the
                        oscillation frequency of the photon but also on the number of oscillations, which appears beyond the scope of present methods to
                        observe. Thus the conventional laboratory measurement of the energy of a photon appears indubitably to be represented by the
                        Minkowski energy, whether the photon is regarded as propagated in M or Mo.
                           According to conventional quantum phenomenology, once a photon state 0 is determined, e.g., by measurement of a full set of
                        quantum numbers, the expectation value of an arbitrary self-adjoint operator ^4 on H, and the distribution of its spectral values in




                                    © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                        No. 2, 1995                           MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS IN EINSTEIN UNIVERSE                                                          317
                        the state ^ are completely determined. Among such self-adjoint operators are the additional five generators of G that are not in P0.
                        The conformal invariance of Maxwell’s equations and the unitarity of the corresponding representation of G mean that these all of
                        these generators are effective observables. All 15 generators of G, in particular the Einstein energy, as they impact on photon states,
                        could therefore be measured by local observers having sufficiently refined apparatus.
                           As the generator of global temporal evolution in M, the Einstein energy appears as basic energy for cosmic considerations in M.
                        In contrast, Minkowski temporal evolution as applied to a given point /? in M produces a bounded orbit whose Einstein time
                        remains throughout all of Minkowski time within tt eons of its starting value, where an eon is unit time in Einstein units (so that
                        the time required for a free photon to encircle space S3 once is 27r). Locally, however, the Minkowski energy differs from .the
                        Einstein energy by an amount that varies as the curvature of space, and the difference is far below the threshold for direct observ-
                        ability on the basis of empirically based estimates of this curvature.
                           In addition to the energy, the analytic specifications of the linear momentum and helicity are different in M from their formula-
                        tions in Mo, while the angular momentum quantum numbers are the same. For details regarding photons and other particles, see
                        P1-P3; here, only the case of the energies, as applied to photons, is relevant and further treated.

                                                                2.2. The Propagation ofLight through Large Distances
                           On the cosmic scale, effects that are negligible on the local scale, such as the representation of photons as (nonnormalizable)
                        plane waves, may be observationally quite significant. Moreover, it is crucial for cosmic considerations, although irrelevant for most
                        local considerations, whether the energy in question is the Minkowski or Einstein energy. These two energies do not commute, so
                        that if one is conserved, the other cannot be. They are both representable as the integral over space in the respective cosmos of the
                        square of the electromagnetic field, in terms of spatially natural coordinates, but in the case of Mo this space is three-dimensional
                        euclidean space, and in the case of M it is a three-dimensional sphere, of which Euclidean space may be regarded as the stereographic
                        projection, and the latter integral is always larger (Segal 1984b). Only for cosmically young and localized photon states of high
                        frequency are both energies approximately equal to each other and to the local frequency for photons sufficiently energetic to be
                        involved in redshift measurements.
                           Although Maxwell’s equations imply in theoretical principle the existence of certain aging effects on normalizable photons in
                        Mo, these effects appear in practice to be below the threshold for observability. Thus, if the driving Hamiltonian is K, the state of
                        the wave function f (assumed normalized to unit norm at time t)\s\p{t) = exp {-itK)yp(Q). In general yp(t) differs from ^(0) in
                        more than phase. Indeed, this is invariably the case when the Hamiltonian K is the relativistic operator H0 in Mo, as a result of the
                        continuous spectrum of H0. However, the expected energy and its dispersion, etc., in the state ^(0 is the same as that for ^(0), and
                        the same would be true of all other quantum numbers, so that a freely propagated photon appears unchanged in the course of time.
                           All of this is no less true if K is the Einstein Hamiltonian. Indeed, H has a discrete spectrum, and rigorous eigenstates exist. If \p is
                        such a rigorous eigenstate, then \¡/(t) = ^(0) for all so any state labels, whether Einstein or Minkowski, are trivially conserved. For
                        an arbitrary state \H0), it remains the case that the expectation values of the quantities that commute with the Hamiltonian are
                        conserved. But when the driving Hamiltonian differs from the observed energy operator, the situation is different. More specifically,
                        suppose the directly observed quantities are Minkowski quantum numbers. Then the expected value of the presently observed
                        energy at time Ms (//0 exp {-itH)\p, exp (-itH)\f), which by unitarity equals {elíHH0e~líH\p, \¡/). This will differ in general from
                        (H0\l/, \p) as a result of the noncommutativity of H and H0. It will in fact be seen below that the Einstein energy is a more global
                        quantity than the Minkowski energy, in that it depends materially on the number of oscillations, as well as their frequency, in the
                        case of a photon propagated over a large distance.
                           In effect, the driving Hamiltonian // is a perturbation of the observed Hamiltonian H0, H = H0 + V, where F is a positive
                        operator. In principle, Maxwell’s equations permit the evolution of a free photon in Minkowski space to be determined from either
                        Hamiltonian. But in the case of H0, the evolution is that of the wavefunction on the usual one-parameter family of spacelike
                        surfaces (hyperplanes) described by the equation Xo = const., while in the case of H the evolution is that of the same wave function
                        on the different one-parameter family of spacelike surfaces, namely, the spheres given by the equations t = const. General formula-
                        tions of fundamental physical theory, developed by Dirac and extended by Tomonaga and Schwinger (e.g., Schwinger 1958) in
                        connection with renormalization theory, show that the choice of spacelike surfaces is in part conventional and not entirely intrinsic
                        to the physical process under consideration. It is, however, connected with the observational process, and the physical process
                        determines on which (if either) of the spacelike surfaces the energy is conserved in the course of propagation. At any given point
                        and frame of observation, Einstein and Minkowski coordinates may be chosen so that all of the latter vanish and the stationary
                        frames are defined by the equationsx0 = 0 = i and define the same spacelike surface (apart from one additional point in the Einstein
                        case) at this instant.
                           However, energy is not determined by the spacelike surface but involves additional considerations, such as a selection of temporal
                        evolution group or kinematically natural coordinates. Segal ( 1976b) argues that this choice must be coherent with the respective
                        underlying causal symmetry groups. In particular, a one-parameter temporal evolution group is required which has the property
                        that the time coordinate increases by the amount s when time evolution of parameter s is applied. The corresponding energy is then
                        conserved theoretically, and this is applicable to both the Einstein and Minkowski energies, but which, if either, of these energies is
                        conserved physically is an observational question. The nonconservation of the Minkowski energy represented by the cosmic redshift
                        indicates in this context that the energy that is measured by conventional apparatus differs from the physical driving energy.
                           This may appear paradoxical, since a free photon in Minkowski space may theoretically be propagated by the Minkowski energy.
                        This implies that its energy is conserved, but only if the local normalized Lorentz frame in which the photon was emitted is coherent




                                     © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                         318                                                      SEGAL & ZHOU                                                          Vol. 100
                        with (i.e., at rest and having the same length scale as) that at the point of observation. This will not be the case in E; the relevant
                        microscopic length scales and also the Lorentz frames, as treated earlier, will differ at the points of emission and observation.
                           In the present context, the respective curved and flat spacelike surfaces involved are tangent to each other at the points of emission
                        and observation. The differences between the surfaces is thus a matter of curvature, or a second-order rather than a first-order
                        difference. The effective interaction Hamiltonian V is not a function but a differential operator that vanishes up to second order at
                        the point of observation. This gives rise to a significant qualitative difference from the results of application of perturbation theory
                        in conventional microscopic analysis. Transition probabilities are not locally approximately proportional to the elapsed time, as in
                        most familiar applications ofperturbation theory, but rather to the square ofthe observed time. Indeed, locally emitted photons in E
                        age significantly over cosmic (but not microscopic) time periods, as presently observed locally, as a rigorous consequence of Max-
                        well’s equations, which predicts that they will appear of lower frequency and greater spatial extent than initially.

                                                                2.3. Relations ofPhoton Wavefunctions in M and M0
                          To facilitate computation of the evolution of simple photon models in the universal cosmos, we recall the imbedding of Mo into
                        M and other geometrical issues from PI. The conformal covariance of this imbedding, relative to any choice of origin in Mo and
                        point of observation in M, is summarized by the
                           Theorem. For any scale-extended Poincare transformation g on Mo, let g' denote the corresponding transformation on M ca-
                        nonically associated with M0 as the simply connected form (= “universal cover”) of its conformal compactification. Let p be any
                        given point o/M0 and p' be any given point o/M. Then there exists a unique one-to-one conformal mapping T o/M0 into M such
                        that (1) for all points qofMv and all transformations g in P,g'T(q) = T(gq), and(2) T(p) = p’.
                           For the proof as well as explicit form of T we refer to PI. What the theorem means is that for all intents and purposes, Mo as a
                        causal manifold (e.g., as regards light propagation) may be regarded as a submanifold of M that is uniquely determined by the
                        subgroup P of G, of which it forms an orbit. M0 inherits the causal structure of M and enjoys just those symmetries that are
                        restrictions of those of M. At the same time, it acquires a fundamental length, which has so far been lacking in relativistic theory or
                        has been rather purely conventional. The laws of fundamental physics at different points of the universe are subject to meaningful
                        and unique comparison in terms of these units, derived from c, ft, and R. Effectively, this is equivalent to using conventional
                        relativistic standards, with the crucial caveat that the spectral lines that are used must be freshly emitted.
                           For the reader’s convenience, we quote the simplest relations from PI, assuming the local observer to be at the origin in Mo, that
                        this origin corresponds to the point 0 X (0, 0, 0, 1 ) = in i?1 X S3 :

                                                      Xo = 2 sint (cost + cos p)-1;        = 2w7(cost + cos p)-1    (7=1,2, 3);                            (2.4)

                                                      / = tan"1 [xo/(l “i-*2];        uj = pxj, where 77= [(1 - ^x2)2 + xg]1/2 ;                          (2.5)

                                                                     d, = ( 1 — \x2)do + ^XoS, where S = x^M .                                            (2.6)

                           Note that the Jacobian matrix of the map from (¿, iq, w2, w3) to the (x0, X!, x2, x3) is unity at the designated point of observation
                        but has determinant ^ 1 in general. Note also that because of the uniqueness of the P-covariant imbedding of Mo into M, it is
                        impossible covariantly to rescale Minkowski coordinates so as to be tangential to the local Einstein ones at distinct points. Thus, at
                        the point in space having the coordinates (0,0, 0, 1 ) in S3* and (0, 0,0) in i?3, the Minkowski time xb is related to the Einstein time
                        t by the equation x0 = 2 tan (¿/2). This is an intrinsically nonlinear relation that cannot be transformed into a linear one because
                        of the fundamental inequivalence of the Einstein and Minkowski temporal evolution groups. At the time / = x0 = 0, the two times
                        are instantaneously synchronous, in the sense that dx^/dt | ,=0 = 1, but at any substantially different time, the Minkowski clock runs
                        at a different rate from the Einstein clock: dx^/dt = sec2 (i/2). Any other time could, of course, be chosen as the time origin, and
                        Xo and t synchronized at that time, but they would then be asynchronous at the original time i = 0. It may also be noted that even
                        the local Minkowski coordinates at different points that osculate the Einstein coordinates at those points are not in general related by
                        a Lorentz transformation. The relation is generically nonlinear ( via a local conformal transformation ) and infinitesimally involves a
                        nontrivial scale factor.

                                                                           3. THEORY OF THE REDSHIFT
                                                            3.1. The Schrôdinger Picture in Two Spacetime Dimensions
                           The Schrôdinger picture appears more physical as well as closer to the familiar classical picture. To exemplify the essential ideas
                        in their simplest form, we first treat the wave equation in two-dimensional Minkowski space, denoted Mo(2).
                           The counterpart to the Einstein universe in the case of Mo(2) is the space E(2) = Æ1 X S1 with the metric dt2 - dp2, where p is
                        the angle on the circle S1, in radians. The canonical (P-covariant) conformal imbedding of M0(2) into M, as parameterized by
                        E(2), takes the form (x0,Xi) (¿,p), where

                                                   ¿ = tan“1 [xo( 1 -x2/4)_1],        p = tan"1 [xj( 1 - x2/4)_1], x2 = Xo -x2.                           (3.1 )




                                    © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                         No. 2, 1995                         MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS IN EINSTEIN UNIVERSE                                                        319
                        The normalizable solutions of the wave equation in Mo(2) form a Hilbert space H0, on which the conformal group [which is here
                        locally SO(2, 2)] acts unitarily and with positive energy, as it does in Minkowski space of any even dimension.
                           In Mo(2), the action of the conformal transformation g sends a wave function 0(x) simply into (¡)(g~xx). In addition, the
                        respective expected quantum energies of the state represented by the wavefunction 0(x), which take the form (//</>, 0) or (H0 0,
                        0) if 0 is normalized to unit norm, (0, 0) = 1, coincide with the familiar classical energies or the integrals over space (respectively,
                        S3 and R3) of the square of the respective spacetime gradients of 0.
                           Now consider the case of a traveling wave solution 0(.Xo,      of the wave equation in M0(2), of the form 0(xo, Xj) =/(Xo — Xi),
                        where /is a given function, and it will be no essential loss of generality to assume that 0 is normalized. The Minkowski energy of
                        this solution is then (^) J [(d0/dxo)2 + (dÿldx\)2]dx{. Under Einstein temporal evolution, t              t — s, this wave function is
                        transformed as follows. We first express x0 and Xj in terms of t and p. Noting that

                                          x0 = 2 sin /(cos / + cos p)-1,     X! = 2 sin p(cos / + cosp)-1,      Xo - Xj = 2 tan [(/ - p)/2],               (3.2)

                        it follows that

                                                                           0(xo, Xi)=f[2 tan (/ - p)/2].                                                  (3.3)

                        Replacing / by / — s shows that the effect of Einstein temporal evolution through time 5 is to transform 0(xo, Xj ) into 05(xo, xr) =
                        f[2 tan 5(/-^-p)].Ifwe replace / and p by their expressions in terms of x0 and Xj, the result is

                                                                    0,(xo, X,) =/[(w - s')/( 1 + us'/4)] - fs(u),                                         (3.4)

                        where u = x0 — x{ and s' = 2 tan s/2.
                         The Minkowski energy ^ of 05is f [(du)fs(u)]2du. If we set us = ( i¿ - s')/( 1 + ¿us'), this maybe expressed as


                                                       J [d„f(us)]2du = J [f'(us)(dus/du)]2du) = ff'(its)2(di/s/di/)dus.

                        Now diis/du = ( 1 + \s'2)/{ 1 -f \us'). When we express u in terms of     as w = (w5 + s')/{ 1 — \uss'), du5/du may be reexpressed as
                        (1 —\uss’)2l{ \    s'2). It follows that

                                                                    £-0(5) = (l + ^'2r'J/'(w)2(l -\ws')2dw.                                               (3.5)

                        The redshift z is given by definition by the equation 1 + z = E0{f))l E0{s), which in the present instance means that

                                                              1 +z = (l +|i'2) Jf'(w) 2dw j jf'(w)2( \ -\ws')2dw .                                        (3.6)

                        If/( w) is initially localized near w = 0 in a region of diameter d, the denominator in the last expression \s\ + 0(d2), which implies
                        that 1 + z = 1 + \s'2, or that z = s'2 = tan2 (p/2), within terms of order d2 .If d is of the order of a star or even a galaxy diameter,
                        in units of the cosmic distance scale, 0{d2) would be expected to be unobservably small.

                                                                             3.2. The Heisenberg Picture
                          The Heisenberg picture facilitates calculation of the small line broadening. The Hilbert space Ho of traveling wave functions on
                        M0(2) includes all “normalizable” solutions of the wave equation (do - d2)0 = 0, of the form /(x0 - Xi) on Mo(2). The criterion
                        for normalizability is technically slightly involved because of the nonlocal character of the norm in boson fields. More specifically,
                        Ho includes all such real solutions/( x0 - Xj ) for which the Fourier transform f has the property that fk>0 k |/( k)\2dk is convergent,
                        with multiplication by a complex number being defined by its application to the positive-frequency component off, and the inner
                        product (/, g) = Jj, kf(k)¿*(k)dk. This expression in momentum space is evidently local, but in physical space, (/,/) has the
                        nonlocal form 2||C/|[2, where C is the operator (-A)1/4 (e.g., as defined by Fourier transformation), and ||^|| for any function g
                        denotes the L2 norm, / | g(x) \2dx\ and multiplication by i is represented by the Hilbert transform with respect to time.
                          The underlying Hilbert space may equally be formulated as a space of functions on M(2), namely, all real functions of the form
                        F(t - p), modulo constant functions, that are normalizable relative to the norm | 11 F| 112 = Zw>o ^|öw|2, where F(z) = 2 anzn.
                        Again, multiplication by complex numbers is applied only to the positive-frequency component (n> 0), and the inner product is
                        analogous to that in H0. We denote as H the space of such functions Fon M(2).
                          The spaces Ho and H are unitarily equivalent via a local transformation T. Ttakes here the form/( x0 - Xj ) ->/[2 tan 5 ( / - p)] ;




                                    © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                         320                                                      SEGAL & ZHOU                                                         Vol. 100
                        i.e., the Minkowski variables x0 and Xi are simply replaced by their expressions in terms of the Einstein variables. T “intertwines”
                        the respective actions U0 and U of the conformal group, in the sense that U(g)T = TUo{g). Here U denotes the representation of
                        the conformal group on H, and U0 its representation on Hq. In addition, Tis unitary: | 11 r</>111 = 11101 | |, where 11 | • • • 111
                        denotes the conformally invariant norm, and the context indicates whether the wave function is on M or Mq.
                           In the Heisenberg picture, a physical single-photon state vector 0 is represented by a fixed vector in Ho or H of unit norm; for
                        specificity and to avoid inessential singularities, let us say H. The Minkowski energy operator H0 is w(d0), or the self-adjoint
                        generator of the one-parameter unitary group corresponding to the transformations x0 jc0 — 5, Xi Xi, as extended from Mo to M
                        in accordance with the foregoing. The Einstein energy operator is similarly w{dt) and is derived from the group of transformations in
                        M,         — The expected value of the Minkowski energy in the single-photon state 0 then takes the form (//o05 0)*
                           Under the assumption that H is the physical driving Hamiltonian, the photon state after lapse of Einstein time t is
                        exp {—itH)<¡) = 0(¿). Under the assumption that H0 is the energy locally observed by extant apparatus, which has been
                        argued above, and represents conventional practice, the expected observed energy of the photon after this lapse of time is
                        (exp(/¿//)//0exp(—/i//)0, 0)-
                           This leads to the same result as the Schrôdinger picture and may be extended to a computation of line breadth. The variance
                        (dispersion2) in Minkowski energy of the state with wave function 0 is (//o0> 0)/(0> 0) — ((#o0? 0)/(0> 0))2- We represent 0
                        as a localized plane wave, taking/( w) = 1 + cos vuîor\u\ <a, and = 0 otherwise. If va is of the form (2Á> 1 )ir, where TV is integral,
                        this function is continuously differentiable, and the resulting wave function is normalizable, in the two-dimensional case. For
                        arbitrary g,

                                        (g,g) = J\k\\g(k)\2dk,           (H0g,g) = j \k\2\g(k)\2dk,           (H%g, g) = J \k\3\g(k)\2dk.                 (3.7)

                        When ^=0(5), these expressions are nontrivial to evaluate in closed form, and we merely quote the result from Segal ( 1976a). The
                        dispersion (ts in the observed energy (i.e., frequency) after lapse of Einstein time s satisfies the inequality

                                                                       (<ri/Vs)2 ^ (<r0/v)2 + C(a,     1 + z)2,                                           (3.8)

                        where vs is the expected observed energy, <70 is the initial dispersion in energy, and C(a,v) is a, constant that is independent of z.
                        Under conservative assumptions as to the cosmic distance scale (>100 Mpc), the size of the emitting region (a < 1 pc), and the
                        emitted wavelength ( <21 cm), the line broadening ô X is estimated to be less than 0.005X, for redshifts z < 5.


                                                                 3.3. Chronometrie Redshift as a Perturbative Effect

                           Taking the standpoint of microscopic particle theory, the “free” Hamiltonian H0 that is presumed to describe the unperturbed
                        motion of the photon is the usual w(d0)* The perturbation Hx = V oï H0, or interaction Hamiltonian, may be characterized in
                        several ways. (1) H{is the difference between the Einstein and Minkowski energies. (2) Hi is ¿ idU[L-U0 - L0,4]. (3)              is the
                        transform of H0 under conformal inversion, which takes the form .x 4.x/.x2 in Mo ; ( 4 ) /^ is the scaling-contravariant component
                        of H, as H0 is the scale-covariant component, in the Lorentz-covariant decomposition of H at the point of observation, H=H0 +
                        Hi.(5) H{ isw{&), where & denotes differentiation with respect to the Minkowski time x’o at the antipode on S'3 to the point of
                        observation. These characterizations, which apply to spacetimes of arbitrary even dimensions, indicate that Hx is a fundamental
                        quantity and not an adventitious or ad hoc one.
                           We amplify these characterizations briefly. The first appears to refer to the energies in two different spacetimes, but as noted
                        above, the photon Hilbert spaces Ho and H over Mo and M are unitarily equivalent, via a local transformation. This transformation,
                        which consists in concrete terms of multiplication by a spacetime dependent matrix as applied to the photon field, is unique because
                        of the irreducibility of the photon representation. Accordingly, the Einstein energy, as represented by a self-adjoint operator in H,
                        corresponds to a unique such operator in Ho. The difference between this operator and the usual Minkowski energy then represents
                             Alternatively, the Minkowski energy operator on Ho is unitarily equivalent to a unique self-adjoint operator on H.            may
                        then be represented, in a unitarily equivalent form to that just defined, by the difference between the Einstein energy in H and the
                        representative for the Minkowski energy in this space.
                           The expression for Hx given in characterization 2 follows from the quantum number assignments given in § 2. Characterization
                        3 provides a simple means to show the positivity of Hx and also exhibits in the interpretation on M, the symmetry between H0 and
                        Hx. Characterization 5 shows that H0 and Hx are covariant quantities; the energy is, of course, frame dependent, and H0 and Hx
                        have the identical frame (Lorentz group) dependence. From the standpoint of an observer at the spatial antipode to the point of
                        observation, the roles of H0 and Hx are reversed according to characterization 5, which in essence restates characterization 3 in
                        terms of the Einstein universe rather than Minkowski space.
                           We note that the chronométrie principle that the driving energy is the Einstein has applications to massive particles, in particular
                        to the elimination of the ultraviolet divergences in quantum electrodynamics in conjunction with the Dirac equation appropriate
                        to the Einstein metric (Segal & Zhou 1994), to which reference must be made for elaboration.




                                    © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                        No. 2, 1995                          MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS IN EINSTEIN UNIVERSE                                                          321
                                                   4.5. Analysis in Four Spacetime Dimensions: The Schrôdinger Representation
                           Let x denote an arbitrary point of Mo, let H =       and set (/ = (oo + i íH)(g0 ~ 5 iH)~l. Under Einstein temporal evolution
                        through time 5, ^transforms into         Now solving for C/in terms of//, U = -2i(U- g0)(U-\- <70). Setting5) for the transform
                        of H through Einstein time 5, it follows that

                                                                         H(s) = -2i(eisU- a0)(eisU + <T0rl                                                  (3.9)

                        If we substitute the expression for U in terms of //and simplify, the result is that Einstein temporal evolution through time s has the
                        effect:

                                                            H2(2 sin ij + //cosis)(2cos^-//sin ¿¿r1 ^//(s).                                                (3.10)

                           This shows that the Minkowski coordinates xM(,y) corresponding to Ii(s) are expressible as quotients of quadratic polynomials in
                        the     with 5-dependent coefficients. To compute explicitly the x/s), note that If(s) has the form 2(2a + bH)(2b — ally1, where
                        <2 = sin 5 5 and b = cos 5 5. Now if X =      and y2 ^ 0, then K~l exists and equals (yo^o - yiGi — y2<T2 ~ y^iúly2, by the properties
                        of the Pauli matrices. If we apply this to y0 = 2b- oxq, yi = -axi, y2 - ax2, y3 = -ax3, the result is det (26 - aH) = 462 - 4abxo +
                        a2x2 = D,ar\d

                                                            (2b - aH)~y = D~{[(2b - axo)<ro + axXGi + ax2<j2 + ax3<j3\.                                    (3.11 )

                        From this, it follows in turn (recalling the relation ax<j2 = ia3 and its cyclic permutations) that H(s) =

                        2D~'[(2a + bxo)G0 + bx{G{ + bx2a2 + bx3o3][(2b - 0x0)00 + axioi + ax2o2 + ax3o3]
                          = 2D~{ {[Aab + 2(b2 - a2)xo - abx2]oo + [(2a + bxo)axx + bxx(2b - axo) + bx2ax3i - bx3ax2i\ox
                             + [(2a + bxo)ax2 + bx2(2b - axo) - bxxax3i + bx3axx]o2 4- [(2a + bxo)ax3 + bx3(2b - axo) + bxxax2i - bx2axxi]o3}
                                                                                = 2D~l {[4ab + 2(b2 - a2)xo- abx2]oo + 2(xxox +x2o2 + x3o3)}.              (3.12)

                        It follows that

                                                                     x0(s)= [2 sin 5 + 2x0cos5 - (x2/2)]/2Z),                                              (3.13)

                                                                     Xj(s) = Xj/D 0= 1,2,3).                                                               (3.14)

                           Locally, the mapping Ts may be approximated arbitrarily closely, in sufficiently small regions, by its linearized form, or differ-
                        ential dTs. If we confine consideration to a small neighborhood of the origin in Mo and differentiate the relations just derived, it
                        follows that dTs locally takes the form

                                                                     (Xo, xx, *2, -^3)   sec2 (s/2)(xq, xx , x2, x3).                                      (3.15)

                        It is no essential loss of generality to assume that the source is at the origin or, alternatively, to interpret the as coordinates in the
                        tangent spaces. This result then shows that a local wavelength at the source is magnified by the factor sec2 (s/2), which implies the
                        redshift z = tan2 (5/2) for a sufficiently localized source.
                           A more complete analysis, which involves the representation of the observed photon by a solution of Maxwell’s equations,
                        proceeds as follows. We take the solution \f/ in the form of a differential form F^X x)dxtldxv of second degree, where FßV( x) are the
                        components of the field strength at the point jc. The effect of any conformal transformation Ton ^ is to map it into the solution \¡/T,
                        where iMjc) = FßV( T~xx)d( r-1x)M</( T~xx)v\ the representation of the conformal group on the Hilbert space of solutions of the
                        Maxwell equations has precisely this form. The Minkowski energy of \¡/ takes the form, apart from a constant factor that depends
                        on the units, /        F^v(x)2d3x, and similarly for ^T. Exact evaluation of \pT or its Minkowski energy is difficult, but when ÿ is
                        sufficiently localized and T = Ts, the Minkowski energy may be approximated arbitrarily closely by the use of the linearized form
                        of Ts. Then \pT may be expressed in the form

                                                        2 F,v(T-'x)d(T-lx)Jdxpd(T-lx)v)/dxadxpdxa = 2 Fpv(x)dxpdxv,                                        (3.16)
                                                       pvp a                                        (iv

                        where F'^x) = Tp<r Fl>„(x')dx'/,/dxtldx'a/dxl,andx' = T lx. Now setting sec2 (p/2) = k, and T = Ts, the dx^/dx,, may be approxi-
                        mated, by      within the region in which the field is effectively nonvanishing, and it results that F'ßl,(x) ~ k^F^Ax'). It follows




                                     © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                         322                                                      SEGAL & ZHOU                                                          Vol. 100
                        in turn that the Minkowski energy of i^is correspondingly approximated by

                                       2 J [/c 2FllXx')]2dxidx2dxi ~ x 4 S J [F^Xx')]2^3dx'ydx^dx'i = k 1 Z f [F^Xx)]2dxidxidx^.                          (3.17)
                                       tiv                               flV                              flV
                        Thus the Minkowski energy is reduced by the factor k, implying the redshift z = tan2 (5/2).

                                                       4.6. Analysis in Four Spacetime Dimensions: The Heisenberg Picture
                          Passing from the Schrôdinger to the Heisenberg representation, the expected Minkowski energy (H0U(s)\¡/, U(s)\f/y may also be
                        expressed as ( U{s)~xHqU(s)\P, i^). Now, unlike U(s)y, the operator U{s)~xH0U{s) = H0(s) may be expressed in a general closed
                        form:

                                                                Ho(s) =5(1+ coss)H-\r 5(1— coss)Hx + 5 sin5iS,                                            (3.18)

                        where S denotes the generator         of the one-parameter group of scaling transformations. It follows that the observed Minkowski
                        energy after time 5 is given by the equation

                                                          (//o(5)) = 5(1+ cos5)(7/) + 5(1- cos5)<//i) + j sin s(Sy .                                      (3.19)

                        The calculation is thereby reduced to one which involves only the photon data at the initial time. This is in part nontrivial as a result
                        of the nonlocality of the invariant inner product in the photon Hilbert space together with the nonlinearity of the transformation
                        generated by Hx. The main point is that for a localized photon in the observable frequency range, (#1) and (5) are negligible
                        (Segal 1976a). From this follows the redshift time of travel relation, z = ( 1 — cos s)/{ 1 + cos 5), which is equivalent to that given
                        above. For the wave equation in two-dimensional spacetime, the computations are greatly simplified, as described above.
                           To treat the four-dimensional case in the Hilbert space context, we work in the Heisenberg representation and model the emitted
                        photon as a spatially cutoff plane wave, which is then normalizable, at the time of emission. To show that the redshift time of
                        travel relation z = tan2 \ t is valid within the present limits of measurability, it suffices to show that the coefficients (Hop, \py and
                        ( w(S)\p, \py in the expression derived above are negligible relative to (H0\p, \py. We formulate the spatially cutoff plane wave by
                        designating its initial values at time 0:

                                                            ^(0, x) = exp (ik-x)f(x),        d0\p(0,x) = exp(ik x)g(x),                                  (3.20)
                        where \k\ is the frequency p and f(x) and g(x) are nonoscillatory functions, which without loss of generality may be assumed of
                        orders 1 or less, since only ratios of the expectation values of the dynamical variables are involved here.
                           In more than two spacetime dimensions, the multipliers in the action of G are non vanishing in general, so that w(Z,l7) = -Lÿ +
                        mÿ, where      is a function on spacetime. The form of the multiplier depends on the spacetime and its “parallelization.” In its form
                        on M0 as normally parallelized, as in conventional relativistic theory, the explicit form of this function follows from Theorem 5.2
                        of PI. This implies that m_10 = -ix0 and that m_14 = 1. Applying Theorem 5.6, it follows that at the time of emission Xo = 0,

                                                                <//0^^> = £3[|grad^|2+ \d0t\2]d3x/(t,i),                                                 (3.21)

                                                                          = | f3|x|2[|grad^|2+ |<WI2]d3*/<^>,                                            (3.22)
                                                                             %/R

                                                              (w(S)t,      = £3 (Xjdjt)rdyx/(t,        .                                                 (3.23)

                           Now letting d denote the overall diameter of the spatial support of /and g, and expressing d and v in chronométrie units, it
                        follows that

                                                                            (Hyyp, \py/(H0\p, \py < 2d2,

                                                                         (w(s)t, py/(H0\p, py<o(d/p).

                        Thus on the highly conservative basis that > 100 Mpc, that p is of the order or greater than the frequency corresponding to the 21
                        cm hydrogen line, and that the spatial support of the emitted photon is 1 pc or less, these ratios (<10-16) are far below the level
                        where they would imply a measurable effect on z, according to its expression in the Heisenberg representation.
                          Essentially the same analysis applies to the full Maxwell equations, as developed by Segal ( 1976a). Here /and g were taken to be
                        Gaussian functions, and quantitative bounds were computed in this case. However, the main part of the argument applies to




                                    © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                         No. 2, 1995                         MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS IN EINSTEIN UNIVERSE                                                       323
                        general / and g, as regards order-of-magnitude estimates. These are sufficient to establish the simple nonparametric and frequency-
                        independent implication of chronométrie theory in the form given above, at the level of practical observations.

                                                                                     4. DISCUSSION
                           Starting from the premise that the fundamental microscopic dynamical variables for all observers are the generators of the
                        conformal group and that they satisfy the same commutation relation at all points of the universe, we have specified and distin-
                        guished the Einstein and Minkowski energies, and local Minkowskian coordinates. It is then a mathematical fact that propagation
                        of light as driven by the Einstein energy affects the local structure of an initially localized photon, as observed in terms of the
                        Minkowski dynamical variables. In particular, a rigorous computation in the free photon Hilbert space shows that after Einstein
                        time t, the wavelength of a localized photon in an observable wave band is increased by the factor sec2 (i/2).
                           The chronométrie analysis is conformally covariant and applies in the universal cosmos M, which represents empty or reference
                        spacetime. While, in principle, observers and sources may be in arbitrary motions relative to one another, the regularity of the
                        redshift phenomenon indicates that there exists a cosmic frame in which they are substantially at rest mutually. In chronométrie
                        theory this frame is represented by the Einstein universe, which provides a factorization of M into time ® space, as Æ1 X S'3. There
                        is an eight-parameter family of such distinct factorizations, corresponding to the homogeneous space quotient G/K and there is a
                        particular factorization that is applicable at any epoch and is definable as that in which the mutual motions of sources and observers
                        are minimized. The physical Einstein universe may also be specified by the designation of its isometry group, which is a maximal
                        essentially compact subgroup K of the conformal group G on M. All such groups are conjugate, and the physical Einstein universe,
                        may, in principle, be picked out, starting from any particular one Ko by minimizing the expectation value ( w(L_li0) U(g)\p, U{g))py
                        of the cosmic energy with respect to the element # of G, where ^ is the vector in the cosmic quantized field Hilbert space H that
                        represents the actual state of the universe, and U{g) is the unitary action of G on H. Starting with the establishment by Hubble of
                        the extragalactic character of nebulae, the concept of the state \¡/ of the universe has attained observational significance, primarily
                        through the characteristics of the extragalactic source population and of the diffuse backgrounds, on which CC implies observable
                        constraints. There is no apparent theoretical or clearly objective empirical contraindication for CC, and it provides a conceptually
                        simple and natural explanation for the redshift as well as improved efficiency in the correlation of observation with theory and
                        microphysical connections.
                           The derivations of the redshift to time of travel relation treated above assumed that the source was localized on a cosmic scale, as
                        appropriate for discrete sources. Delocalized sources exist in theory and are predicted to be less redshifted, or in some cases not
                        redshifted at all, depending on the extent of the delocalization. The flux from such a source would be slowly varying with time,
                        which suggests their possible use as a model for gamma-ray bursts (cf., e.g., Brainerd 1993 ).
                           More specifically, a free photon wavefunction that is invariant under Einstein temporal propagation necessarily has global sup-
                        port in E, as measured by the dispersion in distance and averaged over S3 relative to the field strength. An exact lower bound on the
                        dispersion is given for the case of the wave equation, to which the Maxwell equations are reducible, by the
                          Theorem. Let <p bea solution of the wave equation that is invariant under Einstein temporal evolution. Then the variance V(f)
                        ofsin p, where p is the distancefrom the base point O, as measured by


                                                                         J sin2 pl</>(u)l2du j j*\<¡>(u)\2du,


                        is > \ and < | /both limits being attained by certain solutions).
                           The proof involves extensive calculation involving spherical harmonics and Gegenbauer polynomials ( it was provided for the
                        referee but is here omitted). Further analysis shows that the same conclusion holds if the solution is not an exact eigensolution for
                        Einstein temporal evolution but is in any spectral manifold for 7/that is significantly bounded away from zero. Thus a solution can
                        be spatially localized at a fixed time only if it is extremely remote from being invariant under Einstein temporal evolution.
                          Conversely, it has already been shown that for a localized solution, there is a corresponding redshift z = tan2 (t/2) under evolution
                        through Einstein time /, showing that localized solutions age, as observed by their interaction with local matter. Extant photon
                        detectors are based on the use of localized charged particles and are thereby necessarily sensitive only to the H0 component of the
                        Einstein energy H and not at all to the quasi-gravitational component            . The measurement of the Hx component presents a
                        challenge to instrumentation on an extremely large scale.
                           Because of its freedom from adjustable parameters, CC provides also an efficient basis for objective and model-independent
                        estimation of important astrophysical parameters. To mention only a few, these include the cosmic distance scale R, the motions
                        of the Galaxy and the microwave background radiation relative to the cosmic inertial frame represented by the Einstein universe,
                        and the multi-wave band luminosity functions of objectively specified populations of extragalactic sources.
                          The treatment of nucleosynthesis is similar in CC and in big bang theory, to first order. The difference is only that a stochastic
                        sequence of minibangs, associated with, e.g., the formation of galaxy clusters, replaces the unique big bang. Cluster formation would
                        be expected to be accompanied by extremely high temperatures, which, as in big bang theory, would be productive of light elements.
                        The impressive agreement of the big bang predictions regarding the abundances of the four major light elements depend on an




                                    © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
1995ApJS. .100. .307S
                        324                                                             SEGAL & ZHOU
                        adjustable parameter, which is so tightly constrained as to suggest that some modifications may be needed in the underlying scenario
                        (see, e.g., Audouze 1989).
                           The infinitude of the Einstein timescale relative to the Minkowski scale provides greater scope for such modifications, via ancil-
                        lary processes of longer duration. For example, an adaptation of CC to microphysics suggests a possible theory according to which
                        the fundamental partons consist of a massive x-particle represented by a spinor field of conformal dimension 5/2, together with
                        electrons and/or neutrinos (Segal 1991, and references therein). Such a particle would be electromagnetically noninteracting via
                        the conventional trilinear interaction Lagrangian and would produce nucleons on encountering ordinary matter. The physical
                        existence of such a particle is suggested by the apparently isotropic production of ultrahigh-energy cosmic rays and by the apparent
                        missing mass in the Galaxy. Such a particle would be expected to play a significant role in cluster formation and thereby to enhance
                        the flexibility of the big bang scenario for nucleosynthesis as adapted to a model for the latter process.
                           Heavy elements could be produced primarily in stars along conventional lines, and the infinitude of Einstein time relative to
                        Minkowski time would eliminate possible problems with the otherwise limited timescale for their production. As observed by
                        Steigman ( 1989), “Abundances are not observed. Abundances are derived from observational data, often following a long and
                        tortuous path involving theory.... All this is to dispell the notion that the observational situation involves little new work.” In the
                        light of this and the earlier considerations, there is no special reason to doubt that a variant of big bang nucleosynthesis theory can
                        be effectively adapted to CC.
                           Finally, the transparency of cosmic space implies that photons in E will typically make many circuits before being absorbed or
                        undergoing interaction. A free photon will be infinitely redshifted at the antipode in S3 to its point P of emission, but on returning
                        to P it will be in its original state, as a consequence of the periodicity of free photon wave functions in E. The Planck theory ( or the
                        maximization of the entropy subject to energy conservation) implies that the remnant radiation in the universe will be in a black-
                        body state, irrespective of how optically thin cosmic space may be. By virtue of the large-scale isotropy of the source distribution,
                        the state of the radiative background would also be isotropic. CC thus implies, without any ad hoc scenario, the existence of an
                        isotropic cosmic background radiation. Further details, including possible effects of local perturbations, are given by Segal ( 1983).

                          We thank J. F. Nicoll for useful discussion.

                                                                                              REFERENCES
                        Alexandrov, A. D. 1967, Canadian J. Math., 19, 1119                          Paneitz, S. M., Segal, I. E., & Yogan, D. A., Jr. 1987, J. Funct. Analysis,
                        Alexandrov, A. D., & Ovchinnikova, V. V. 1953, Vestn. Leningr. Gos.            75, 1
                          Univ., 11,95                                                               Schwinger, J. 1958, Selected Papers on Quantum Electrodynamics (New
                        Audouze, J. 1989, in Cosmic Abundances of Matter (New York: AIP),              York: Dover)
                          304                                                                        Segal, I. E. 1951, Duke Math. J., 18,221
                        Brainerd, J. J. 1993, ApJ, 410, 507                                                  . 1976a, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sei., 73, 669
                        Bateman, H. 1910, Proc. Lond. Math. Soc., 2, No. 8,223                               . 1976b, Mathematical Cosmology and Extragalactic Astronomy,
                        Cunningham, E. 1910, Proc. Lond. Math. Soc., 2, No. 8,77                       (New York: Academic)
                        Einstein, A. 1917, Sitzber. Preuss. Akad. Wiss., 142                                 . 1982, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sei., 79, 7961
                        Faddeev, L. D. 1989, in Braid Group, Knot Theory, and Statistical Me-                . 1983, Phys. Rev., D28, 2392
                          chanics, ed. C. N. Yang & M. L. Ge (Teaneck, NJ: World Scientific), 97             . 1984a, Nuov. Cimento, B79, 187
                        Fock, V. 1964, The theory of space, time, and gravitation (2d ed.; Oxford:           . 1984b, in Proc. J. C. Maxwell, the Sesquicentennial Symp., ed.
                          Pergamon)                                                                    M. S. Berger (Amsterdam: North-Holland), 245
                        Gross, L. 1964, J. Math. Phys., 5, 687                                               . 1986b, in Quantum Theory and the Structure of Time and Space,
                        Heisenberg, W. 1946, Z. Nat., 1, 608                                           Vol. 6, ed. L. Castell & C. F. v. Weizsäcker ( Munich: Hanser), 120
                        Hoyle, F., & Narlikar, J. 1974, Action at a Distance in Physics and Cos-             . 1991, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sei., 88,994
                          mology (San Francisco: Freeman)                                                    . 1993, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sei., 90,4798
                        Hubble, E. P., & Tolman, R. C. 1935, ApJ, 82, 302                                    . 1993, ApJ, 411,465
                        Inonu, E., & Wigner, E. P. 1953, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sei., 39, 510             Segal, I. E., Nicoll, J. F., & Blackman, E. 1994a, ApJ, 430,63
                        Jakobsen, H. P., & Vergne, M. 1977, J. Funct. Analysis, 24, 52               Segal, I. E., Nicoll, J. F., & Wu, P. 1994b, ApJ, 431, 52
                        Lichnerowicz, A. 1988, in NATO Adv. Sei. Inst., Ser. C, Math.-Phys. Sei.,    Segal, I. E., & Zhou, Z. 1992, Ann. Phys., 218,279
                          Vol. 247, Deformation Theory of Algebras and Structures, and Applica-              . 1994, Ann. Phys., 232, 61
                          tions ( Dordrecht: Kluwer), 855                                            Steigman, G. 1989, in Cosmic Abundances of Matter (New York: AIP),
                        Minkowski, H. 1908, address at 80th Assembly of German Natural Scien-          310
                          tists and Physicists, Cologne                                              Wesson, P. S. 1980, Gravity, Particles, and Astrophysics (Dordrecht:
                        Möller, C. 1972, The General Theory of Relativity ( 2d ed.; Oxford: Oxford     Reidel)
                          Univ. Press)                                                               Will, C. 1992, Int. J. Mod. Phys., Dl, 13
                        Paneitz, S. M. 1983, J. Funct. Analysis, 54, 18 (PI )                        Zeeman, C. 1964, J. Math. Phys., 5,490
                        Paneitz, S. M., & Segal, I. E. 1982a, J. Funct. Analysis, 47,78 (P2)         Zwicky, F. 1929, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sei., 15,773
                                . 1982b, J. Funct. Analysis, 49, 335 (P3)




                                      © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
