197 9ApJ. . .230L. .63S
                          The Astrophysical Journal, 230:L63-L65, 1979 June 1
                          © 1979. The American Astronomical Society. All rights reserved. Printed in U.S.A.




                                                        A COSMOLOGICAL RED SHIFT-D IST AN CE SQUARE LAW?*
                                                                                      Raymond M. Soneira
                                                                               Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton
                                                                          Received 1978 November 21; accepted 1979 March 7
                                                                                 ABSTRACT
                                       We directly examine the claims of Segal that the {m,z) Hubble diagram is fitted best by a square
                                     law z — Kr2 rather than by the traditional Hubble law z = Hr m the low-redshift range 2 < 0.01,
                                     corresponding to galaxies brighter than 14th mag. Segal attempts to fit a distance relation to the
                                     (w,2) scatter diagram in which each individual galaxy is plotted. We calculate the exact relation
                                     between the mean redshift (z(rn)) for all galaxies in a small magnitude interval m + bm/2 and the
                                     apparent magnitude m. Our relation is independent of luminosity function and peculiar velocity
                                     distribution about the general expansion. Also, it is not affected by sample incompleteness as a
                                     function of apparent magnitude or the clustering of galaxies in the sample. Segal’s method is
                                     affected by all of these and requires a highly sophisticated statistical analysis to deal with the
                                     non-Gaussian pointwise scatter. Our analysis favors the Hubble law and conclusively rules out the
                                     square law for the small redshift region.
                                     Subject headings: cosmology — galaxies : redshif ts

                                                                                I. INTRODUCTION
                             There has been some discussion in the literature that the (m,z) Hubble diagram is fitted best by a square law
                          z = Kr2 rather than by the traditional Hubble law 2 = Hr (Segal 1976; Nicoll and Segal 1978, and references there-
                          in). In recent years Segal has been the strongest advocate of this position. His approach has been to fit a distance
                          relation to the scatter (m,2) diagram in which each individual galaxy is plotted. A highly sophisticated statistical
                          analysis is needed to take into account the (typically non-Gaussian) scatter arising from the following sources: (1) a
                          broad galaxy luminosity distribution; (2) a relatively large peculiar velocity distribution about the general expansion,
                          as well as redshift measurement errors; (3) surveys which are necessarily magnitude-limited and have a completeness
                          that varies with magnitude; and (4) the clustering of galaxies which causes points in the diagram not to be statistically
                          independent. Segal neither takes all of these effects into account nor does he use presently accepted descriptions of
                          them. (For example, Segal uses a Gaussian luminosity function; this is very different from the generally accepted
                          form. The luminosity function measured for the local galaxy “field” depends on the adopted redshift-distance rela-
                          tion. When testing the linear Hubble case, the function determined from this “assumption” [Felten 1977] must
                          be used.)
                             There is a possibility that if these incorrect analyses remain unchallenged they may somehow entrench themselves
                          into the literature as a real uncertainty. It is the purpose of this short Letter to directly address this question. Using
                          a data base quite similar to one that has been used by Segal, we consider the general redshift-distance relation 2 =
                          brv. Our method does not require statistical analysis and does not suffer from any of the four systematic effects
                          noted above. The results favor the Hubble law /> = 1 and conclusively rule out the square law p = 2 for the small
                          redshift region.
                                                                                 II. THE METHOD
                             The mean redshift (2) for galaxies which have apparent magnitudes in the interval m + 5m/2 is given exactly by

                                                                       JiZidy Jlœz(r, y)Q(y)G[m — 5 log r — 25 — k(z)]r2dr
                                                         (z(m)) =                                                         ,
                                                                          jy^dy JlœQ{y)G[m — 5 log r — 25 — k{z)]r2dr

                                                                       z(r, y)   = brv       y,      f_c°M{y)dy = 1 ,

                                                                       jyyQ(y)dy = 0 ,                                                          (1)
                          where G is an unspecified differential galaxy luminosity function, Q is an unspecified distribution function of peculiar
                          velocities y (including measurement errors) about the general redshift-distance relation brv (b a constant), and k is
                            * Work supported by National Aeronautics and Space Administration grant NAS8-32902.
                                                                                                   L63



                           © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
197 9ApJ. . .230L. .63S
                          L64                                                    SONEIRA                                                   Vol. 230
                          the dimming due to movement of the galaxies away from us. In equation (1) we have assumed radial homogeneity;
                          the validity of this assumption is discussed below. For the redshifts we consider here and for any Q with a reason-
                          able characteristic width of a few hundred km s-1 (Soneira 1978, 1979), the k term is at least an order of magnitude
                          less than the bin size bm we shall adopt (Pence 1976). Hence we can neglect k. The integral yQ then vanishes by
                          definition, so equation (1) reduces to
                                                                      {z{m)) = constant X 10(p/5)m .                                            (2)
                          The constant is independent of z and M) its particular value is not of interest here. The redshift-distance relation
                          proposed by Segal remains a square law only for small redshifts z < 0.04 (Segal 1978). This is a factor of ^5 greater
                          than the redshifts for a 14th mag limited sample we consider here. The integral in equation (1) is cut off by the
                          luminosity function G (because of a brightness limit for galaxies) well before deviations from the square law begin.
                          Hence equations (1) and (2) accurately test the redshift-distance law proposed by Segal. We rewrite equation (2) as

                                                                     log {z(m)) — ^ m       constant' .                                         (3)

                          In the regime where we apply this equation it is essentially exact. In the discussion which follows we neglect the
                          constant in the equation.
                              Considering the systematic effects noted in § I, we see that: (1) the equation is independent of luminosity func-
                          tion—this is important because the shape of the function depends on the redshift-distance relation adopted; (2) it
                          is independent of the peculiar velocity distribution because of the averaging process; (3) it is not affected by a limit-
                          ing magnitude or magnitude-dependent completeness because only small magnitude intervals bm are considered;
                          and (4) it is not affected by correlated galaxies, again because of the averaging process. Note that within an ap-
                          parent magnitude interval there is no selection bias according to redshift because the surface brightness of a galaxy
                          is independent of distance (and therefore redshift) as long as the k term is negligible. Hence, an incomplete sample
                          of redshifts is still expected to comprise a fair sample for measuring {z{m)) in the regime under discussion.
                             When galaxies are selected collectively rather than individually there is an observational bias that can influence
                          (z{m)) for samples which have a completeness that falls with increasing apparent magnitude. If galaxies with
                          dim apparent magnitudes are selected for redshift measurement on the basis of their association with galaxies that
                          have bright apparent magnitudes (and these typically have low redshifts), there will be a bias toward smaller red-
                          shifts in the dimmer magnitudes. We can test for such an effect in the data. Turner and Gott (1976) have compiled
                          a complete 14th mag catalog of galaxy groups. The (incomplete) redshift sample in their catalog is quite similar,
                          to ours (§ HI, below). We compare the redshift completeness and magnitude distribution of isolated galaxies (32%
                          of the total number of galaxies) to the strongly associated galaxies that are in groups with 10 or more members
                          (43% of the total number of galaxies). The remaining 25% of the galaxies belong to small groups which have prop-
                          erties intermediate to the two extreme populations. To consider the possibility of differing magnitude-dependent
                          completeness in the two populations we divide each into galaxies brighter and dimmer than 12th mag. (The mean
                          magnitude for galaxies with measured redshifts is 12.1 for both populations; the standard deviation of the magni-
                          tude distributions is 1.1 mag for isolated galaxies and 1.0 mag for the galaxies in rich groups.) Both populations have
                          a redshift completeness of 90% for m < 12; for w > 12 the isolated galaxies are 20% complete and the galaxies in
                          rich groups are 25% complete. The latter difference is in the noise for a fair sampling of the complete distribution.
                          Any effect of this size is much too small to significantly influence our study of the redshift-distance relation.
                              In equation (1) we have assumed radial homogeneity. However, because of clustering about our own Galaxy there
                          is a local density inhomogeneity which can be measured by using the number-magnitude diagram for galaxies (Soneira
                          and Peebles 1977, Fig. 8 and eq. [6]). The inhomogeneity lowers (z) somewhat for the brighter (and typically
                          nearer) magnitudes m < 12 but has virtually no influence on the dimmer magnitudes, thereby increasing the slope
                           of equation (3) and favoring the p = 2 case. One can take explicit account of the density inhomogeneity in equa-
                           tion (1), as in Soneira (1978, 1979), but we have not done this here because the effect is small—an increase of <10%
                           in the slope p. (Local clustering could also produce virial motions for which (z) —> 0. Again, this would affect only the
                           brighter magnitudes and likewise favor the p = 2 case.)
                                                                                III. THE DATA
                             We have calculated (z(m)) for galaxies in the Reference Catalogue of Bright Galaxies (de Vaucouleurs and de Vau-
                          couleurs 1964; 1967) supplemented by redshifts from Roberts (1967)—the only sample available to us at present in
                          computer-readable form. In order that absorption in the Galaxy not be important, we consider only the region h11 >
                          40°; there are 375 galaxies in the sample. We have plotted the results in Figure 1 for bm = 0.4 mag. The range.in
                          m plotted (10.4 to 14.0) includes all bins that have 10 or more galaxies. The flags are rough estimates of the noise
                          in (z{m)) given by (jm/n112, with gJ the variance about the mean redshift {z{m)) for all galaxies in each magnitude
                          bin, and n the number of galaxies in a bin. The relations ^ = 1 and 2 are drawn as solid and dashed lines, respec-
                          tively. Graphically, the linear relation is very strongly favored over the square law. Performing a weighted least-
                          squares fit to the data gives a slope p = 0.85 ± 0.10, with a linear correlation coefficient of 0.95. The reduced x2 is




                             © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
No. 2, 1979                                  REDSHIFT-DISTANCE SQUARE LAW?                                                             L65




   Fig. 1.—The (m,z) Hubble diagram for nearby galaxies. The redshifts in each magnitude interval have been averaged. The solid line is
the relation expected for a linear Hubble law according to eq. (3). The dashed line has the slope expected for a square-law redshift-distance
relation.

1.7 per degree of freedom. We notice that the first point m = 10.4 is more than 2J standard deviations away from
the fit. Eliminating this point a posteriori we obtain a slope p = 1.0 ± 0.10, a linear correlation coefficient of 0.98,
and a reduced x2 of 0.6 per degree of freedom. The first fit is somewhat worse than expected for an ideal fit in the
ensemble average (which will have a reduced x2 of 1 per degree of freedom) and the second somewhat better. The
latter fit is a linear Hubble law and corresponds to the solid line in 2the figure. The best fit constrained to the square
law ÿ = 2 is drawn as the dashed line in the figure. The reduced x is 30 per degree of freedom; with the first point
m = 10.4 removed it is 17 per degree of freedom. The p = 2 case fails at the ^>>99.9999% confidence level. The
formal probability that the plotted points come from & p = 2 relation is less than 10“25 (assuming a normal error
distribution). The scatter about the linear relation = 1 is reduced somewhat when either the galaxies in the core
of the Virgo cluster are excluded or the sample of galaxies with b11 < — 40 from the southern galactic hemisphere
are included. There is little question that the Hubble relation is strongly favored and the square law definitively
ruled out here.
   There are somewhat deeper and more complete redshift samples available that can easily be analyzed using this
method, but it appears unlikely that the case for ÿ = 2 will improve. Our result is important because it is a rigorous
statistical test of the Hubble law for a fair sample of all galaxies out to ^35 h^1 Mpc (h is Hubble’s constant in units
of 100 km s_1 Mpc-1) and complements the more specialized methods that have confirmed this relation out to sig-
nificantly greater distances, such as those of Sandage, Kristian, and Westphal (1976).

                                                             REFERENCES
de Vaucouleurs, A., and de Vaucouleurs, G. 1967, A.J., 72, 730.     Segal, I. E. 1976, Mathematical Cosmology and Extragalactic
de Vaucouleurs, G., and de Vaucouleurs, A. 1964, Reference            Astronomy (New York: Academic Press).
  Catalogue of Bright Galaxies (Austin: University of Texas Press).        . 1978, Astr. Ap.f 68, 353.
Felten, J. E. 1977, A./., 82, 861.                                  Soneira, R. M. 1978, Ph.D. thesis, Princeton University.
Nicoll, J. F., and Segal, I. E. 1978, Ann. Phys., 113, 1.                  . 1979, to be published.
Pence, W. 1976, Ap. /., 203, 39.                                    Soneira, R. M., and Peebles, P. J. E. 1977, Ap. J., 211, 1.
Roberts, M. S. 1967, private communication.                         Turner, E. L., and Gott, J. R. 1976, Ap. J. Suppl., 32, 409.
Sandage, A., Kristian, J., and Westphal, J. A. 1976, Ap. /., 205,
  688.


Raymond M. Soneira: Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ 08540




 © American Astronomical Society • Provided by the NASA Astrophysics Data System
