                                                                   Two electron dynamics in




arXiv:physics/9706013v1 [physics.atom-ph] 9 Jun 1997
                                                                      photodetachment
                                                       D. Hanstorp, G. Haeffler, A. E. Klinkmüller, U. Ljungblad
                                                           Department of Physics, Göteborg University and
                                                                Chalmers University of Technology AB
                                                                     SE-412 96 Göteborg, Sweden
                                                                              U. Berzinsh
                                                           Department of Spectroscopy, University of Latvia,
                                                                        LV 1586, Riga, Latvia
                                                                             I. Yu. Kiyan
                                                        Russian Academy of Sciences, General Physics Institute,
                                                                       117 942 Moscow, Russia
                                                                              D. J. Pegg
                                                       Department of Physics, University of Tennessee, Knoxville,
                                                                           TN 37996 USA
                                                                                 September 3, 2021


                                                           We present the results of experimental studies of photon-negative ion
                                                        interactions involving the dynamics of two electrons. Resonances asso-
                                                        ciated with doubly excited states of Li− and He− have been observed
                                                        using laser photodetachment spectroscopy. Total and partial photode-
                                                        tachment cross sections have been investigated. In the former case, the
                                                        residual atoms are detected irrespective of their excitation state, while in
                                                        the latter case only those atoms in specific states are detected. This was
                                                        achieved by the use of a state selective detection scheme based on the
                                                        resonant ionization of the residual atoms. In addition, in the case of Li−
                                                        photodetachment, the threshold behavior of the Li(2 2 P)+e− (ks) partial
                                                        cross section has been used to accurately measure the electron affinity of
                                                        Li.




                                                                                             1
1    Introduction
We present results of recent studies of the photodetachment of few-electron atomic
negative ions. The motivation for these measurements is to better understand the
general problem of correlated motion of particles in many-body systems. Correlated
motion plays an important role in several fields of physics. In nuclear physics, for
example, it manifests itself in halo nuclei, in which the two outermost neutrons con-
tribute to the formation of very diffuse nuclei [1]. In the case of atomic systems, it
is known that negative ions, in particular, exhibit an enhanced sensitivity to elec-
tron correlation effects due to the suppression of the normally dominant Coulomb
force of the core. This sensitivity is further increased in the case of doubly excited
states of negative ions where, in general, the outermost electron moves in the field
of an excited atom. Such an electron is bound by short range polarization forces,
in contrast to the long range Coulomb force characteristic for the binding of atoms
and positive ions. The more symmetric the two electron excitation, the more highly
correlated the state. A highly excited pair of electrons are no longer independent,
rather they begin to move collectively. The autodetaching decay of doubly excited
states is manifested as resonances in photodetachment cross sections. Such reso-
nances arise from an interference between two paths to the same final continuum
state: direct photodetachment and resonant photodetachment via the intermediate
doubly excited state. The results of experiments on negative ions, and particularly
those involving resonances associated with excited negative ions, therefore provide
sensitive tests of the ability of theory to go beyond the independent electron model.
    The prototypical atomic negative ion is H− . Here, two electrons move in the
field of a point core, the proton. In general, if both electrons are excited the outer
electron moves in the field of an excited H atom consisting of the nucleus and the
inner electron. Since this permanent dipole field differs intrinsically from the long
range Coulomb field, the series of resonances will not be strictly Rydberg in nature.
Electron correlation becomes more enhanced as the level of excitation increases since
the excited H atom becomes more easily polarizable. Resonances representing the
decay of such doubly excited states appear in the photodetachment cross section
below the excited H atom thresholds. Double excitation of the H− ion has been
studied extensively both experimentally [2] and theoretically [3]. It is clear that
these highly correlated states are not well represented by the independent electron
model. Instead, new quantum number labels have been introduced that describe the
collective motion of the electron pair [4]. We have chosen to study the two electron
dynamics in He− and Li− ions since they represent the logical extension of the
work on the H− ion. In the case of both He− and Li− , the two active electrons
move in the field of a finite core. He− and Li− ions are therefore simple systems for
investigating few-particle interactions since the core, in each case, is finite but small.
The spherically symmetric closed core of Li− might be expected to approximate the
H− ion somewhat better than the open core of He− . The presence of a core will serve



                                            2
to lift the degeneracy of the excited state thresholds characteristic of the H atom.
Doubly excited states will then be bound in the shorter range field of an induced
dipole and not a permanent dipole, as is the case for H− . As a consequence, one
expects the photodetachment spectra of these ions to differ from that of the H−
ion, at least at low-to-intermediate levels of excitation. For example, the resonances
should be broader since the lifting of the threshold degeneracy results in a larger
number of continua available for autodetachment [5, 6]. It is also not clear whether
the quantum numbers and propensity rules developed to describe the H− spectra
will remain valid to the same extent in the case of the He− and Li− spectra. Of
course, as the level of excitation increases the role played by the core will become
less significant and the spectra, particularly that of Li− , should appear more and
more like that of H− . In fact, the Li− ion can be considered as the “poor man’s H−
ion” in the sense that at high levels of excitation their spectra should be similar.
The doubly excited states of Li− are, however, far more accessible. In both Li− and
He− , high lying states can be studied in high resolution experiments using tunable
dye lasers. Corresponding states in the H− ion, however, have excitation energies
about an order of magnitude larger and therefore remain relatively inaccessible.


2     Method
2.1   Total Cross Sections
The total photodetachment cross section describes the probability that an electron
is detached from a negative ion following the absorption of a photon, regardless
the excitation state of the residual atom or the energy or direction of the emitted
electron. A total cross section is the sum of partial cross sections for detachment into
each of the energetically allowed continua. This is illustrated in Fig. 1. Here we show
the three possible channels accessible to a doubly excited state of Li− that lies just
below the Li(3 2 P) detachment threshold. The total cross section may be determined
by monitoring the production of either the detached electrons or the neutral atoms
left following photodetachment. In ion beam experiments the residual atoms can be
efficiently collected in the forward direction since they are moving with the same
velocity as the beam ions. In the present experiments we measure the yield of the
residual atoms produced when a beam of negative ions is merged collinearly with
a beam of pulsed, tunable laser radiation. Studies of double excitation of negative
ions demand both high sensitivity and energy resolution as a consequence of the low
production cross sections and the high density of resonances below highly excited
thresholds. The choice of a collinear geometry has two major advantages over a
crossed beam geometry. First, the interaction volume can be made at least two orders
of magnitude larger, resulting in a more efficient production of the doubly excited
states. Second, kinematic compression [7] of the longitudinal velocity distribution of
the ions significantly improves the energy resolution of the photodetachment spectra.



                                           3
               6




               4                1 o
                                           3 2P
                                                 o
                                P
                                            2
                                           3 S
                                                  Figure 1: Partial energy level diagram for the


Energy [eV ]
                                                            Li− /Li systems showing the autode-
                       ω
                                                            taching decay of a doubly excited state
               2                           2 P2 o           of Li− into different continua. Each of
                                                            the three continuum channel is charac-
                                                            terized by the state that the residual Li
                                                            atom is left in following photodetach-
                                                            ment via the doubly excited state. A
               0                           2 2S
                                                            particular decay channel is isolated by
                                1
                                S                           state selectively detecting the excited
                           Li         Li                    residual atom.

    Typically, doubly excited states autodetach predominantly to just a few continua
and the associated resonance structure modulates the corresponding partial cross
sections. A problem arises in total cross section measurements as high lying doubly
excited states are accessed. Resonance structure in total cross sections tends to “wash
out” as many partial cross sections with little or no structure are added to those
that exhibit well modulated structure. Under such conditions, it becomes necessary
to isolate a particular continuum channel and study resonances in the corresponding
partial cross section. Another problem arises if one attempts to study the total cross
section for the photodetachment of metastable negative ions such as He− . In this
case a large neutral atom background arises from autodetachment of the unstable
ions in their ground state. To avoid these two problems, we have chosen to selectively
ionize the residual atoms and detect positive ions in the presence of a much smaller
background. By use of this state selective detection scheme, we hence study partial
cross sections instead of total cross sections.

2.2                Partial Cross Sections
A partial photodetachment cross section describes the probability that an electron
is detached from a negative ion into a particular continuum state. Each decay chan-
nel is characterized by the excitation state of the residual atom and the energy and
angular momentum of the detached electron. A particular channel can therefore
be identified by either measuring the energy of the detached electron, as in photo-
electron spectroscopy, or by state selectively detecting the residual atom. We have




                                                       4
chosen the latter alternative in the present work. The excitation state of the residual
atom can be determined by the use of the well established technique of Resonance
Ionization Spectroscopy (RIS). This sensitive and selective technique was developed
more than 20 years ago [8] but it has only recently been applied to the study of
negative ions [9]. The use of a collinear beam geometry combined with the resonant
ionization of the residual atoms presents several distinct advantages over photoelec-
tron spectroscopy in which the detached electrons are energy analyzed, invariably
using a crossed beam geometry. First, the positive ions can be collected far more
efficiently than photoelectrons since they move in one direction only, the ion beam
direction. In contrast, the electrons are ejected over a distribution of angles and
therefore only a small fraction can be collected within the finite acceptance angle
of a detector. Second, the background associated with the detection of positive ions
is generally far smaller than that associated with the detection of photoelectrons.
Both of these advantages enhance the sensitivity of state selective measurements on
the residual atoms. On the other hand, the major advantage of photoelectron spec-
troscopy is that all energetically allowed photodetachment channels can be isolated
and measured simultaneously. Another attribute is that the angular distribution of
the detached electrons can be measured. This additional information provides fur-
ther insight into the photodetachment process. In order to extract information on
the parameters of a resonance one must fit a parameter function that describes the
interaction of a doubly excited state with continua to the experimental data. The
most commonly used form is the Beutler- Fano profile [10]

                                            (q + ǫ)2
                               σ(E) = a +                  ,                       (1)
                                             1 + ǫ2

with,

                                         (E − E0 )
                                   ǫ=2                 ,
                                            Γ
where E is the photon energy, E0 and Γ are the position and width of the resonance,
q is the shape parameter, a is the background and b is the amplitude of the resonance.
This form is strictly only valid for the treatment of resonance structure in a total
cross section. It can, however, be used to parametrize resonances in a partial cross
section if, as in the present case, only the positions and widths of the resonances
are required. Starace has extended the Beutler-Fano treatment to cover the case of
partial cross sections [11]. The form that Starace has proposed can be written as

                 b  2                   
  σ(E) = a +          ǫ + 2ǫ qℜ(α) − ℑ(α)  + 1 − 2qℑ(α)
               1 + ǫ2
                                                    − 2ℜ(α) + (q 2 + 1)|α|2 (2)
                                                                           




                                          5
where the parameters have the same significance as in the Beutler-Fano formula.
In addition a complex parameter, α, is introduced to describe the branching into a
particular channel.

2.3   Experimental Procedure
A detailed description of the interacting beams apparatus used in the present work
can be found elsewhere [12]. In short, positive ions are extracted from a plasma- type
ion source and accelerated to beam energies that can be varied between 2.5 keV and
5 keV. Negative ions are produced in the beam by double sequential charge exchange
in a cesium vapor. A pair of electrostatic quadrupole deflectors (QD1,2) is used to
direct the negative ion beam into and out of the path of the laser beams, as shown
schematically in Fig. 2. The ion-laser interaction region is defined by two apertures
(AP) of diameter 3 mm placed 0.5 m apart. The amount of negative ions remaining
after passage through the interaction region is monitored for normalization purposes
using a Faraday cup (FC) placed adjacent to the second quadrupole deflector. Neutral
atoms produced by photodetachment or collisional detachment are unaffected by the
electric field in the second quadrupole. They enter the neutral atom detector (ND)
situated downstream of the second quadrupole deflector. Here, the impact of the fast
beam atoms on a quartz plate (CG) produces secondary electrons that are efficiently
detected using a channel electron multiplier (CEM). The plate is coated with a few
atomic layers of platinum in order to prevent charge build-up. The transparency of
the plate makes it possible to direct the laser beams both parallel and anti-parallel
with respect to the ion beam. By performing both co- and counter-propagating
experiments, it is possible to correct for the Doppler shift to all orders. A serious
background source with this arrangement, however, is associated with photoelectrons
generated on the plate by pulsed UV radiation. This contribution is greatly reduced
by modulating the bias on a grid placed between the glass plate and the CEM, as
described in detail in [13]. This detector has been shown to work efficiently for laser
wavelengths down to 250 nm.
    The third detector (PD) in the interaction chamber is used to detect positive ions
in the state selective measurements. It is situated adjacent to the second quadrupole,
opposite the Faraday cup used to monitor the negative ion current. It operates in
the same way as the neutral atom detector just described. In this case, however,
the detector is out of the line of sight of the laser beam and so laser-generated
photoelectrons pose no problem. The positive ion detector is used to state selectively
detect residual atoms in the partial cross section measurements. The electric field of
the second quadrupole is used both to field ionize the Rydberg atoms and to bend the
resulting positive ions into the detector. The positive ion background is usually small,
the major contribution arising from double detachment collisions of negative ions
with the residual gas in the interaction chamber. This contribution is minimized by
a combination of a good vacuum (approximately 10−9 mbar) and a pair of deflection



                                           6
                         -                       FC
                     A
                                                           -
                                                       A

             ω1              AP              AP                          CG       ω2

                                         DP                          A
                                                                             e-
                    QD1                                        QD2
                                                           +
                                                       A
                                                                     CEM

                                                                         N
                                  PD                                     D
                                       CEM        e-           MP




Figure 2: Portion of the collinear laser-ion beam apparatus. QD1,2, electrostatic
          quadrupole deflectors; CEM, channel electron multiplier; DP, deflection
          plates; PD, positive ion detector; FC, Faraday cup; ND, neutral particle
          detector; CG, conducting glass plate; AP, aperture; MP, metal plate; A,
          any element. The distance between QD1 and QD2 is approximately 0.5 m.


plates (DP) positioned just prior to the entrance of the second quadrupole. The
transverse electric field is insufficient to field ionize the atoms prepared in the highly
excited Rydberg states but it does serve to sweep out of the beam any positive
ions produced upstream in collisional events. This procedure substantially reduces
the collisional detachment background since only atoms left in high lying Rydberg
states will contribute to the background. Of course, this simultaneously hinders the
negative ions from reaching the Faraday cup. The deflection plates are therefore
switched off periodically to monitor the negative beam intensity.
    The laser system used in the experiments consist of two excimer-pumped dye
lasers. The dye lasers can produce narrow bandwidth laser radiation of wavelengths
between 340 nm and 850 nm, which can be extended, with the use of second harmonic
generation, down to 205 nm. The bandwidth is nominally about 5 GHz, but this can
be reduced to 1 GHz by use of an intra cavity etalon. The energy resolution in the
present experiments is limited solely by the linewidth of the laser. The maximum
pulse energy is typically a few mJ in the visible wavelength region and a few hundred
µJ in the UV, after doubling. The laser intensity is measured after the passage
through the interaction chamber for normalization purposes. The wavelength of the
laser light is calibrated by observing well known resonance lines in Ne or Ar using
optogalvanic spectroscopy in hollow cathode lamps.


3    Results



                                             7
3.1   Total Cross Section Measurements
The cross section for photodetachment of an electron from the Li− ion has previously
been investigated, both experimentally [14] and theoretically [15]. Earlier laser stud-
ies have focused on the region around the first and second detachment thresholds.
The latter, also called the first excited state threshold, corresponds to the process
in which the residual Li atom is left in the 2 2 P state following photodetachment.
In contrast to the heavier alkali ions [16], the Li− photodetachment cross section
shows no resonance structure below the first excited state threshold. It is expected,
however, that doubly excited states should appear at higher levels of excitation. The
atomic wave function then becomes more extended in space, making it easier for an
extra electron to share the attractive force from the nucleus, or equivalently, the
atom becomes more polarizable. We therefore initiated a search for doubly excited
1 Po states of Li− , that are bound with respect to the 3 2 P state of the Li atom [17].

The results in the energy region 4.2-4.5 eV are shown in Fig. 3. The Li atom signal is
proportional to the total cross section which, in this case, is equal to the sum of the
partial cross sections for the three channels shown in Fig. 1. The experimental cross
section data are not absolute. The measurements have therefore been normalized
to a theoretical curve at the Li(3 2 P) threshold. The main contribution to the ap-
proximately 10% scatter in the experimental data arises from changes in the spatial
overlap of the laser and ion beams that occurred as the laser frequency was scanned.
The statistical scatter due to counting of the residual atoms was less than 3%. The
experimental data exhibits three significant features. A small narrow dip is seen at
4.456 eV, a rather narrow structure is observed at 4.453 eV (labeled b) and finally,
a broad resonance is seen to cover essentially the entire energy region between the
Li(3 2 S) and Li(3 2 P) thresholds (labeled a).
     The small dip at 4.456 eV is a Wigner cusp that arises from the opening of the
Li(3 2 P)+e− (ks) photodetachment channel (hereafter labeled 3 2 Pks, for brevity).
The other two structures are resonances associated with the decay of doubly excited
states. These resonances overlap one another as well as the Wigner cusp, making it
impossible to extract information on individual positions and widths. The Beutler-
Fano formula, which is normally used to extract resonance parameters, cannot be
applied in this case since it is only valid for isolated resonances. In order to explain
the origin of the observed structures in the Li− photodetachment cross section, com-
parisons with two independent calculated cross sections were made. Lindroth [17]
used an approach which combines complex rotation [18] with a discrete numerical
basis set [19], whereas Pan et al. [5] employed the R-matrix method. The two the-
oretical methods yield essentially identical results (see the solid line in Fig. 3). We
observe a rather good agreement between theory and experiment over the whole
energy region studied. According to Lindroths calculation, the broad structure (a)
is identified with an intrashell resonance associated with the symmetrical excitation
of the two valence electrons. This resonance was found to be dominated by the 3p3d



                                           8
                                                       a
                                                                     b




                 Normalized Li signal
                                                                               1.4


                                                                                     σth [Mb]
                                                                               1.0


                                                                          2
                                                                         3 P
                                                                               0.6
                                        4.2                 4.4
                                              Photon energy ω [eV]

Figure 3: Yield of Li atoms vs. photon energy in the range 4.2-4.5 eV. The Li signal is
          proportional to the total cross section for the photodetachment of Li− via
          the 2 2 Skp, 2 2 Pks,d and 3 2 Skp channels (see Fig. 1). The experimental
          data (dots) has been normalized to theory (solid line with scale to the
          right) at the 3 2 P threshold.


and 4s3p configurations. The narrow structure (b) at approximately 4.453 eV cor-
responds to several overlapping intershell resonances in which the valence electrons
are asymmetrically excited.

3.2   Partial Cross Section Measurements
The state selective detection scheme based on RIS has been applied to isolate specific
autodetaching channels for doubly excited states in both He− and Li− . Here we
present the results of recent measurements of the positions and widths of doubly
excited states which appear as resonances in partial cross sections below certain
excited state thresholds. The 1s3s4s 4 S state in He− , for example, lies just below the
He(3 3 S) threshold. A Feshbach resonance associated with the autodetaching decay
of this state was observed in both the He(1s2s 3 S)+e(ks) and He(1s2p 3 P)+e(kp)
partial cross sections (hereafter labeled 2 3 Sks and 2 3 Pkp) [20]. Similarly, in the
case of Li− , resonances due to doubly excited states below the Li(4 2 P) and Li(5 2 P)
thresholds were observed in the 3 2 Skp partial cross section [21]. The state selective
detection scheme has also been used to study the threshold behavior of the 2 2 Pks
partial cross section. This technique enabled Haeffler et al. [22] to accurately measure
the electron affinity of Li.




                                                       9
                                                          n 3L    Figure 4: Partial energy level diagram
               4
                                                                            for the He− /He systems. Solid
                                                                            lines represent photoexcitation,
                                        ω''2        ω'2
                                                                            the wavy line field ionization
                      1s3s4s                              3 3S              and dashed lines autodetach-
                           S




Energy [eV ]
                                                                            ment. The 1s3s4s 4 S state is pro-
               2                                                            duced by absorption of photons
                                  ω1                                        of frequency ω1 . The 2 3 Sks and
                                                          2 3Po
                                                                            2 3 Pkp decay channels were iso-
                                                                            lated by selectively detecting the
               0    1s2s2p 4 Po                           2 3S              residual He(2 3 S) and He(2 3 P)
                                   He          He                           atoms using RIS (laser ω2′ and
                                                                            ω2′′ , respectively).


3.2.1              Doubly Excited States of He−
Doubly excited states of He− of doublet symmetry have been observed in studies of
electron impact on He [23]. In contrast, data on quartet states are sparse. Selection
rules on photoexcitation from the 4 Po ground state limit excited state production to
those of 4 S, 4 P and 4 D symmetry. Recently, the He− photodetachment cross section
below 4 eV has been calculated by Xi and Froese Fischer [24]. They predicted a
number of resonances associated with the decay of doubly excited quartet states.
Bae and Peterson [25] observed a (1s2p2 4 P) shape resonance in the total photode-
tachment cross section of He− just above the He(2 3 P) threshold. The parameters
of this resonance were subsequently measured more accurately by Walter et al. [26].
We recently embarked on a program aiming to investigate doubly excited states in
He− below the He(n > 2) thresholds. The first measurement involved the 1s3s4s 4 S
state that lies below the He(3 3 S) threshold. The decay of this state was observed as
a Feshbach resonance in both the 2 3 Sks and the 2 3 Pkp partial cross sections.
    Fig. 4 shows selected energy levels of the He− /He systems. The 1s3s4s 4 S state
of He− is situated just below the He (3 3 S) threshold. This state, which is excited
with laser ω1 , rapidly autodetaches via the 2 3 Sks and 2 2 Pkp channels. Following
the decay, the residual He atom will be left in either the 2 3 S or 2 3 P excited states.
Two different laser frequencies ω2′ and ω2′′ were applied separately in the resonance
ionization scheme used to monitor the population of the 2 3 S and 2 3 P states. The
frequency was chosen to induce a transition between the 2 3 S and the 24 3 P states
of the He atom, when photodetachment into the 2 3 Sks channel was studied. The
frequency ω2′′ induced a resonance transition between the 2 3 P and 26 3 D states of
He, when photodetachment into the 2 3 Pkp channel was studied. The population



                                                                  10
of both the high lying Rydberg states were efficiently depleted by the electric field
of the second quadrupole deflector and He+ ions thus produced were recorded as a
function of frequency of laser ω1 . The output of laser ω1 was attenuated to avoid
saturation of the photodetachment process and the detector.
     Fig. 5 shows how the He+ signal varies as a function of the laser frequency ω1 in
the vicinity of the resonance. The signal is proportional to the partial cross sections
for photodetachment via the 2 3 Sks,d channels (Fig. 5a) and the 2 3 Pkp channel
(Fig. 5b). Selection rules forbid the autodetachment of the 1s3s4s 4 S state via the
2 3 Skd channel in the LS-coupling approximation and so in Fig. 5 (a) this channel
contributes to the background only (we do not resolve the degenerate s- and d-wave
channels). According to recent calculations of Xi and Froese Fischer [27] the cross
section for the d-wave channel remains nearly constant at 6 Mb across the reso-
nance, while the s-wave channel has a peak value of 20 Mb on the resonance. The
difference in the level of the background in Fig. 5 (a) and Fig. 5 (b) arises essentially
from the aforementioned d-wave channel. The background in Fig. 5 (b), and that re-
maining in Fig. 5 (a) after the d-wave contribution has been subtracted, arises from
several sources. The two most significant background processes that produce He+
ions, indirectly from He− ions, are collisional single detachment and photodetach-
ment processes by laser ω2′ (ω2′′ ) that populate the He(2 3 S, 2 3 P) states. Once these
states are formed by background processes, they will be resonantly ionized by the
laser frequencies ω2′ and ω2′′ , respectively, and the resulting He+ ions will be indis-
tinguishable from the signal. The He+ ions produced directly in double detachment
events were essentially eliminated in our experiment by the use of a pair of deflection
plates placed just upstream of the second quadrupole deflector (see Fig. 2). The low
pressure in the interaction chamber is essential to reduce the background due to col-
lisional detachment processes. In addition, the output of the laser at frequencies ω2′
and ω2′′ was attenuated to reduce the background arising from the photodetachment
of He− at these frequencies.

            Table 1: A comparison of experimental and theoretical values
            for the positions and widths of resonant states in He− and
            Li− relative to the ground state of the negative ion.

              Resonance       E0 (eV)        Γ (eV)      Reference
              He− (4 S)     2.959 255(7)   0.000 19(3)   Experiment [20]
                            2.959 07       0.000 19      Theory [24]
              Li− (c)       5.113 2(4)     0.007 4(5)    Experiment [21]
                            5.115          0.007 3       Theory [6]
              Li− (d)       5.123 4(4)     0.007 6(11)   Experiment [21]
                            5.126          0.009 9       Theory [6]
                                                 continued on next page



                                           11
                                            continued from previous page
              Resonance       E0 (eV)         Γ (eV)     Reference
              Li− (j)       5.448 5(1)      0.001 8(1)   Experiment [21]
              Li− (k)       5.450 8(1)      0.007 3(3)   Experiment [21]

    The resonance energy and width are obtained by fitting the data shown in Fig. 5
to both a Beutler-Fano profile (1) and to the form proposed by Starace (2). As
expected, the values of E0 and Γ were the same using both parametrizations. In
each case, the measurement was performed with co-propagating and counter- prop-
agating laser (ω1 ) and ion beams to eliminate the Doppler effect associated with
the fast moving ions. The data shown in Fig. 5, for instance, have been recorded
with co-propagating laser (ω1 ) and ion beams. The fit to these data yields the blue-
shifted resonance position, E0b . The measurement was repeated with counter- prop-
agating beams to yield the red-shifted resonance position, E0r . The resonance posi-
tion, corrected
       q        for the Doppler effect to all orders, is given by the geometric mean,
E0 = E0b E0r , of the red- and blue-shifted energies. Table 1 compares the present
measurement of the resonance position and width with the result of a recent calcu-
lation of Xi and Froese Fischer [24]. One can see that the present results are in good
agreement with theory.

3.2.2   Doubly Excited States in Li-
The method of studying partial photodetachment cross sections based on the se-
lective detection of the residual atoms has also been used to investigate resonances
associated with the decay of doubly excited states of Li− . Fig. 6 illustrates a state
selective detection scheme designed, in this case, to isolate the 3 2 Skp partial cross
section in Li− photodetachment. A laser of frequency ω1 excites the negative ion into
a 1 P doubly excited state that is embedded in several continua. This transient state
subsequently autodetaches producing a free electron and a neutral Li atom which, in
general, is excited. In the case shown in the figure, the quasi-discrete state is embed-
ded in six continua i.e. there are six possible decay channels that are energetically
accessible. These channels are characterized by the residual Li atom being left in 2 2
S, 2 2 P, 3 2 S, 3 2 P, 32 D or 42 S state following detachment. A second laser of frequency
ω2 is applied to resonantly photoexcite those Li atoms left in the 3 2 S state to the
22 3 P state. Atoms in such highly excited Rydberg states are efficiently ionized by
the electric field of the second quadrupole. The positive ions thus produced can be
efficiently detected in the presence of a relatively low background. This procedure
isolates the 3 2 Skp channel.
     In Fig. 7, we show the cross section for photodetachment of Li− via the 3 2 Skp
channel over photon energies of approximately 5.04-5.16 eV and 5.29-5.46 eV. These
ranges cover the regions below, and including, the Li(4 2 P) and Li(5 2 P) thresholds,



                                            12
                              300
                                    (a)




         He signal [counts]
                              200


        +

                              100


                                    23895                23900
                                          Photon energy ω1 [cm-1]



                                    (b)




         He signal [counts]
                              100




        +




                                0
                                    23895                23900
                                          Photon energy ω1 [cm-1]

Figure 5: Yield of He+ ions vs. photon energy. The He+ signal is proportional to
          the partial cross section for the photodetachment of He− via the 2 3 Sks,d
          channel (a) and the 2 3 Pkp channel (b). The solid line represents a fit of
          the Fano function (1) to the experimental data (dots).




                                                   13
               6
                                              o
                                      22 2P
                                          o
                                      5 2P
                                        2 o
                                                   Figure 6: Partial energy level diagram for
                         1 o          4 P
                         P                                   the Li/Li− systems. Solid lines
                                 ω2
               4                       2 o
                                      3 P                    represent photoexcitation, the
                               3 2S                          wavy line field ionization and


Energy [eV ]
                                                             the dashed line autodetach-
                   ω1                                        ment via the 3 2 Skp channel.
               2                       2 o
                                      2 P                    Doubly excited states of Li−
                                                             are produced by the absorption
                                                             of photons of frequency ω1 . The
                                                             3 2 Skp partial cross section is
               0               2 2S                          isolated by selectively detecting
                         1
                         S
                                                             the residual atoms left in the
                    Li           Li                          3 2 S state using RIS (laser ω2 ).


respectively. Several Feshbach “window” resonances are observed to lie below these
thresholds. In the figure the present measurements are compared with the result
of a recent eigenchannel R-matrix calculation by Pan et al. [28]. The experimental
resolution, which is estimated to be about 25 µeV, is sufficiently high compared to the
typical resonance widths that a direct comparison with theory can be made without
resorting to deconvolution procedures. At photon energies just below 5.39 eV, the
ionization energy of Li, we also observed in-board calibration lines arising from the
photoexcitation of ground state Li atoms, by laser ω1 , to high lying Rydberg states
that are subsequently field ionized. It was unnecessary in this case to resort to the
use of co- and counter-propagating beams to eliminate the Doppler effect since the
resonances in the Li− spectra are much broader than those in the He− spectra. The
calibration procedures described above sufficed to determine the resonance position.
The cross section measurements are relative. In Fig. 7a and 7b, they have been
normalized to the theoretical results of Pan et al. [28] by multiplying the data by
factors equal to the ratio of the areas under the experimental and theoretical cross
section curves between the limits 5.04-5.16 eV and 5.39-5.46 eV, respectively.
    Fig. 7 shows that there is generally a good qualitative agreement between exper-
iment and theory in the sense that all the predicted resonances have been observed
and no new resonances are apparent. There is also excellent quantitative agreement
in the case of the resonant structure below the Li(4 2 P) threshold, between 5.04 eV
and 5.16 eV (Fig. 7a). The situation is slightly different, however, for the resonances
below the Li(5 2 P) threshold. Here, theory fails to predict the exact energies and
strengths of the resonances. For example, there exists a difference in energy be-
tween the measured and calculated resonances ranging from 0-2 meV. The size of



                                                  14
                                                                                                   0.15
                                     (a)




              Normalized Li signal
             +                                                                                     0.10

                                                                                                       σth [Mb]
                                                                                                   0.05
                                                                      d
                                                                                       2
                                                                                   4 P

                                                                  c       e                         0.00
                          5.040              5.080      5.120                                  5.160
                                           Photon energy ω1 [eV]


                                     (b)                                                           0.10




              Normalized Li signal
             +


                                                     h                                             0.05σth [Mb]
                                                                              j   k        l
                                                              i


                                                                                   2
                                                                                  5 P

                                                                                                   0.00
                     5.390                 5.410         5.430                5.450
                                           Photon energy ω1 [eV]

Figure 7: Yield of Li+ ions vs. photon energy in the ranges 5.04-5.16 eV (Fig. 7a)
          and 5.39-5.46 eV (Fig. 7b). The Li+ signal is proportional to the partial
          cross section for photodetachment of Li− via the 3 2 Skp channel (see Fig.
          6). The experimental data (dots) has been normalized to theory (solid line
          with scale at the right). The thick solid lines indicate fits of the double
          Fano formula (3) to the data.




                                                         15
the discrepancy appears to increase the further the resonance is from the threshold.
Experiment and theory overlap, however, close to the threshold. The resonance la-
beled h is also seen to be considerably weaker than theoretically predicted, while
resonance j is not as strong as resonance k, contrary to theory. The more recent
calculation by Liu and Starace [29] shows, however, an improved agreement with
the experimental data.
     The window resonances shown in Fig. 7 partially overlap each other, and it is
therefore not possible to fit a single Fano profile to each resonance. We have instead
fitted a form representing the sum of two Fano profiles to the data in order to extract
the energy and width of each resonance pair:
                                         2
                                         X          (qn + ǫn )2
                           σ(E) = a +          bn                 ,                 (3)
                                         n=1
                                                      1 + ǫ2n

with
                                       (E − E0n )
                              ǫn = 2                    .                           (4)
                                           Γ
Here, the index n represent the parameters for each resonance. Using this method
we determined the parameters for resonances c and d in Fig. 7a. The measured po-
sitions and widths are shown in Table 1, along with corresponding values calculated
by Lindroth [6]. There is a good agreement between the experiment and theory in
this case. Lindroth’s resonance parameters are derived directly from a complex rota-
tion calculation. The R-matrix calculation of Pan et al. [28] did not explicitly yield
the resonance parameters and therefore cannot be used for comparison. Since the
Fano formula strictly only applies to total cross sections, the values of the q shape
parameters are not entirely meaningful in the context of partial cross sections. This
parameter is therefore omitted in the table.
    We also attempted, unsuccessfully, to include the resonance labeled e in the fit-
ting procedure. In this case it appears that the resonance is prematurely terminated
by the opening of the 4 2 Pks channel. The resonance energies in this case depended
strongly on the interval of the fit, which was not the case when the c and d reso-
nances were treated as a pair. In a similar manner, the double Fano formula was fit
to the two resonances labeled j and k. The parameters obtained from this fit are also
included in Table 1. In this case there is no theoretical data available for comparison.
    In Fig. 8 we show an extended 3 2 Skp partial photodetachment cross section
which includes measurements below the Li(5 2 S) threshold in addition to the data
already shown in Fig. 7b. The data in the range 5.29-5.39 eV represents a relatively
low statistics survey scan. It is normalized to the calculation of Pan et al. [28] using
the same factor as for the data between 5.39-5.46 eV. It is clear, even from this
relatively low quality data, that the two resonances labeled f and g are observed
at approximately the calculated energies but their measured strengths appear to



                                            16
                                                                        0.10




                 Normalized Li signal
                                         f
                +                              g

                                                                           σth [Mb]
                                                                        0.05


                                                   2               2
                                               5 S               5 P

                                                                        0.00
                             5.28       5.32       5.365.40      5.44
                                         Photon energy ω1 [eV]

Figure 8: Yield of Li+ ions vs. photon energy in the ranges 5.29-5.46 eV (Fig. 7b).
          The Li+ signal is proportional to the partial cross section for photodetach-
          ment of Li− via the 3 2 Skp channel (see Fig. 6). The experimental data
          (dots) has been normalized to theory (solid line with scale at the right).

be weaker than predicted. Presumably, the lowest lying resonance, labeled f, is the
intrashell resonance representing symmetric excitation of the two valence electrons.

3.2.3   Threshold Investigations of Li−
Wigner [30] predicted that in the vicinity of a threshold the photodetachment cross
section is represented by
                               (
                                 (E − E0 )l+1/2 E ≥ E0
                        σ(E) ∼                                                  (5)
                                 0                 E < E0 ,
where E − E0 is the excess energy above threshold and l is the angular momen-
tum of the outgoing electron. This form has been tested experimentally [31] and is
now well established. The range of validity of the Wigner law describing threshold
behavior, however, varies from system to system. It is primarily determined by the
polarizability of the residual atom [32]. Resonances near the threshold also play a
role in limiting the energy region over which the threshold law applies. If the outgo-
ing electron is represented by l=0 (s-wave detachment) the cross section rises with
an infinite slope at the threshold. This allows one, in principle, to perform very ac-
curate threshold measurements. If, however, l ≥ 1 the slope of the cross section is
zero at threshold, making high precision measurements much more difficult.
    An investigation of the threshold behavior of the photodetachment process in a s-
wave detachment channel, using tunable laser sources, has the potential for yielding



                                                       17
the most accurate values for electron affinities. It was recently demonstrated [22,33]
that, by state selectively detecting the residual atom following photodetachment, it
is possible to determine an electron affinity to very high accuracy for, in principle,
almost any element. In such a scheme, the residual atoms are resonantly ionized and
the resulting positive ions are detected in the presence of a low background. The
excellent signal-to-background ratio in this case produces data of high statistical
quality, which is especially valuable in the vicinity of a threshold. In addition, the
use of a collinear laser-ion beam geometry results in high energy resolution mea-
surements. Again, this is particularly valuable near a threshold where the range of
validity of the Wigner law is limited. We demonstrated the potential of this tech-
nique [22] in a measurement of the electron affinity of Li. The result is about an
order of magnitude more accurate than any previous measurement. In the experi-
ment we selectively detected the residual Li atoms left in the 2 2 P state following
photodetachment via the 2 2 Pks channel. The sharp onset of production of Li+ ions
at this s-wave detachment threshold enabled us to easily fit the Wigner law form to
the near-threshold data and extrapolate to the threshold value. The data shown in
Fig. 9 were taken with counter-propagating laser and ion beams. The measurement
was repeated with co-propagating beams. The threshold energy was determined, cor-
rected for the Doppler effect to all orders, from the geometrical mean of the measured
blue- and red-shifted threshold energies. The energy of the threshold of the 2 2 Pks
channel was found to be 19 888.55(16) cm−1 . The well known separation of the 2 2 S-
2 2 P states of Li [34] was subtracted from the threshold energy to yield an electron
affinity of 618.049(20) meV using the conversion factor 8065.5410 (cm−1 /eV).


4    Conclusions
The structures of singly excited atoms and positive ions are well described within the
independent particle approximation. A large base of experimental data is available
for such systems. More loosely bound systems such as negative ions and doubly ex-
cited systems in general are, however, more sensitive to electron correlation since here
the Coulomb field becomes less dominant. In these cases, the independent electron
model begins to break down and collective motion becomes apparent. Experimen-
tal data on doubly excited states of negative ions, where correlation effects are of
paramount importance, are relatively sparse. Until a few years ago, for example, a
systematic investigation of doubly excited states had only been made in the case of
the simplest two electron negative ion, H− .
    In the present work we have extended the study of double excitation to the He−
and Li− ions which also have two active valence electrons. We have determined the
positions and widths of several states in these systems by analyzing resonances in
photodetachment cross sections. The measurements were performed under condi-
tions of high sensitivity and resolution since production cross sections are typically




                                          18
              Li signal [counts]
                                   200




                                   100
             +




                                    0
                                         19866            19867            19868
                                                 Photon energy ω1 [cm-1]

Figure 9: Yield of Li+ ions vs. photon energy in the region of the 2 2 P threshold. The
          Li+ signal is proportional to the partial cross section for photodetachement
          of Li− via the 2 2 Pks channel (See Fig. 1). The solid line is a fit of the
          Wigner law (5) to the data in the range shown. The error bars on selected
          data points represent the shot noise.


small and resonances are close lying in energy. The sensitivity and resolution were
enhanced by combining a collinear laser-ion beam apparatus with the detection
of positive ions produced by resonantly ionizing the residual atoms from the pho-
todetachment process. This state selective detection scheme, which is based on the
well established technique of Resonance Ionization Spectroscopy, greatly extends the
field of negative ion spectroscopy. It is our intention to continue these studies and
investigate doubly excited states in He− and Li− and their branching into different
continua, all the way to the double detachment limits.


5    Acknowledgements
We would like to take the opportunity to acknowledge the support and encourage-
ment that we have received from Professor Ingvar Lindgren throughout this work.
As a theorist, his interest in our work most certainly stems from the enhanced role
played by electron correlation in negative ion physics. As a former practicing exper-
imentalist, however, we suspect he derives great pleasure from observing how the
development of new experimental techniques allows investigations of more and more
subtle effects in atomic systems. Thanks Ingvar, we wish you well in your future
pursuits. We also thank E. Lindroth, A. F. Starace, C.-N. Liu, J. Xi and C. F.
Fischer for fruitful discussions and for providing us with unpublished data. Finan-



                                                         19
cial support for this research has been obtained from the Swedish Natural Science
Research Council (NFR). DJP acknowledge support from the Swedish Institute,
The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and the US Department of Energy, Office
of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Chemical Sciences. UB acknowledge personal
support from the Swedish Institute and, finally, IYK acknowledge support from the
Wenner-Gren Center Foundation.


References
 [1] For example, P. G. Hansen, A. S. Jensen and B. Jonson, Annual Review of
     Nuclear and Particle Science, 45, eds. C. Quigg, V. Lueth and P. Paul (Palo
     Alto, CA, 1995), p.591.

 [2] For example, P. G. Harris et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 309 (1990); H. C. Bryant
     et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 38, 228 (1977); M. E. Hamm et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 43,
     1715 (1979); M. Halka et al., Phys. Rev.A 44, 6127 (1991).

 [3] For example, H. R. Sadeghpour and C. H. Greene, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 313
     (1990); H. R. Sadeghpour, C. H. Greene and M. Cavagnero, Phys. Rev. A 45,
     1587 (1992); J. Z. Tang et al., Phys. Rev. A 49, 1021 (1994).

 [4] See, for example, J. W. Cooper, U. Fano and F. Pratts, Phys. Rev. Lett. 10,
     518 (1963); D. R. Herrick, M. E. Kellman and R. D. Poliak, Phys. Rev. A 22,
     1517 (1980); C. D. Lin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1633 (1992); C. D. Lin, Phys. Rev.
     A 29, 1019 (1984); C. D. Lin, Adv. At. Mol. Phys. 22, 77 (1986).

 [5] C. Pan, A. F. Starace and C. H. Greene, J.Phys. B 27, L137 (1994).

 [6] E. Lindroth, Phys. Rev. A 52, 2737 (1995).

 [7] S. L. Kaufman, Optics Comm. 17, 309 (1976).

 [8] For example, G. S. Hurst, M. G. Payne, S. D. Kramer and J. P. Young, Rev.
     Mod. Phys. 51, 767 (1979).

 [9] P. Balling et al., J. Phys. B. 26, 3531 (1993).

[10] U. Fano, Phys. Rev 124, 1866 (1961).

[11] A. F. Starace, Phys. Rev. A 16, 231 (1977).

[12] U. Ljungblad, Thesis at Gteborg University (1996).

[13] D. Hanstorp, J. Meas. Sci. Technol. 3, 523 (1992).




                                          20
[14] J. Dellwo, Y. Liu and D. J. Pegg, Phys. Rev. A 45, 1544 (1992); Y. K. Bae and
     J. R. Peterson Phys. Rev. A 32, 1917 (1985).

[15] For example, K. T. Chung and P. Fullbright, Phys. Scr. 45, 445 (1992); C.
     Froese Fischer J. Phys. B. 26, 855 (1993).

[16] For example, T. A. Patterson, H. Hotop, A. Kasdan, D. W. Norcross and W.
     C. Lineberger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 32, 189 (1974).

[17] U. Berzinsh et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 4795 (1995).

[18] E. Lindroth, Phys. Rev. A 49, 4473 (1994).

[19] S. Salomonson and P. ster, Phys. Rev. A 40, 5559 (1989).

[20] A. E. Klinkmüller et al., Accepted by Phys. Rev. A.

[21] U. Ljungblad, D. Hanstorp, U. Berzinsh and D. J. Pegg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77,
     3751 (1996).

[22] G. Haeffler et al., Phys. Rev. A. 53, 4127 (1996).

[23] S. J. Buckman and C. W. Clark, Rev. Mod. Phys. 66, 539 (1994).

[24] J. Xi and C. Froese Fischer, Phys. Rev. A 53, 3169 (1996).

[25] J. R. Peterson, Y. K. Bae and D. L. Huestis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 692 (1985).

[26] C. W. Walter, J. A. Seifert and J. R. Peterson, Phys. Rev. A. 50, 2257 (1994).

[27] J. Xi and C. Froese Fischer, private communication.

[28] C. Pan, A. F. Starace and C. H. Greene, Phys Rev A 53, 840 (1996).

[29] A. F. Starace and C.-N. Liu, private communication.

[30] E. P. Wigner, Phys. Rev., 73, 1002 (1948).

[31] H. Hotop and W. C. Lineberger, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 14, 731 (1985).

[32] T. F. O’Malley, Phys. Rev. 137, A1668 (1965).

[33] V. V. Petrunin et al. Phys. Rev. Lett.75, 1911 (1995).

[34] C. J. Sansonetti and B. Richou, Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 40, 1272 (1995).




                                         21
