       ]    PHOTOELECTRIC DETERMINATION                   OF PLANCK'S       "h."




     A DIRECT PHOTOELECTRIC                          DETERMINATION                 OF
                                  PLANCK'S         "h.'"
                                    BY R. A. MILLIKAN.

                                  I. INTRQDUcTQRY.
      UANTUM theory was not originally developed for the sake of
        ~           ~

        interpreting photoelectric phenomena.            It was solely a theory
                        ~

as to the mechanism of absorption and emission of electromagnetic
waves by resonators of atomic or subatomic dimensions.             It had nothing
whatever to say about the energy of an escaping electron or about the
conditions under which such an electron could make its escape, and up
to this day the form of the theory developed by its author has not been
able to account satisfactorily for the photoelectric facts presented here-
with. We are confronted, however, by the astonishing situation that
these facts were correctly and exactly predicted nine years ago by a form
of quantum theory which has now been pretty generally abandoned.
   It was in I9o5 that Einstein' made the first coupling of photo effects
and with any form of quantum theory by bringing forward the bold, not
to say the reckless, hypothesis of an electro-magnetic light corpuscle of
energy hv, which energy was transferred upon absorption to an electron.
This hypothesis may well be called reckless first because an electromag-
netic disturbance which remains localized in space seems a violation of
the very conception of an electromagnetic disturbance, and second be-
cause it Ries in the face of the thoroughly established facts of interference.
The hypothesis was apparently made solely because it furnished a ready
explanation of one of the most remarkable facts brought to light by
recent investigations, viz. , that the energy with which an electron is
thrown out of a metal by ultra-violet light or X-rays is independent of the
intensity of the light while it depends on its frequency.         This fact alone
seems to demand some modification of classical theory or, at any rate,
it has not yet been interpreted satisfactorily in terms of classical theory.
   While this was the main if not the only basis of Einstein's assumption,
this assumption enabled him at once to predict that the maximum energy
   I An abstract of this paper was presented before the Am. Phys. Soc. in April, I9I4.
(PHYs. REv. , IV., 73, 'r4, ) The data on lithium were however first reported at the meeting of
the Am. Phys. Soc. in April, I9IS. (PHYS. REv. , VI., SS, 'IS.)
   ~ Ann. d. Phys.
                    (4), x7, r3a, r9os, and (4), zo, I99, I9o6.
                                                                                         SECOND
356                                 R. A. MILLIKAN.                                     r SERIES'


of emission of corpuscles under the influence of light would be governed
by the equation
                           ',mv'=V. e= hv —p,
                           —

in which hv is the energy absorbed by the electron from the light wave,
which according to Planck contained just the energy hv, p is the work
necessary to get the electron out of the metal and ~mv2 is the energy with
which it leaves the surface, an energy evidently measured by the product
of its charge e by the P.D. against which it is just able to drive itself
before being brought to rest.
   At the time at which it was made this prediction was as bold as the
hypothesis which suggested it, for at that time there were available no
experiments whatever for determining anything about how P.D. varies
with v, or whether the hypothetical h of equation (r) was anything more
than a number of the same general magnitude as Planck's h. Never-
theless, the following results seem to show that at least 6ve of the ex-
perimentally veritable relationships which are actually contained in
equation (r) are rigorously correct. These relationships are embodied
in the following assertions:
r. That there exists for each exciting frequency              v, above     a certain   cr~t~cal
       value,   a definitely    determinable      maximum       velocity    of emission      of
     corpuscles.
2. That there is a linear relation between V and v.
          —
          dV
3. That dv or the slope of the V v line is numerically           equal to h/e

4. That at the critical frequency         vo at which   v   = o, p = hvo, i e. , tha. t the
     intercept of the V v line on the v axis is tlie lowest frequency at which
      the metal in guestion can be photoelectrically active.
5. That the contact E.M. F. between any tvLlo conductors is given by tke
       equation
                Contact E.M. F. = h/e(vo          —v, ') —(Vo —V0').
No one of these points except the erst' had been tested even roughly
when Einstein made his prediction and the correctness of this one has
recently been vigorously denied by Ramsauer. ' As regards the fourth
Elster and GeiteP had indeed concluded as early as 189', from a study of
the alkali metals, that the more electro-positive the metal the smaller is
the value of v at which it becomes photo-sensitive, a conclusion however
which later researches on the non-alkaline metals seemed for years to
contradict.
  ' Lenard (Ann. d. Phys. (4), 8, I49, I902) discovered a maximum     velocity though he did
not find the effect of frequency upon it.
   ~ Ann. d. Phys.
                   , 45, II2o, I9I4 and 45, p. 96I.
   Ivied. Ann. , 43, 225, I89I.
        ']   PHOTOELECTRIC DETERMINATION                    OF PLANCK'S        "h."         357
    During the ten years which have elapsed since Einstein set up his
equation the fifth of the above assertions has never beentested at all,
while the third and fourth have never been subjected to careful experi-
mental test under conditions which were even claimed to permit of an
exact and definite answer, nor indeed can they be so subjected without
simultaneous       measurements i n vucuo of both contact potentials and
photo-potentialsin the case of nzetats which are sensitive throughout a long
range of observabte freguencies         In. making this statement I am not under-
rating at all the exceptionally fine work of Richardson and Compton, '
who in common with most other observers interpreted their results in
terms of Einstein's equation, but who saw the significance of that equation
much more clearly than most of their predecessors had done. I am
merely calling attention to the fact that the slope mentioned in (3) and
the intercept mentioned in (4) cannot possibly be determined with any
approach to certainty unless the region of wave-lengths open to study is
larger than it is in the case of any save the alkali metals, and also, in the
case of (4) unless simultaneous measurements are made in vacuo upon
photo-potentials and contact E.M. F.'s. The fact that Richardson and
Compton's slopes vary by more than 6o per cent. is sufhcient evidence
of the correctness of this statement.         Also on the one alkali metal, sodium,
on which they made measurements, they made no attempt at contact
E.M. F. determinations. ' Furthermore, since their work appeared
two or three theories have been developed to explain their observed de-
partures from the relationships predicted by Einstein's equation'—
departures which the work at the Ryerson Laboratory appears to prove
to be altogether non-existent.           In a recent review Pohl and Pringsheim
whose own large experience with photoelectric work possibly predisposes
them to see the difficulties even too clearly, go so far as to assert not only
that any conclusions regarding the validity of (3) and (4) are premature
and quite unsupported by any experiments with light waves, but that
(2) also, to the testing of which practically all of the work on the energies
of photo-emission has thus far been directed, is not deducible from existing
data. Furthermore Sir J. J. Thomson'writing in December, I9I4, says;
"  the experimental results hitherto obtained seem on the whole to confirm
    j Phil. Mag. (6), 24, p. 575, I9I2.
   2 Professor Richardson in his note in the PHvs. REv. , IV. , p. 523, I9I4, rightly states that
                  "        "
they developed a novel method of estimating contact E.M.F.'s in vacuo, and for this they
deserve much credit. But they could not use this method in the case of sodium, for they
definitely state that on account of fatigue effects, they were unable to obtain any complete
photo current-potential     curve for sodium. Further my own work shows that this novel
method is not always a valid one for determining contact E.M. F.'s.
    3 See Hughes, Phil. Mag. (6), 25, 683, I4 and Sutton, Phil. Mag. , 29, 734, &5.

    4 Phil. Mag. , 26, xoz7, I9I3.
    5 Proc. Phys. Soc., London, XXVII., xo5, December I5, I9I4.
                                                                            SECOmn
358                                    R. A. MILLIKAN.                      t SERIES.

this result [that stated in (2)] though it must I think be confessed that
the direct experimental evidence in favor of the strict proportionality is
too meagre to enable us to maintain that it is a direct result of experiment.      "
   The diKculties which have stood in the way of reaching a reliable con-
clusion even as to (2) will be seen from the following review. The first
measurements on the relation between the frequency and the maximum
energy of emission (which has always been measured by the retarding
P.D. necessary to just stop the discharge of electrons under the inHuence
of ultra-violet light) were made in i9o7 by E. Ladenburg' who concluded
that &V was proportional to v, i. e. , that the maximum velocity rather
than the maximum energy of emission was proportional to frequency.
Joffe' worked over Ladenburg's experimental data and showed that it
fitted just as well the Einstein relation V ~ v. The reason for this
wide uncertainty lay simply in the fact that the range within which the
relation between V and I could 0be followed in Ladenburg's experiments
was between 2, 000 and 2, 6oo Angstroms, and with so small a strip of
wave-length to investigate, and relatively large experimental errors in
making the settings, practically any kind of a theoretical curve might be
fitted by the experimental data.
   Unquestionably     the most reliable work in this field is that done by
                                                    first




Richardson and Compton' and by Hughes. 4 But Hughes like Ladenburg
made his observations at but three frequencies, viz. , those corresponding
to X = I,849, X = 2, 257, and 'A = 2, 537 and the first of these he finds very
hard to get on account of the extreme feebleness of the light. He uses
the observations at two of these points, viz. , I, 849 and 2, 5g7 to fix his line,
and then finds that the third point is slightly closer to this line when I
is assumed proportional to V than when it is assumed proportional to
&V. This is evidence favorable to the           lawa opposed to the second,
but it obviously does not show a linear relation between V and v as
opposed to a relation of the type V ~ va as implied by Lindemann's
theory, ' or as opposed to any one of several other relations which might
be suggested.     Hughes indeed adds to his case the argument that his
straight line cuts the I axis at about the frequency at which the metal is
found to first become photo-sensitive, but since he fails to take any
account of the contact E.M. F.'s between his opposing plates these
crossing points should be incorrect as Pohl and Pringsheim have pointed
out. According to these latter authors, barring the very uncertain
points at ) = I, 8oo and ) = 2, ooo A. , even a V ~ v' relationship
                                                O

                                                                                 is
  't
       Verh. d. D. Phys. Ges. , 9, S04, I907.
  2    Ann. d. Phys. (4), 24, 939, I907.
  3L. c.
  4    Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London, A, CCXII., zos, I9Iz.
  5    Verh. d. D. Phys. Ges. , I5, 637, x9I3.
      ']    PHOTOELECTRIC DETERMINATION             OF PLANCK'S      "k."   359
just as well fitted by both the Richardson and Compton and the Hughes
work as a V ~ v relationship.       The whole argument, according to these
critics, rests, in- Richardson and Compton's case, on the value of the
potential at X = 2, ooo which is so far in the ultra-violet as to yield a V
which they think unreliable and which in fact fits neither curve well,
while in Hughes's case the argument rests on the value of the potential
at X = I, 894 which they think even more unreliable.
   The work at the Ryerson Laboratory on energies of emission began in
I905. How the present investigation has grown out of it will be clear
from the following brief summary of its progress and its chief results.
   I. It was found first that these energies are independent of temperature, '
a result unexpected at the time but simultaneously discovered by Lienhop'
and thoroughly confirmed by others later. This result showed that
photoelectrons do not share in the energies of thermal agitation as they had
conzmonLy   been supposed     to do, and this result still stands.
  z. The apparent energies of emission, that is, the volts which had to
be applied to just stop the emission were determined for eleven different
metals and found to differ among themselves by more than one volt. '
This point has recently been tested again by Richardson and Compton'
and by Page, ' both of whom find no differences.   The present work shows
that differences do in general exist though possibly not under the con-
ditions used by the other experimenters.
   3. The energy of emission was found to vary considerably with time
and illumination, a result which I interpreted as due to the disturbing
inAuence of a surface film which exerted under different conditions dif-
ferent retarding influences on the escape of electrons. '
   4. The results in 3 revealed the necessity of questioning the validity
of all results on photopotentials unless the effects of surface films were
eliminated either by removal of the films or by simultaneous measure-
ment in vacuo of photopotentials and contact E.M. F.'s, or by both pro-
cedures at once. Accordingly I initiated in x9zo on a somewhat elabor-
ate scale simultaneous measurements on photoeffects and contact E.M. F.'s
in vacuo on film free surfaces. Some of the results of these measurements
on the common metals have been recently reported by Mr. Hennings.
Others are contained in this paper, and still others will be reported in a
later paper.
  ~ Phil. Mag. (6), x4, I88, I907.
  ~ Ann. d. Phys. (4), 2I, 284.
  3 Phil. Mag. (6), 24, S82, x9I2.
  4 Am. Jr. Sci. 36, Sox, x9I3.
                ,
  5 PHYs. REv. 30, 287, I9IO, and 34, 68, I9I2.
               ,
    PHYs. REv. , 4, 228, I9I4.
                                                                                        SECOND
36o                                   R. A. MILLIKA¹                                   r SERIES.


   5. The marked difference between the apparent effects on the energy
of emission of different types of sources such as the spark and the arc,
even when the same wave-length was employed, were traced to the
extreme difficulty of eliminating disturbances when spark sources are
employed      —a difficulty of course appreciated from the first, but thought
to have been disposed of because screening of the direct light from the
arc removed the differences. ' After these disturbing inHuences were
eliminated powerful spark sources of given wave-length were found to
produce exactly the same energies of emission as arc sources of the same
wave-length and of about the same mean intensity, but of only one
thousandth the instantaneous intensity.          This furnished very exact proof
of the independence first discovered by Lenard of the energy of emission upon
intensity, even when the intensity of i/lunzination     in one wave-length, v~s. ,
                                            erg
       3650, was as h'ttgAl as 20000 cm sec
   6. The relation between V and v was tested with spark sources
without bringing to light at first anything approaching a linear relation-
ship. These results were reported by Dr. Wright. ' A question as to
their validity was, however, raised by my subsequent proof of the insuf-
ficiency of such screening devices as had been used in the case of spark
sources. Accordingly Dr. Kadesch took up again the relation between
V and v with powerful spark sources, using film-free sodium and
potassium surfaces, and obtained results which spoke definitely and
strongly in favor of a linear relation between the maximum0
                                                                    P.0D. and v.
The range of wave lengths studied was from 3,900 A. to 2, 200 A. These
results have been published' since Pohl and Pringsheim wrote their
critique, else I think they would not have felt that the common assump-
tion since I 905 of a linear relation between V and v rested upon so
insecure an experimental basis.
   y. At the same time I undertook to investigate with as much exactness
as possible, using as a source the monochromatic radiations of the quartz-
mercury arc, the third, fourth and fifth of the above assertions of Ein-
stein s equation, and in the vice-presidential address before the American
Association for the Advancement of Science in December, I9I2, expressed
the hope that we should soon be able to assert whether or not Planck's h
actually appeared in photoelectric phenomena as it has been usually
assumed for ten years to do. 5 At that time the papers of Hughes and of
   ' Verh. d. D. Phys. Ges. , XIV., 72o, xgx2.
   2 PHYS. REV.
                 (2), I, 73, I9I3.
   ~ PHYs. REv.
                , 33, 4I, I9I I.
  4 PHYS.     REV. , 3, 63, May, xgx4.
  t'   Science, 37, xxg, xgx3. The following is the quotation from that address: "But not only
PHYS1CAL REVIEW, VOL.   VII. , SECOND SERIES.        I'LEYTE   I.
       March, rgx6.                              To face page 36'.




                                       Fig. 1.

                               R. A. MjL11KAN.
No. s;   1    PHOTOELECTRIC DETERMINATION                   OP PLANCK      S               36I
Richardson and Compton had just appeared, though the latter paper I
had unfortunately not seen at the time of writing and hence made no
reference to it. These authors found the value of k in the Einstein
photoelectric equation varying in the eight metals studied from 3.55 )(
Io '7 to 5.85 &( Io . Planck's h was 6.55 )& Io '~, a difference which
Hughes tried to explain by assuming either that only a fraction of the'
energy hv was absorbed or that the energy of emission against the direction
of the incident light was less than that in the direction of the incident
light.
                        2. EXPERIMENTAL ARRANGEMENTS.
   In all of this photoelectric work at the Ryerson Laboratory the same
general method has been employed, namely, the substances to be studied
or manipulated have been placed in the best obtainable vacuum on an
electromagnetically controlled wheel and all the needed operations have
been performed by movable electromagnets placed outside. As new
operations have been called for the tubes have by degrees become more
and more complicated until it has become not inappropriate to describe
the present experimental arrangement as a machine shop in vacuo. The
operations which are now needed in all the tubes which are being used are
   I. The removal in vacuo of all surface films from all surfaces.
   2. The measurement of the photocurrents and photopotentials due to
these film-free surfaces.
   3. The simultaneous measurement of the contact E.M. F.'s of the
surfaces.
   To construct tubes in which these operations can all be performed in
rapid succession, particularly when the substances to be studied are, as
in this case, the inHammable alkali metals, sodium, potassium and lithium,
is not at all easy, and such success as is being obtained in these experi-
ments is due in no small degree to the skill and experience of the mechan-
ician, Mr. Julius Pearson, who has from the start made all the tubes and
contributed not a little toward their design. Dr. A. E. Hennings and
Dr. W. H. Kadisch, whose papers have already been referred to, have also
assisted materially in the evolution of these tubes. That shown in Fig. I
is the ninth tube of this general plan which has been constructed.    Since
the detail in the photograph is not very clear it will be explained in con-
nection with the diagram shown in Fig. 2. This diagram, however,
relates to a tube used before that shown in the photograph and one in
which the motions of the plate S in the measurement of the contact
is the absorption of energy by an electron from a light wave proportional to u; its numerical
magnitude is approximated a least by multiplying the frequency of the light by Planck's,
h. It- is true there is here no accurate agreement as yet for part of the energy absorbed by the
electron is lost in getting out of the metal and the exact amount of this loss has not been
measured with as much accuracy as we hope soon to be able to obtain, etc.
                                                                          "
                                                                             SECOND
     362                          R. A. MILLIKAX.                            t SERIES.

     E.M. F.'s were made mechanically instead of electromagnetically, other-
     wise the tubes are identical.
        The three metals on the periphery of the wheel w (Fig. z) are cast
     cylinders of sodium, potassium and lithium.       The measurements t here-
     with reported relate only to the sodium and the lithium, an accident
     having prevented the inclusion of data on potassium at the present time.
     The wheel zo is rotated by the electromagnet (not shown in Fig. z) which
     is nearest the observer in Fig. I, until it is opposite the rotary knife X.
     The electromagnet F (Fig. 2) is then energized and slipped slightly for-




                                        Cl'




'
    I1&][]$11)'$&~PP'




                        1$


                    L
                    I
                                   gN                                                      I
                                                                                           I
                             t
                    I                                                                      I
                                                                                           I

                                                                                     mI'




                                                                         Q       G



                                              Fig. 2.

     ward. It thus advances the armature M' which is rigidly attached to
     the knife X by a rod which slips freely through the second armature M'
     until the stop N strikes against 2IL In this motion the small centering
     rod which projects in front of the knife X enters a small cylindrical hole
     in the middle of the sodium cylinder.      The magnet F is then demag-
     netized and slipped still farther forward until it is opposite the armature t
        , re-energized and rotated on an axis coinciding with the axis of the
     tube. This motion advances the knife X, which is rigidlyyaattached
                                                                      ac e to 3II
     by pushing the screw between X and M forward in the brass nut carried
     by a frame which is rigidly attached to the walls of the tube (Fig. z).
       ]   PHOTOELECTRIC DETERMINATION          OP PLANCK'S    "h."      363
Z is thus advanced far enough so that upon rotation it will cut a thin
shaving from the face of the sodium cylinder.         Ii is then demagnetized,
slipped   back to its position opposite M',    energized and rotated and the
shaving cut off. It will be clear that by suitably setting 3EI the thickness
of the shaving can be regulated at will. The shaving falls down into the
enlargement on the bulb beneath the wheel where it is of use in freeing
the tube from residual oxygen. The knife X is next withdrawn from the
sodium by slipping back the electromagnet Ii. The whe'el W is then
rotated until the freshly cut sodium surface is normal to the beam of
monochromatic light entering at 0, and a number of photocurrents (see
below) are taken corresponding to various P. D. 's applied between the
sodium and the Faraday cylinder into which it projects. This Faraday
cylinder consists of an inner cylinder of copper gauze and an outer one
of solid copper. The gauze cylinder, of mesh I/zo cm. , is strongly oxi-
dized by dipping it into a solution of copper nitrate and then holding it
in a bunsen flame. The inner gauze cylinder and the outer solid one
are insulated from each other by ebonite rings 3 mm. thick, though in
this experiment they were always at the same potential because of the
joining of the electrodes B and C. This type of.Faraday cylinder, origi-
nally designed by Ladenburg and Markow, was here used for the sake
of giving the corpuscles which have just enough energy to reach the gauze
a chance to go through the mesh and be caught between the gauze and
cylinder, the idea being that the photocurrent-potential          curve would
plunge into the potential axis more suddenly and thus locate the maxi-
mum positive potential more accurately than if a single cylinder were
used. Furthermore, the gauze projected out beyond the sodium so as to
catch all electrons which left the latter (see Figs. I and 2).
   At any desired time the freshly cut sodium or lithium surface was
rotated until it was opposite the test plate S, which was of copper treated
as to oxidizing, washing, drying, etc. , exactly as was the copper cylinder,
so that the contact E.M. F. between the sodium and S should be the same
as that between the sodium and the gauze cylinder. This contact E.M. F.
was measured by the Kelvin method,     i. e. , by applying, with a potentiom-
eter system, just such a P.D. between the sodium and the plate S that
lifting S from a position say two tenths millimeter above the face of the
sodium caused no motion in an electrometer needle connected to 8'.
The accuracy of this determination was better than /&s per cent. All
potentials measured in this work were in terms of the indications of a
Weston Standard Laboratory voltmeter certi6ed correct to O. r per cent.
by the Bureau of Standards at Washington.
    Since the aim was to test with the utmost possible accuracy the slope
                                                                       SECOND
                              R. A. MILLIKAN.                          t SERIES.

of the line connecting frequency with the maximum P. D. it was necessary
first to know v with great precision and second to see that no trace of light
of frequency greater than that plotted got through the slit of the spectro-
scope. To this end a Heracus 2oo volt quartz-mercury lamp was used
as a source, the lines of a powerful spark source such as that used by
Kadesch and also by Lenard and Ramsauer having been found much too
impure for the purpose in hand. A grating photograph of the spectrum
of the mercury lamp was taken and only such lines were chosen for use
as had no companions anywhere on the short wave-length side. This
photograph is shown in Fig. 3. The central lines belong to the iron com-
parison spectrum, the mercury lines being above and below it. The lines
chosen for use were X = 5, g6I (not shown in the photograph) )I = 4339.4,
X = 4o46. 8, X = 3650.2, X = 3I25.5, X = 2534.7 and X = 2399. The
wave-lengths were kindly determined by Mr. Walter T. Whitney.              A
glance at the photograph will show how well adapted these lines are
for use as accurately determined monochromatic sources so far at least
as the short wave-length side is concerned. Light filters to cut out stray
short wave-length light were also used as described below. Since the
measurement was to be made on the maximum P.D. and since this in-
creases with decreasing wave-length it was not of great importance that
the source be of great purity on the long wave-length side. The spectro-
scope used was a Hilgar monochromator, the end of which is shown in
Fig. I. The slit width was uniformly. oI inch save in the case of lines
2, 535 and 2, 65o with which slit-widths as large as .o4 inch were some-
times used.
   The pressure in the apparatus, which was exhausted by a Gaede molec-
ular pump, assisted by the chemical action of the sodium shavings, was
carried down to a ten-millionth of a millimeter or less as measured by a
McLeod gauge sensitive enough to permit estimates as low as the value
mentioned.     Such a gauge gives, of course, no indication as to the amount
of mercury vapor present, but there appears to be no reason for thinking
that this is not carried out by the molecular pump (which ran contin-
uously throughout the observations unless otherwise stated) nearly as
completely as are other gases. I have, however, made no tests upon this
point and hence can make no positive assertions.

              3. SQURcEs oF ERRQR AND THEIR ELIMINATIoN.
   (a) 3lagmtude of Photoourrents                   t—
                                          Since pho. o potentials are inde-
pendent of light intensity, it is evident that the accuracy with which the
point of intersection of the photocurrent-potential curve with the potential
axis can be determined is directly proportional to the magnitude of the
PHYSICAL REVIEW, VOL. VII. , SECOND SERIES.         PI.ArE II.
        March, xgz6.                            To face page 364.




                                     Fig. 3.

                              R. A. MlLLlkAN.
      ']   PIIOTOELECTRIC DETERMINATION        OP PLANCK'S    "h."      365
photocurrents at any particular potential, for example at saturation.
The photocurrents from a freshly shaved sodium surface are, in the best
attainable vacuum, hundred of times larger than those from surfaces a
few hours old. Results of especial interest in this connection will be
found in a following paper.
   The method employed for obtaining the maximum energy of emission
in volts was not to attempt to locate experimentally just that retarding
potential which would prevent the escape of electrons from the sodium
                        —                                      —
or lithium to the gauze a very uncertain procedure at best but rather
to plot the photocurrent-potential       curve in the neighborhood of the
balance point and then to locate this point graphically.       These currents
were measured with a Dolezalek electrometer connected to the joined
electrodes B and C (Fig. 2). This electrorneter had a sensibility of 2, 500
mm. per volt, and the scale could be read to o.z mm.
   The currents were measured by the deHections obtained in an illu-
mination of 3o seconds, and the deHections used in the location of the
balance potentials in the case 'of the sodium ranged from 3 mm. to 8o mm.
But with a/l tke lines studhed the saturate, on currents were from rg to goo
times these maximum currents used in locatinf; the balance points. Thus
the saturation current for line 5,461 was 3,000 mm. , that for line 4., 339
was 6,ooo mm. , that for line g, og7 was 6,ooo mm. , that for line 3,65o
was 3I,ooo mm. , that for line 3, 125 was I7,ooo mm. , that for line 2, 652
was 3,ooo mm. and that for line z, 535 was 7, 8oo mm. This means that
the complete curves the beginnings of which are shown in Fig. 5 would
be from three to twenty meters high. These enormous currents, when
measured in scale divisions, make the location of the intercepts on the
potential axis a matter of much precision. Smaller currents were used
in part of the measurements       to be reported both because light 61ters
were introduced (see below) arid because a considerable portion of the
energy passing through the slit was absorbed in a thermopile introduced
for the sake of making simultaneous photoelectric and energy measure-
ments.
                                                —
   (b) Electrons Liberated by RefEected Light. In general the balance
potential does not correspond at all to the potential necessary to stop
the electrons having the highest energy of emission, but rather to the
potential at which the stream of electrons escaping from the illuminated
surface is equal to the stream liberated from the walls opposite that
surface by light reHected to these walls. With small photocurrents the
difference between the two potentials may be very large. Of course,
the attempt is usually made to measure and allow for this reverse elec-
tronic current by applying a large positive potential to the illuminated
                                                                                         SECOND
366                                  R. A. MILLIKAN.                                    t SERrEs.

electrode and noting the apparent positive leak, but a correction made in
this way is very uncertain.     It was because of this error that Richardson
and Compton placed less reliance on their determination of maximum
energy of emission that on that of mean energy. But the validity of
Einstein's equation can only be tested by accurate determinations of the
maximum energy.       This         "
                                back leakage            "
                                                 was here eliminated com-
pletely by using only       light  for which  the  ilium&sated   electrode was
photoelectrically           but for which the surrounding
                     sensitive,                             walls were not
photo-sensitive.   In the following experiments with sodium the long      0
wave-length     limit of the oxidized copper walls was X = 2688 A, '
                                                   0
but the sodium was sensitive up to 'A = 68oo A. For any interrfled~ate
wave lengths, -though the saturation currents were measured by a deflection
of from g to gx meters, there was not a guarter of a mm. of def'ection in go
seconds whee the sodium was given a positive potential of 6 volts. Hence
the balance potentials corresponding to the lines from 3, I25 to 5,46I,
inclusive, were obtained with very great precision, so far as this eGect
alone was concerned.      Line 2, 535 was below the long wave-length limit
of the walls of the Faraday cylinder which was used in the measurements
on sodium, so that a positive potential of 6 volts applied to the sodium
produced a back leak of 2o mrn. in 3o seconds, because of electrons
liberated by the reflected light. This was corrected for in plotting line
2, 535, but I consider the balance potential for this line as less reliable
than those for the other lines. When it is remembered that most pho-
topotential-frequency   curves have been obtained from observations on
lines between 2, 5oo and I, 8oo where this positive leak is always very
large it is not to be wondered at that most erratic and uncertain results
have been obtained.
                                                               —
   (c) Contact Electromotive Forces The meas. urement of the contact
E.M. F. between the alkali metals and the test plate showed that it varied
                                       —
from o.4 volt up to 3.o volts depending upon the condition as to age,
absorbed gas, etc. , of the surfaces tested. This shows the futility of
attempting to obtain accurate information about photopotential-fre-
quency relations in the case of the alkali metals without simultaneous
measurement in vacuo of photopotentials and contact E.M. F.'s. Further-
more, these changes in contact E.M. F. were found to take place quite
rapidly immediately after a fresh surface had been formed by shaving.
These results will be more fully reported in a following paper. For the
purpose of this study it was more convenient and more accurate to find
conditions under which the contact E.M. F. would remain constant over a
    ~
      In the experiments with lithium the receiving cylinder has been changed and its long wave-
length limit was distinctly and definitely lower, namely X = 2535 A     .
       ']   PHOTOELECTRIC DETERMINATION          OP PLANCK'S "Ia.  "       367
time sufficiently long to make possible a full series of photopotential-
frequency measurements, than to correct each photopotential measure-
ment by a simultaneous contact E.M. F. determination.          Such conditions
were found after considerable experimenting and oddly enough they were
obtained not in the best obtainable vaccum, but with a pressure of as
much as .OI mm. of gas in the bulb. Under such conditions there was
obtained the very desirable combination of a constant contact E.M. F.
and very large and fairly constant photocurrents so that the most reliable
photopotential frequency curve yet taken on sodium (that shown in
Figs. 5 and 7) was taken at a pressure as high as .ot mm. of mercury.
These results were in perfect agreement, however, so far as concerns h,   " "
with others obtained in the best obtainable vaccum by another method
 (see below).
    (d) The Length of the PhotoPotent~al Freg-ueucy Curve              —
                                                                The .smallness
of the range of frequencies throughout which reliable photopotentials
can be measured has already been mentioned as the gravest source of
uncertainty in attempting to test any one of assertions 2, 3, 4 01 5 of
page 356. Ladenburg's whole wave-length range, viz. , from 260 pp, to
20I pp gave him a curve of length but 59yp and that in a region in
which, in view of the sensitiveness to the reflected light. of all substances
of which the collecting Faraday cylinder can be made, accurate measure-
ments of photopotentials cannot be obtained.          Hughes's range of 69 pp,
was in a less favorable region I85 @1M to 253 pp, even than Ladenburg's.
All of Richardson and Compton's             published   photocurrent-potential
 curves save those on Al and Na correspond to wave-lengths between
X = 2IO pp, and X = 275 pp,    i.e. , the range is 65 pp, or about the same as
 in  Ladenburg's experiments,   and   the spectral region is the same. With
 aluminum the range was from 200 pp, to 3IO pp, or a total of IIO pp, and
 it was against the validity of the conclusions from the work on Al that
 Pohl and Pringsheim critique was chiefly directed.       On sodium, Richard-
 son and Compton obtained no complete photocurrent-potential              curve,
 but made measurements on maximum positive potentials with wave-
 lengths g36, 366, 3I3, 25', and 2IO pp. The settings on 254, and 2IO
 are subject to the same difficulty due to reflected light as are my own
 readings on these lines, so that although they made no measurements of
 contact E.M. F.'s of sodium in vacuo, their range of wave-lengths at
 which reliable settings on maximum energy of emission might have been
 made if the contact E.M. F.'s had been known was from 430 pp to
3I3 pp 01 II7 p, p, .
  Kadesch's observations on sodium and potassium           covered the range
of 390 pp to 220 pp, or I70 pIJ, .
                                                                          SECOND
368                            R. A. MILLIKAN.                           t SERIES.

   The present observations on sodium cover the range from 680 pp, to
240 pp, or a total of 440 lgp and the potentials determined with a very
high precision (about .ot volt) cover the range 577.0 to 265.0 or 3I2 pp,
i. e. , the range is four times that of Ladenburg and Hughes and the
region in which thoroughly trustworthy settings can be made is nearly
three times that of Richardson and Compton or of Kadesch.
                                           —
    (e) Scattered Short Wave Length -Light. With the very large sensibility
of from 2, 000 to 3I,000 mm. of deflection for saturation currents, settings
on the potential necessary to entirely stop a negative discharge would be
incorrect if there were the slightest trace of scattered light of wave-length
considerably shorter than that of the line being studied. There were in
these experiments slight indications of such traces of short wave-length
light, deHections of several millimeters in 30 seconds persisting in some
cases considerably beyond the potential at which the photocurrent-
potential curve was approaching the potential axis. In other words
with increasing positive potential this curve would fall very rapidly toward
the potential axis until it almost touched it and then shoot out nearly
horizontally and approach it asymptotically.          That these Hat "feet"
to the photocurrent-potential      curves were due to stray short wave-length
light diffusely reHected from the prism faces, lenses, or the plane reHector
of the Hilgar monochromator was rendered probable by the fact that
they were more pronounced with the longer wave-lengths than with the
shorter, and also by the fact that they changed in amount when the
plane reHector furnished with the instrument was replaced by one of
speculum metal made in the laboratory;.           It was conclusively proved
when it was found that the interposition of filters which absorbed all
wave-lengths      shorter than the one under investigation caused these
"feet" to disappear entirely. Figure 4 shows a rather extreme case
of the falsification of the true photocurrent-potential    curve by such stray
short-wave-length       light. The metal studied was here lithium.          The
slit width was .o2 inch and a considerable portion of the light which
came through it was intercepted by a thermopile so that the saturation
currents were smaller than those mentioned above, as the data on the
figure shows.      It will be seen from this data that line 2, 535, which is the
last strong line at the short-wave-length end of the mercury arc spectrum,
did not show any trace of this stray light effect, for at    +   r.3 volts, only
.or volt beyond the intercept there was not a trace of a deHection although
.2 mm. could have been easily detected. It will be seen too that at +5.7
volts there was also no trace of a deHection, thus showing that in this
case line 2, 535 was above the long-wave-length limit of the receiving
Faraday cylinder. These readings together with the shape of the curve
No. s         1
                        PHOTOELECTRIC DETERMINATION                                                                  OF PLANCK S                  i'I
                                                                                                                                                                                                          369
constitute the best of evidence that neither stray short-wave-length light
nor reverse electronic currents (Richardson and Compton's " back leak-
age ") vitiate in any way this curve corresponding to line a, gg5. But
the curve corresponding to line 4, 339 has a very pronounced "foot"
(see Curve I.) which however disappeared completely upon interposing
a filter of aesculin in a glass trough a combination which was found                             —
to cut out entirely all lines below 4, 339 including the strong adjacent

                              I                                          I
                              1                                       I
                                                                     r

         ;t        Ddlss                                     eadrI
                                                                     I
                                                                              %effect toes w, Qb sec'.s
         'reit'izzeeeeez
                                                         Id''I
                                                                                     '%tkogt IL 'Nth. --
                                                                                         I                                                                                                                I
                                                                             "Voits 'Bette~     Filter
              Q 05„„
                                                                                                                                                                                                          I
         ~$7            e.owe                                dr                0.   0.   ) Rma                                                                                                    ~r
                                                                                                                                                                                                          L




                                                                                                                     ~
                                                         ~,      I
                                                         n                                                                                                                                            I
                                                             I                                                                 ~r   d                                                             Il
                                                                                                          fr   tl
              Q ),0                   ~   «
                                                     I
                                                         ~r
                                                             I
                                                                                    gf   A   W    f Ih/                        rr   rl                                        P
                                                                                                                                                                                                  II
                                                                                                                                                                                                  I

                                                                                    3 --- -i/0 " It
                                                                                                                Ir

                                                                                                                     ~
                                                                                ~

              U i7"
                                                                                                          rr                                                                                      I



                 $,$„.
                                                         I                                                                                                                           t I
                                                                                                                                                                                                 II
                                                         I                                          ~
                                                     .I                                                                                                                      rIL             I
              a~                                                                                  3Q                           rr                                                    1       1I




                                                                                                          „~0.0-. .
           q    )0. .
                 O,
                          ~«„                                                   ,6 - - - -3z                    ., 0.0
                                          „




          ,g )7.
                                                                                                                                                                                     I




         =$7 67S.O                                                              .7         S,g
                                                                                9 - - - - 1'f4'                      g.o. « ..
                                                                                                                                    ~
                                                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                                                                                               I I
                                                                                                                                                                               Ie
                                                                                                                                                                             rz I
                                                                                                                                                                                         I




                                                                                .sS .                                                                                        I
 O


9-
                                                                                '.Io             $7„p     „~1/0      80         ~


                                                                                                                                d,
                                                                                                                                    „                                I
                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                         I

                                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                              In
                                                                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                 I




                                  r
                                      /
                                                                               1 po-- -93.           0"                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                                 /



                                                                               $7+..&Sq.~p. 5'g1.p "-
                          /                                                                                                                                 I ~ ar
                                                                                                                                                        I 'I1 . ' I'l
                         el
                                                                                                          ,                                             I        /       JJ
                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                                             h)


        1,3       1.L    l.f                  I,O    g               .8 7
                                                                                             hl
                                                                                                 0,1,
                                                                                                    —h/


                                                                                                   -~~
                                                                                                               A/
                                                                                                       .3 h~, S .6
                                                                                                               2,
                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                       ILr
                                                                                                                           L         tt
                                                                                                                                                                             g                            /o
                                                                             +Voks                                   k5
                                                                                 Fig. 4.

line g, o47.                      Note that there was now no trace of a deflection either at
 6 or at —.
—.        p volt (see Curve II.). Tlzese curves and a great many similar
ones which              I have taken seem to me to establish beyond egestion the contention
tlzat tlzere is a definite, exactly determinable    maximum velocity of emission of
corpuscles from                            influence of liglzt of a given frequency.
                                                    a metal, under             tlze
Ramsauer's' recent conclusion to the contrary is due, I think, to the fact
that the errors caused by stray short-wave-length light (falsches licht)
were so large as to falsify entirely the lower parts of his velocity distri-
bution curves. His correction for falsches licht" actually amounted
                                                                                             "
to as much as ro per cent. of his saturation currents. ' lt will be seen
that the effect of this stray short-wave-length light is to push the maxi-
mum potentials corresponding to the longer wave-lengths too far in the
direction of positive potentials, while the effect of reverse electronic
currents is to push the intercepts corresponding to the shorter wave-
lengths, which alone they influence, in the opposite direction. These
two errors are probably chiefly responsible for the fact that the slope lz/e
has heretofore come out so erratically and so low.
   ~ Ann. der Phys. ,
                      4S, p. I I20, I9I4.
   2 For more complete discussion of Ramsauer's experiments see R. A. Millikan, PHvs. REv. ,
January, I9I6.
                                                                          SECOND
370                            R. A. MILLIXAN.                            t SERIESI

    In the present work there were selected, for each line studied, filters
which absorbed       all, or nearly all, of the energy of wave-length shorter
than that of the line under investigation.        Since, however, these filters
diminish largely the total saturation currents their use tends to diminish
the accuracy of locating the intercepts.        Hence after it has been estab-
lished that the flat" feet "of the curves are due to stray light, it is perhaps
just as well to reduce these feet as much as possible, without the use of
filters, that is, b'y having all transmitting and reflecting surfaces as clean
and as perfect as possible and all absorbing surfaces as black as possible,
and then simply to cut the feet off. Thus even in the extreme case
shown in Fig. g, Curve I., very little error in the intercept would have
been made by drawing the curve altogether without reference to the last
eight small readings.        In the work on the sodium, after a study of all
the lines had been made with filters and the stray light effects reduced
to the order of a millimeter in 3o seconds, the filters were dispensed
with entirely and curves plotted corresponding to observed deflections
between 3 mm. and 8o mm. The result is shown in Fig. 5.
                                                                     —
    (f) 3IIaximum Energy of Emission vs. IrIost Frequent Energy. Richard-
son and Compton place least reliance upon their determinations of maxi-
mum energies of emission arid draw most of their conclusions from a
consideration of the most freguent energy of emission, making the assnmp-
tion that with all wave-lengths the ratio between the most frequent
energy and the maximum energy is a constant.             In the present experi-
ments with sodium this was not found to be the case, and in general it
seems probable that the assumption cannot be strictly true. For even
if the surface of the sodium were a perfectly homogeneous substance
 (evidence against this view will be brought forward in a second paper),
the differences in the penetrating power of light of different wave-lengths
into the sodium, as well as the differences in the absorptions of electrons
of different speeds in the layers of sodium through which they emerge,
would seem to require differences in the velocity distribution curves ob-
tained with different spectral lines. Hence, there would seem to be no
warrant for expecting to obtain a reliable test of any of the assertions of
Einstein's equation by comparing the most frequent velocities of emission
produced by different lines. If Planck's         "h"    is actually involved in
photoelectric Phenomena its presence can be exPected to be brought to Eght
 only by accurate measurements on the maximum energies of emission under
 the influence of lights of dhgerent frequencies     Attention  w. as, therefore,
here directed entirely to this end.
Np 3   PHOTOELECTRIC DRTBRMIXA TION OF                                                                                                                                                   I LA 1VCK'S "h."                                                                          37&




                                                                                                                                                             r JL                                     I
                                                                                                                                                            J 'LTJ
                                                                                                                                                                    I. r rT
                                                                                                                                                                        I   7                1.       I

                                                                                                                                                                                              I
                   L                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LL
                   ~I           L'r
                  I w II T.
                          . T &L
                                    J                                                                                            L I' ~
                                        L                                                                                                                                                                                                                 V
                                                    I   lJ '                  L                                                                                                                                                                               '1
                                                                                  '1 K
                                                                                         '
                                                                                             IL                                                                                                                                                                            L


                                                                                                          1I
                                                                                                                                 ~    J
                                                                                                                    1.




                                                                                                                  ~ PI,

                                                                                                                  L1.
                                                                                                              ~   ea     I

                                                                                                                  JL
                                                                                                                                          J\
                                                                                                                    Hl
       I                                                                                                          I.
                                                                                                                   II                                               J
           I                                                                                                                                                                1                ~             ~

                                                                                                                                                                            ~~       DL
                                                                                                                                 I' ~ ,
                                                                                                                                    ~
                   'I                                                                                                                         1   J~                                                                                  I ~I'

                                                                                                                                                       '1
                                1                                                                                                                                                                                                                 'L
                   J    ~
                            ~           1                                                                                                                           'LL                                                                                   I Il
                   IL
                                                L
                                    J
                                                                                                                                                                        J                                  Ã'L
                                            I                                                                                                                                   II
                                                                                                                                                                            1J
                                        J
                                                           L
                                                               I,
                                                               1 +1   I
                                                                      1
                                                                                                                    L~
                                                                                                                    I~
                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ~ ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                                                                                                                                                          I'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \ 'J
                                                                          1                                                      'I       ~                                                                                                   L
                                                                              I
                                                                              1                                                                                                                                                                   L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      K T

                                                                                    L                                                                                                                                                                     'L
                                                                                   Id
                                                                                         L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Tl
                                                                                             L,                                                                                                                                                                        -L CO
                                                                                             1                                   I        ~
                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                      ~ II

                                                                                                                                 ~    J

                                                                                                                                              I9 ~ a
                                                                                                                                                                        L
                                                                                                                         I ~
                                                                                                                                                                      ~1
                                                                                                                                                                                         I   II

                                                                                                                             I                                       '1' JIJlsl
                                                                                                                                                                            I   T        5        ~
                                                                                                                                                                                     4       J    ~

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I           I
                                                                                                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                                                                                               r

                                                                                                                                 '~~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L




               Qp43$&~ Q 0/0+(f
                                                                                                                  Fig. 5.
                                                                                                                SECOND
372                                            R. A. MILLIKA2V.                                                t SERIES.

                                   THE DETERMINATIQN oF k.
   Fig. 5 shows the most reliable single set of photocurrent potential
curves yet taken for the different lines. For compactness the whole
right half of the figure, namely the half containing lines 3,6go to 5, 46I,
is placed below the half containing lines 2, 535 and 3, I25. It will be
seen that all the curves, save that corresponding to ) = 2, 535, strike the
potential axis on the side of negative volts. This means simply that e
times the contact P.D. , which, since sodium is positive with respect to
copper, acts as a retarding potential, exceeds the energy of emission save
in the case of line 2, 535. It will be seen also that the maximum possible
error in locating any of the intercepts is say two hundredths of a volt and
that the total range of volts covered by the intercepts is more than 2.5.
Each point, therefore, of a potential-frequency curve should be located
with not more than a per cent. of uncertainty.         The frequencies are, of
course, known with great precision. In the case of a group of lines such
as that about 3, 65o or 4. , 339 (see Fig. 3) the shortest wave-length of the
group is taken since it alone determines the position of the intercept.
The actual potentiometer readings and the corresponding deflections in
mm. for all these lines are given in Table I. In the plotting the deflections

                                                    TABLE I.

   5&46&              4&339            4&o47               3,65o.               3&zs6.                      &5351


           n                                Def'n. ,            Def'n. ,             Def'n. ,                       Def'n. ,
Volts.
           c' Volts.               Volts,              Volts.               Volts.    mm.           Volts            mm.


2.257      28      1.581      44   1.576       82      1.157        67 /2   .5812    52         '
                                                                                                    —.0576          68
2.205      14      1.629      20   1.524       55      1.105        36      .5288 29                +.0576          38
2. 152         7   1576       10   1.471       36      1.0525       19      .4765 12                +.1620          26
2. 100         3   1 524       4   1.419       24      1.0002       11      .4242        5          +.2670          16/12
                                   1.367        3       .9478        4      .3718        2/12       +.3720            8


in mm. were multiplied   by such factors as were necessary to give all the
curves practically the same maximum ordinate.       No corrections of any
kind were apphed to the readings save in the case of line 2, 535 (see section
3, t& above).
   The result of plotting the intercepts on the potential axis against the
frequencies is given in Fig. 6. It will be seen that the first result is to
strikingly confirm the conclusion reached successively by Joffe, Hull,
Kunz, Hughes, Richardson and Compton and Kadesch as to the correct-
ness of the predicted linear relationship between maximum P.D. and v,
no point missing the line by more than about a hundredth of a volt.
   The slope of this line was fixed primarily by a consideration of the five
']   PHOTOELECTRIC DETERMINATION                                                                                     OP PLANCK'S                            "h."        373



                                                                                                                                           I   I



                                                                                                                               i&+-t---+,-L--------T+              +
                                                                                                                                                            I
     LI
                                                                                                                                               - -+-
          r

              'l
                                                                                                                               ~i-:g~l~ + &~&c
                   IL
                     L
                         'l



                                                                          +t&
                                                                                                                          )c
                                                                          -Pt.                                                      ll


                                                                                                             a       +I
                                                                                                             o        ))
                                                                                                                         o'a
                                              I
                                               1                                             P                                 g O                     —:~+It—O
                                                   LI
                                                        'I
                                                             I
                                                                                                                                                       ---++"''-
                                                    I        I




                                                                 I
                                                                 )Y


                                                                                                                               O     I'                -$T.I- 4'
                                                                                                         ll-

                                                                                +
                                                                                             hmP
                                                                                                             ~~ g                  W gP)




                                                                           I
                                                                           'I
                                                                                'l


                                                                                         l
                                                                                     I
                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                +I O"

                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                     l
                                                                                                         l
                                                                                                         1rY'I

                                                                                                                 l


                                                                                                                     'L
                                                                                                                      'r




                                  II ~
                                  ~I
                                    r%

                                         h


                                    I~ '1 I

                                  ~ Y    ~~
                                    'h I

                              L      ~ I




                                                                                                                                                                   O




     f g ) DA +                                              g'$ ) op,

                                                                         Fig 6.
                                                                       SECOND
374                          R. A. MILLIKAN.                          t SEXES.

points corresponding to lines 5, 461, 4, 3g9, 4, o47, 3,651 and g, 125, of
which the erst, the fourth and the 6fth are particularly reliable.
   Since no potential departs from the line by more than .oi volt and
since the range of volts is about 2, it is a conservative estimate to place
the maximum uncertainty in the slope at about I in 200 or 0.5 per cent.
The value of this slope in volt-frequencies is 4. 124 )&    ".  Setting this,
when reduced to absolute units, equal to h/e and inserting my value of e,
namely 4.774 X io    ",
                      — there results h = 6.
                                              56 p ro  ".
   The measurements thus far reported were all made upon a particular
surface several hours after it had been cut, the conditions being exactly
the same with all the lines, the only change made throughout the whole
series of observations consisting in shifting the incident light from one
wave-length to another by the adjustments provided on the Hilger mono-
chromator.     Such a shift required but a couple of minutes at the most.
The gas pressure within the bulb amounted to as much as a hundredth of
a millimeter, for the reason that after considerable experimenting it was
found that under these conditions, though the contact E.M. F. varied
rapidly and largely immediately after shaving, in an hour or so it reached
a constancy which it maintained for several hours. Furthermore, this
constant contact E.M. F. was accompanied by very large and fairly
constant photocurrents    —  a condition very essential to accuracy in the
determination     of photo-potentials.   In a high vacuum, though the
contact E.M. F. does not change rapidly after shaving, the photocurrents
 often decay to a third or a fourth of the initial value in half an hour, so
 that it is impossible to get a complete set of curves like the above.
    Having placed beyond a doubt, however, the fact of the linear relation
 between V and v, it was possible to determine the slope of the line in
 the highest attainable vacuum by locating two distant points on it in
 rapid succession. Wave-length 5, 46' was always chosen for one of
 these points because its great intensity and large wave-length i. e. , steep
 slope, adapt it admirably to an accurate determination of the intercept
 on the potential axis. This intercept was determined a few minutes
 after shaving, while the molecular pump was kept running and the
 McLeod gauge showed a pressure of perhaps a ten millionth of a milli-
 meter, then the intercept of the other chosen line was found as quickly
 as possible by the method used above, after which the intercept of 5,461
 was again taken. If the contact E.M. F. was changing uniformly this
 change should be eliminated by taking the mean intercept of line 5,46r.
The results of nine different determinations of slope made in this way on
diferent days and with different wave-lengths to compare with 5,461 are
 given in Table II.
          ']      PHOTOELECTRIC DETERMINATION                          OF PLANCK'S             "h."           375
                                                 TABLE II.
                      Wave-Length Compared
                          with 5,46z.                        Slope in Volt-Frequencies.
                            3, 126                                     4. 11 X10 '~
                            3, 650                                     4. 14
                            3, 126                                     4. 10
                            3,650                                      4. 12
                            3, 126                                     4.24
                            4, 047                                     3.98
                            2, 535                                     4.04
                            3, 126                                     4.24
                            4, 047                                     4.21
                                                    Mean.           . . . 4. 131 X10 i~

The estimated uncertainties in these slopes, as set down at the time of
taking, range from I per cent. to 4 per cent. , those corresponding to lines
g, 65o and 3, Izo being most reliable.   I have not, however, attempted
to weight the individual observations in taking the mean. This is seen,
however, to be in very close agreement with the value found from Fig. 5.
We may conclude then that the slope of the volt-frequency line for sodium
is the mean of 4. I24 and 4. I3I, namely 4. I28 )( Io ' which, with my
value of e, yields
                        h = 6.569 g Io     erg. sec.         "
   The measurements on lithium were made in a new tube and the new
receiving
       0
          Faraday cylinder was found to have a long wave-length limit
I 5o A. lower than its predecessor so that the maximum positive
potential due to line 2, 535 could now be determined with precision.
Lithium was found to diHer from sodium in that the surface formed by
shaving in vacuo remained strongly photo-sensitive for an inde6nite
period. It was studied without shaving through a period of six months
during which time it showed no marked decay. The set of observations
in Table III was taken a few days after shaving without filters but with
                                                 TABLE I II.

      4339.                        4o4V              365o.                      3125,                  2535

 Volts.        Def'n. ,
                mm.
                          Vol~s.
                                          mm.
                                                Volts.   Def'n. ,
                                                          mm.
                                                                       Volts.       Def'n. ,
                                                                                    mm.
                                                                                                Volt   .   Def'n
                                                                                                            mm.

—6.00 1,300.0 —6.000 1,950.0 —6.000 6,000.0 —6.000 6,000.0 —6.000 3,500.0
—1.200   10.0 —1.087    21.5 —0.680    19.0 —.077     16.0 +0.736    18.0
—1.153    5.7 —1.027    10.5 —0.628     9.5,  .000     6.3 +0.777    10,5
—1.103    2. 7 —0.984    6.7 —0.575     5.0 + .058     23 +0.814      6.7
—1.058    1.7 —0.941     3.5 —0.539     2.7 + .100     1.1 +0.873     4.0
—1.000    1.1 —0.900     2.5  0.495     1.5 + .151      .5 +3.928     2.0
—.950     0.6 —0.845     1.0  0.437      .6 + .200      .2 +0.969     1.0
—.870     0.5 —0.793     0.5  0.390      .2                +1.019     0.5
               —0.737    0.25                              +1.069     0.0
                                                                                               i+6.000         0.0
                                                                                                                             SECOND
376                                                                R. A. MILLIGRAM.                                      r SERIES.


all the precautions for avoiding stray short-wave-length  light which had
been used with the sodium. Line 5, 461 was entirely above the long-wave-
length limit of the lithium, but the other lines gave readings as follows:
   It will be seen that the observations were purposely extended down to
very minute deHections where the effects of stray short-wave-length light
                                                   I   I
                                                             I
                                                           II
                                                       I   I I




                                                                                            I   I   I   /
                                                                                          JLI//I    I   I
                                                                                                                     »
                                                                                                                 ~   /




                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                            /       I
                                                                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                                                    /
                                                                                                                                   ' ~I             I
                                                                                                                                                I
                                          I                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                  ~I      /I
                                      /                                                                                      II           ' I
                                                                                                                         I                  I
                             1»                                                                                          I


                                  /                                                                                          /
                        II
                    I
                             I




           J
                I
          I I




                                              .7           ,8              o
                                                                          E.                                 0
                                                                                                            7,



                                                                         Fig 7.

are observable, but in drawing the curves it was planned beforehand to
ignore all deHections under 3 mm. , so as to have the results comparable
in every way with those on sodium.       In this way the intercepts in Fig. 7
were all determined precisely as they now stand before plotting as in
Fig. 8 was tried at all. It will be seen from Fig. 8 that the points so found
are in perfect alignment, and that the slope of the line is extraordinarily
close to that found with sodium. Several months later, on the then old
lithium surface, another set of observations was taken using a new
spectrometer.    The observations are those shown in Fig. g. Fig.
shows the same observations graphed so as to determine h. This quan--
tity is seen to come out exceedingly close to the value found several
months earlier on the new surface. From the two determinations on
lithium we obtain the mean
                                                                 h = 6.584 '7 erg. sec.

the uncertainty here being perhaps as much as I per cent. In the matter
of precision I place the greater reliance on the value 6.57 ' obtained from
'j   PIIOTOELECTRIC DETERMINATION                                      OF PLANCK'S "11."                                                                 377




                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                I
                              I       1                                                                                                             fA
                                  I




                                                                                         I

     d   I
         I   )
                                                                                         I

                                                                                         I
             I                                                                       1
         I                                                                           I
         I                                                                               I




                         ~I
                                                               I ~ 4 TLII   'I II. 3)~
                                                                   T        '1




                                          L
                                          \
                                              \
                                                  I

                                                      I
                                                       1
                                                           L

                                                           I



     Q           1
                     I




                                      L
                                      1




                                                                                             I
                                                                                             \
                                                                                                 L



                                                                                                     IL3

                                                                                                       L
                                                                                                           '
                                                                                                               ~
                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                       l
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                           l
                                                                                                                           1

                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                   \
                                                                                                                                       1,
                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                     SECOND
                                                                                                                          R. A. MILLION.                                                        t SERIES.

the experiments on sodium. If, as estimated above, this is in error by
no more than .5 per cent. it is by far the most reliable value of k which
is thus far available.   Planck's original value was very close to this,
namely 6.55 && Io   ", but it was obtained from a product ab' in which
Planck used n   =  7.o6z X xo '~ (erg. /cm. ' degree') and fi = .291' cm.
degrees. In the latest edition of the "%armestrahlung,        published in                                                                                 "
I9I3, the value taken for a is 7.39 g Io while that for b is o.z89. The                                                                 ",
             I   I   I I I'I I I I              I I I I I I I              I   I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
                      I TTi
           III I IIII
           I I
                 I


                 I
                   I

                     I
                      I III
                           I
                            IIIIII II IIIIIIIIIIII
                         I I I I I I           I
                                                   III
                                                I I I I I I I

                                                I I    I   I I I       I
                                                                           I

                                                                           I
                                                                               I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
                                                                               I I I I I I I I   I   I I   I   I I


                     ZUIi!'= hU-P='Pn e


           ~              A. Volt~ ~o
                              dv
                       I,I'/+74
                 d v {il+;6)l)italo'~
                          41'74» l0
                                        3Kio        e:'
                                                     ~
                                                                                     @gal„g

                                       30h „ylgq
                                                                                                                                                                   1~
                                                 g gg~lg'                                                                                             JL           I    I   LI
                                                                                                                                                               I                                      I
                                                                                                                                                           I I I   ~   LU'.       II EL I I. LI II
                               I
                                                                                                                                                                            I'
                                                                                                                                                                              I

                                                                                                                                                                                                      f
                                                                                                                                                                        L'I        U
                                                                                                                                                                                       U




                                   ~   Lr ~ ~         .JLI. . I    ~
                 fo,               Q
                                        ~   .    II                                                                                                  II
                                                                                                                                                     ~~




 +4


                                                                                    » 'I
      .8
                                                                                                                                                             ~UJ            I:IU           ~          UHya'

                         60 x lo                                                           '7O                                                 10O            jIO                                      JLO
                                                      Prequemcg
                                                                                                                              Fig. 9.

original value of k was obtained, then, from the product of two factors,
the first of which Planck has since changed by Il. .7 per cent. (the actual
uncertainty in it was twice this amount), the second by i.7 per cent.
 &( 4 = 6.8 per cent. so that the original value of k contained at the lowest
possible estimate, an uncertainty of v (g.              (6.8)' = 8 per cent. The                                                        7)'+
value of k at which Planck arrives in the last edition of the Warmes-
trahlung is 6.4I 5 g Io        but Westphal whose value of a Planck used,                                            ",
has now raised his value by 2.85 per cent. while the uncertainty in fi (i. e. ,
in c,) is still at least o.6 per cent. , since this is the difference between the
Reichsanstalt value c2 = I.436 and Coblenz's value c2 = I.4456. There
is still, then, in each of the factors ub4 an uncertainty of at least 2.5 per
cent. and hence an uncertainty in Ii of &{2.5)'             (2.5)' = 8.5 per cent.                                                             +
   Planck's equations combined with radiation data are not then as yet
able to yield a value of h which is comparable in accuracy with that
obtained from these photoelectric measurements.
   If, however, Planck's equation is correct we can determine h with
much precision from my value of e and recent data on the total radiation
constant which is related to the a of Planck's equation through a = 4o./c,
c denoting the velocity of light.
          ']   PHOTOELECTRIC DETERMINATION                  OP PLANCX'$   "b        379
  Thus Planck's equation is
                                             k' 4.8m'n'('
                                               it
                                             c l a
and if we insert my value of k, ' which has the same precision as e and the
value of a corresponding to Westphal's latest conclusions as to the
value of 0., namely 5.67 )& Io 5; we obtain
                     (I.372 &( Io 'e)' '48 &( I.O8z8 ' =
               h =                                              657 x Io—"
                                                            I


                       2.999 )( Io       &   7.56 )( Io     )

The above value of cr Westphal has kindly sent me by letter as the result
of new work at the Physical Institute in Berlin. It agrees exactly with
Shakespear's value, ' and Coblenz's recent work on 0 seems to indicate
that it is not likely to be in error by more than a per cent. If its error
is no greater than this, then the above value of h, which involves a'
should be in error by no more than /~ per cent. This value will be seen
to be in exact agreement with the present photoelectric determination
which I have estimated as involving an uncertainty of —, per cent.
   We are now in position to compute with the aid of Planck's equation
both of the constants 0- and c2 of black body radiation from my direct
measurements on e and h. cr is of course seen from the preceding calcu-
lation to come out 5.67 &( Io ', while the value of c2 is found to be
I.g36 cm. degrees. ' This is exactly the Reichsanstalt value found in
I9I3.
  P/ance's       " h " appears then to stand out in connection with photo-eLectric
measurements more sharply, more exactly and more certainly                 than in con-
nect~on w'th any other type of measurements thus far made                   The reason.
it has not appeared with greater certainty before despite the fact that
the experiments of Ladenburg, Kunz, Hull, Hughes, Richardson and
Compton and Kadesch have all been interpreted in terms of Einstein's
theory is found, I think, chiefly in the uncertainty in determining volt-
frequency relations when special precautions are not taken to avoid
stray short-wave-length light, and when the wave-Lengths used are below
the long wave length lim-it of-the recet'vtng surface, v' e. , below ab. out X = 2, 'too.
Richardson and Compton's work was all done below this limit save in
the case of sodium and aluminum and although the values of h obtained
with these substances should have been the most reliable, the sodium
gave h = 5.2 or 2o per cent. too low, while the Al gave h = 4.3, or 35 per
cent. low.
   ' PHvs. REv. , Vol. II., p. x43, z9z3.
   'Proc. Roy. Soc., 86, x8o, r9rz.
   'See PHvs. REv. , II., 142, I9I3.
   4   Ann. der Phys. , 4o, 609, I9I3.
                                                                       SEcoNs
380                           R. A. MILLIKAN.                         t SERiES.

      5. THE LONG-WAVE-LENGTH        LIMIT OF PHOTOSENSITIVENESS.
    The observations corresponding to Figs. 5 and 6 were all taken between
 one and seven hours after shaving when the gas pressure within the bulb
 amounted to one or two hundredths of a millimeter.        A contact E.M. F.-
 time curve was then taken under identical conditions, and with the
 following results.    The contact E.M. F. before shaving was 2.8I9 volts,
 it fell upon shaving to 2.30 volts. Then rose at a fairly uniform rate
 for half an hour to 2.52o volts, where it remained so nearly constant for
 nine hours that an observation made 6 hours after shaving gave a vat. ue
 2.495 volts, while one made nine hours after shaving gave 2.493 volts.
After nine hours the molecular pump was started and the gas all pumped
 out, whereupon the contact E.M. F. rose at once to 2.82o volts, its initial
value. The contact E.M. F., then, during the period of taking the
 photopotential curve remained constant at a value which was within a
 hundredth of a volt of 2.5I volts. Accordingly, in order to find the value
 of the frequency at which, if there were no contact field, the light could
just cause an electron to escape from the metal, i. e. , in order to find the
frequency which causes an electron to leave the surface of the metal with
zero velocity it is only necessary to push up the. volt frequency line of
 Fig. 6 by the amount of the contact E.M. F., viz. , 2.5I volts, and then to
find its intercept on the frequency axis.         The dotted line of Fig. 6
shows this line thus displaced.     The intercept  is seen to be at Pp = 43.9
                                              0
 )&  Io" which   corresponds to ) p = 6, 8oo A. This is far above the long-
wave-length limit of sodium as computed by Richardson and Compton
who published the two estimates 5, 77o and 5, 83o. Yet it was found by
direct measurement that the long-wave-length limit of this sodium was at
least in the neighborhood of 6, 8oo. For the yellow lines 5, 79o and 5, 770
produced together a saturation current which was ~ &3 of that produced
by line 5,46I. Indeed the balance potential for these lines was deter-
mined and found to lie on the straight line of Fig. 6 within the limits of
error of its determination, but the point corresponding to 5, 46I was so
near to it and could be determined with so much greater accuracy, that
no attempt to use the former point in the determination of h was made and
it was not placed on the diagram of Fig. 6. Also the red line 6,235 pro-
duced a marked saturation current of value ~~~ of that of the yellow group.
With the aid of Mr. Wilmer Souder who is making in this laboratory
photoelectric-efficiency measurements on these same surfaces, the energies
in the lines 5, 46I, 5, 78o and 6,235 were found with a thermopile to be in
the ratios 7I, Ioo, Io, respectively.       From these data the saturation
photocurrents per unit. intensity for these three lines are found to have
the ratios I40, 50, 25. Plotting these numbers against wave-lengths and
          ']   PHOTOELECTRIC DETERMINATION         OF PLANCK'S   "h. "

drawing a smooth curve, we can locate the intercept on the wave-length
                                                                      0
axis that is, the long-wave-length     limit, within perhaps I oo A. The
result is shown in Fig. Io. This procedure is probably
the simplest way of avoiding the disturbing e0ects
of stray short-wave-length light in determining direct-
ly the long-wave-length limit. Evidence will be pre-
sented in a later paper to show that this limit is by
no means a constant           —
                         a fact also emphasized by Pohl &= 7o.,6$,& $$,$~~
and Pringsheim, ' but the two sorts of measurements              Fpg ] p
upon it herewith reported are made at practically the
same time so that their agreement is a real test of the validity of Einstein s
equation.
   Lithium is better suited to this sort of a test than is sodium for
the reason that its long-wave-length limit falls in the middle of the
visible spectrum where all the elements necessary to the comparison
are most easily and reliably observable.     Both Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 show
such comparisons, the first on a new lithium surface, and the second on
the same surface several months later. It is to be particularly noted
that while the measured contact E.M. F. between the lithium and the
oxidized copper plate was I.gI volts in the observations shown in Fig. 8,
it was only I.I I volts at the time the observations shown in Fig. 9 were
taken, yet the displacing of the V v line by the amount of this measured
contact E.M. F. yields in each case excellent agreement between the pp
determined from the intercept on the v axis and that determined by direct
observation (see lower right hand corners of Figs. 8 and 9). I should be
unwilling to claim that the direct observations fix the long-wave-length
                                          0
limit with a precision greater than Ioo A. Nevertheless these observa-
tions seem to leave no room whatever for doubt that the agreement de-
manded by Einstein's equation between the two methods of determining
vp actually exists.


        6. CQNTAcT E.M. F. AND LQNG-WAvE-LENGTH LIMITs.
  I have shown elsewhere' that Einstein's equation demands that the
contact E.M. F. between any two conductors be given in terms of photo-
electrically measured          quantities   thus
                                            h
                   Contact E.M. F. = —(vo —vo') —(Vo —Vo'),               (2)
                                            e
in which vp and vp are the long-wave-length limits of the two conductors
and Vp and    Vp' are the maximum potentials which must be externally
  ' Phil. Mag. , z6, roz7, z9x3.
  2   PHYs. REv. , January,   z9x6.
                                                                        SECOND
                              R. A. MILLIKAN.                          r SERIES.


applied to just prevent corpuscular discharge by light of any particular
wave-length from these two conductors to any third conductor.           If the
long-wave-length    limit of the copper oxide receiving cylinder can be
determined this equatibn can be quite accurately tested by means of the
experiments recorded above. The desired measurement on the Faraday
cylinder was made with no little precision by utilizing the observation
mentioned in section 3b that when the sodium for example was charged
to a positive potential of say 6 volts, if the wave-length used was longer
than the long-wave-length      limit of the cylinder, there was no trace of
an apparent positive leak to the cylinder upon illuminating the sodium,
but as soon as, with decreasing wave-length, the long-wave-length limit
of the cylinder is reached, such a leak will appear because of the liberation
of electrons from the walls of the cylinder by the light reflected to them.
I have already mentioned that with line 3, j:25 although it produced with
 —6 volts on the sodium a current of i7, ooo mm. in 3o seconds, when the
sodium was given a potential of      +   6 volts and illuminated there was
not a quarter of a millimeter of deHection. Since the greater part of
the light incident on the sodium is reflected back to the Faraday cylinder,
this shows that line 3, I25 is completely and definitely above the long-
wave-length limit of the copper oxide. Lines 3,022 and 2, 967 and 2, 804
are weaker and their indications are accordingly less definite, but no
positive leak was obtained with them. But with wave-length 2, 652,
which with —    6 volts give a deHection of 5, 3oo mm. , +   6 volts produced
 a deflection in 3o seconds of 3 mm. and with ), = 2, 535, which with —6
 volts gave 7, 8oo mm. , +   6 volts produced a deflection of 20 mm. The
energies of the two lines were found in the ratio 5.3 to 9.x. Plotting then
 deHections per unit intensity, viz. , 2o/9. r = 2z and 8/8. 3 = 6.66 against
 the corresponding wave-lengths and extending the straight-line connecting
 these two0 points to the wave-length axis we find the intercept at )
  = 2, 688 A. which may be taken as the long-wave-length the limit of the
 copper oxide, and in view of the steepness of the0 curve it is not likely
 that this point is in error by more than say 3o A. The corresponding
 vo' is rrr. 6 X ro". From the relation d volts/dv                      "
                                                         = 4. rz8 X ro we
 can compute the maximum energy of emission in volts of corpuscles
 under the inHuence of line 2, 835 (which corresponds to v = erg. z X ro")
 from a surface for which this energy is zero at ) = 2, 688 A. It is

             4. iz8 X ro "(rr8.2 —rrr. 6) X ro" = .27 volt.
                         —

This is Uo, With line 2, 535 Fig. 5 shows that the observed Uo for sodium
was .52 volt        so that Uo —Uo' ——.52 —.27 = .25 volt.             But
fr/e(vo —vo') = 4. r28 X to '~(rr8. 2 —48.9) X ro" = 2.79 volts.      The
      ']   PHOTOELECTRIC DETERMINATION                 OF PLANCK'S      "h."    383
measured contact E.M. F. at this time was 2.5I volts (see p. 582 and
Fig. 6). Hence equation 2 becomes
                            2.5I = 2.79 —.25 = 2.54,
which is but about I per cent. in error.
   Similar computations made with lithium showed equally good agree-
ment. As stated above the Faraday cylinder used with the lithium was a
new one and with line 2, 535,            +
                                   6 volts on the lithium failed to reveal
any trace of a reverse electronic current.    But with line 2, 4oo A this
reverse current was distinctly and definitely present, although line 2, 4oo
is weak in energy compared with 2, 535. Line 2, 535 was then in this
case very close to the long-wave-length limit. Considering the limit at
this line we have Vo = o. But Fig. 8 shows that at that time the contact
E.M. F. was I.52 volts, while Vo for line 2535 was I.oo volt and vo
 = 57 X Io". Hence f'/e(vp —vp') = 4. I28 X Io 'p (II8.2 —57.0) X
Io" = 2.526 volts, and equation (2) becomes
                          I.52 = 2.526 —I.oo = I.526.
In the measurements          taken       six months   later, although    the contact
E.M. F. had dropped to I.I I volts, equation 2 still predicts the observed
value. For now (see Fig. 9) //e(vp —pp) = 4.. I28 X Io "(II8.2 —59.7)
   Io = 2.4I5 volts and Vo —I.29 volts, so that equation 2 becomes
                    I.I I = 2.4I5 —I.29 = I.I25.
Einstein's equation appears then to stand up accurately to all of the five
quantitative tests demanded of it on page g56.

                       9. THEQRIEs oF PHQTo EMIssIQN.
  Perhaps it is still too early to assert with absolute confidence the
general and exact validity of the Einstein equation.   Nevertheless, it
must be admitted that the present experiments constitute very much
better. justification for such an assertion than has heretofore been found,
and if that equation be of general validity, then it must certainly be
regarded as one of the most fundamental and far reaching of the equations
of physics; for it must govern the transformation of all short-wave-length
electromagnetic energy into heat energy. Yet the semi-corpuscular
theory by which Einstein arrived at his equation seems at present to be
wholly untenable.      I have pointed out elsewhere' that this theory was
but a very particular form of the ether-string theory advanced by J. J.
Thomson' two years earlier, for it simply superposed upon that theory
the additional hypotheses (I) that the bunches of energy which are as-
   ' Science, Vol. XXXVII., p. x30, xyr3.
   Electricity and Matter, pp. 62 —70.
                                                                        SECOND
                                       R. A. MILLIEAN.                 t ERIES

sumed to travel along the ether strings are proportional to the impressed
frequency and (2) that they are transferred upon absorption as wholes
to an electron. This being the case, the objections to an ether-string
theory, that is, to any theory in which the energy remains localized in
space instead of spreading over the entire wave-front, must hold for the
Einstein theory. Lorenz' and Planck' have pointed out some of these.
Despite these objections, however, Sir J. J. Thomson' and Norman
Campbell' still adhere to it. I wish to call attention to one more difficulty
which in itself seems to me to be very serious.
   If a static electrical field has a fibrous structure, as postulated by any
form of ether-string theory            "
                                   each unit of positive electricity being the

        "
origin and each unit of negative electricity the termination of a Faraday
tube,    then the force acting on one single electron between the plates
of an air condenser cannot possibly vary cors6nuomsly with the potential
difference between the plates. Now in the oil-drop experiments              we
actually study the behavior in such an electric field of one single, isolated
electron and we find, over the widest limits, exact proportionality between
the field strength and the force acting on the electron as measured by the
velocity with which the oil drop to which it is attached is dragged through
the air.
   When we maintain the field constant and vary the charge on the drop,
the granular structure of electricity is proved by the discontinuous
changes in the velocity, but when we maintain the charge constant and
vary the field the lack of discontinuous change in the velocity disproves
the contention of a fibrous structure in the field unless the assumption
be made that there are an enormous number of ether strings ending in
one electron. Such an assumption takes all the virtue out of an ether
string theory.
   Despite then the apparently complete success of the Einstein equation,
the physical 'theory of which it was designed to be the symbolic expression
is found so untenable that Einstein himself, I believe, no longer holds to it.
But how else can the equation be obtained?
   Before attempting to answer this question, let us consider the energy
relations which it imposes. It requires the absorption at some time or
other by the escaping electron of at least the energy hv from incident
waves of frequency v. The total luminous energy falling per second from
   ' Phys. Zest. , II349, I9IO.
     Ann. der. Phys. , 39, I9I2. Berliner Ber. , 723, I9II.
   ' Proc. Phys. Soc. London, XXVII., Ios, December I5, I9I4.
  4   Modern Electrical Theory, Cambridge Press,      I9I3, p. 248.
  ~
      J. J. Thomson's Electricity and Matter, p. 9.
      PHYs REv   y   2y   IO9t I9I3.
         ']   PHOTOELECTRIC DETERMINATION         OP PLANCK'S       "h."

a standard candle on a square centimeter at a distance of three meters
is one erg. ' Hence the amount falling per second on a body of the size
of an atom, i. e. , of cross section ro ' cm. is 0 ro ' ergs, But the energy
hv for light of wave-length equal to 5,ooo A is 4 X ro          "   ergs or 4,ooo
times as much. 0
                     Since not a third of this energy is in wave-lengths 0
                                                                           shorter
than 5,ooo A, a photoelectric cell which is sensitive up to 5,ooo A. should
require at least Io, ooo seconds or 4 hours of illumination by a standard
candle 3 meters away before any of its atoms could absorb enough energy
 to discharge a corpuscle, yet the corpuscle is observed to shoot out the
 instant the light is turned on. If then we must abandon the Thomson-
 Einstein hypothesis of localized energy, which is, of course, competent
 to satisfy these energy relations, there is mo alternative but $0 assunse that
 the corpuscles which are ejected are already possessed of an energy almost
 equal to hv. Since this energy must have come from the incident fre-
 quency, for otherwise it could not be proportional to this frequency, it is
 necessary to assume, if the absorption is due to resonance (and we know
 of no other way in which to conceive it after eliminating as above the
 possibility that a single ether pulse drives out a free electron) that there
 are oscillators of all frequencies within the absorbing body and that these
 oscillators are at all times in all stages of energy loading up to the value
 hv. But this is impossible if the oscillators, when not exposed to radi-
 ation, emit any energy at all; for if they did so, they would in time lose
 all their store and we should be able, by keeping bodies in the dark, to
 put them into a condition in which they should show no photoelectric
  effect until after at least 4 hours of illumination with a standard candle.
  Since this is contrary to experiment, we are forced, even when we discard
  Einstein's theory of localized energy and discontinuous absorption, to
  postulate electronic absorbers which do not radiate at all while they are
  absorbing until the absorbed energy has reached a certain critical value
  when explosive emission occurs. The photoelectric effect then, however
  it is interpreted, if only it is correctly described by Einstein's equation,
  furnishes a proof which is quite independent of the facts of black-body
  radiation of the correctness of the fundamental assumption of the quantum
  theory, namely, the assumption of a discontinuous or explosive emission
  of the energy absorbed by the electronic constituents of atoms from ether
                                                                "
  waves. It materializes, so to speak, the quantity "h discovered by
  Planck through the study of black body radiation and gives us a con-
  fidence inspired by no other type of phenomenon that the primary phys-
  ical conception underlying Planck's work corresponds to reality.
     But to return to a substitute for Einstein's theory. Planck' and Som-
   ~   Drude, Lehrbuch der Optic, z906, p. 47&.
   2   Ann. d. Phys. , 37, 644, x9&2.
 386                                           R. A. MILLIKAN.                                       SECOND
                                                                                                 T SERIES'



 merfeld' have both made alternative suggestions, neither of which,
 however, seems competent, in general, to furnish a physical basis for the
 Einstein equation.      Indeed Sommerfeld and Debye-" de6nitely admit
 the inadequacy of their theory to account for the normal photoelectric
 effect, which is precisely the effect herewith investigated, while Planck's
 theory as thus far formulated does not yield the Einstein equation at all.
 Originally it had nothing whatever to say about the escape of corpuscles
 from atoms under the influence of ether waves, and even in the I9I2 for-
 mulation' the energy of an oscillator was assumed to be given up only in the
 form of electromagnetic waves, but in I9I3 the theory was extended so
as to permit part of the energy to be emitted in the form of an ejected
corpuscle. The oscillator of frequency v was assumed to absorb energy
continuously without radiating any of it until its energy content became
e&hv, in which n~ is an integer, the value of which on the average depends
on the intensity of the incident waves. This energy was then assumed
to shoot out explosively, the amount Ohv, o. being a fraction less than one,
going off in the form of an ether wave, and the amount (n —~)hv ap-
pearing in the form of the kinetic energy of the escaping corpuscle. This
energy (n —0)hv was then assumed to be transformed entirely into
electromagnetic waves of frequency v&, when the corpuscle fell into a new
oscillator of natural frequency v2.
   Now when we compare this theory with the above experimental results
we observe that there is not the slightest indication in the latter that the
energy absorbed by an escaping corpuscle from an incident light wave of
frequency v is ever more than hv, or that a has any value at all and yet
the setting of e~ —I and a = o in the above expression of Planck is not
consistent with his way of deducing his black body radiation law.
   Further the assumption that all bodies which show the normal photo-
electric effect, and there is some evidence that even gases when stimulated
by waves of frequency v shoot off corpuscles with energy hv, contain
     I Phys. Zeit. , I2, IoS7, I9II, Solvey Congress,        I9II,
     2 Ann. d. Phys. , 4x, 873, Igx3.
     3 Sitz. Ber. d. k. Preuss. Akad. , x8, 3So, x9x3.
     4 Ann. d. Phys. ,
                        37, 644, x9I2.
     ~
       My experimental results might perhaps be reconciled with Planck's theory if, under the
                                                         I      = pI (Warmestrahlung,
conditions under which          I work, his expression                                    p. I59) were a
quantity very much smaller than unity. As a matter of fact, however, the intensity of
illumination K which I used in these experiments was measured and found, with line 546I,

to be about xo
                erg
                      ' Since K =
                                      32"""
                                               I 3C
                                            (see "Warmstrahlung,             "
                                                                 p. I62) and p =
                                                                                   3C3
                    cm' sec                                              ~
                                                                                                 32m~hv'

we       see that   pI = —.
                         c'K
                          hv3
                                   Inserting    c = 3 X xo", h = 6 X xo —»,      v   = 6 X Io'4 we    find

pI = 7ooo —a very large quantity     instead of a very small one.            This seems to make my
results irreconcilable with Planck's theory.
      ']       PHOTOELECTRIC DETERMINATION       OP PLANCK'S    "h."       387
sharply tuned oscillators possessing every conceivable natural frequency
is a somewhat troublesome one. Certainly both the phenomena of ab-
sorption and of emission show that in most substances the great bulk of the
oscillators possess natural frequencies of one or two particular values and
the characteristic waves which they emit are of these frequencies, the
condition for such emission being in general merely that the stimulating
frequency be greater than the characteristic frequency.
     In spite of these diAiculties, however, a modification of Planck's for-
 mulation seems to me able to account for all the relations thus far known
between corpuscular and ethereal radiations.          Most of the oscillators
 of a given substance may be assumed to have a particular frequency or
 frequencies characteristic of the substance, but, just as the line spectrum
 of a gas is always superposed upon a faint continuous spectrum, so a few
 oscillators of every conceivable frequency may with no little plausibility
 be assumed to be mixed with the enormously larger number of oscillators
 which have a frequency or frequencies characteristic of the given sub-
 stance. This is only making for all substances precisely the assumption
 which Planck makes with such conspicuous success for black substances.
 In other words it is assuming that all substances are to a certain degree
 black. If any particular frequency is incident upon such a substance
 the oscillators in it which are in tune with the impressed waves may be
 assumed to absorb the incident waves until the energy content has
 reached a critical value when an explosion occurs and a corpuscle is shot
 out with an energy hv. This free corpuscle may then be assumed to
 fritter away some, and in many cases all, of its energy by impacts with
 atoms, but if it strikes an oscillator of any frequency v2 while its energy
 exceeds hv&, it either stimulates directly new ether waves of frequency
  v2, or else it modifies the condition of the atom in such a way that in a
 subsequent readjustment it emits waves of this frequency.          If the sub-
 stance possesses these particular oscillators v2 in great abundance then
 these emitted waves are its characteristic X-rays. Whether they are
 stimulated by the return of a displaced corpuscle or by the act of dis-
 placement by a corpuscle of energy greater than hv& may be left unsettled,
 though the former view is at present the more attractive.
      In the photoelectric effect we study not the stimulation of these char-
 acteristic ether waves but the antecedent emission of corpuscles from the
 atom, this emission appears to take place to some extent at all frequencies
 of the incident light, though the emitted corpuscle never leaves the metal
 unless its energy of emission from the atom is greater than hvo, but it
  takes place especially copiously when the impressed frequency coincides
           "
 with a natural frequency.    "    According to this point of view the selective
                                                                      SECOND
                                R. A. MILLIKAN.                      t SERIES.

photoelectric is simply the normal effect taking place in the neighborhood
of an absorption band where oscillators of one particular frequency pre-
dominate.    This is little more than Planck s theory with the possibility
of a corpuscle being emitted from an atom with an energy greater than
hv eliminated for the sake of reconciling it with the experimental facts
above presented.     It is to be hoped that such a theory will soon be
shown to be also reconcilable with the facts of black body radiation.
   I have to thank Mr. Wilmer H. Souder for able assistance during the
latter portion of this investigation.

                                  I O. SUMMARY.
  r. Einstein's photoelectric equation has been subjected to very search-
ing tests and it appears in every case to predict exactly the observed
results.
   z. Planck's h has been photoelectrically determined with a precision
of about .5 per cent. and is found to have the value
                                h = 6.57 )& zo-".
   RYERSON PHYSICAL LABORATORY,
       UNIVERSITY OI CHICAGO.
