

===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 1 = RMP 58 page 647 =====

The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

John G. Cramer

Department of Physics FM-15, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195"
and Bereich Kern- und Strahlenphysik, Hahn-Meitner-Institut fur Kernforschung, D-1000 Berlin 39

The interpretational problems of quantum mechanics are considered. The way in which the standard
Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics deals with these problems is reviewed. A new interpreta-
tion of the formalism of quantum mechanics, the transactional interpretation, is presented. The basic ele-
ment of this interpretation is the transaction describing a quantum event as an exchange of advanced and
retarded waves, as implied by the work of Wheeler and Feynman, Dirac, and others. The transactional in-
terpretation is explicitly nonlocal and thereby consistent with recent tests of the Bell inequality, yet is rela-
tivistically invariant and fully causal. A detailed comparison of the transactional and Copenhagen interpre-
tations is made in the context of well-known quantum-mechanical Gedankenexperimente and “paradoxes.”
The transactional interpretation permits quantum-mechanical wave functions to be interpreted as real
waves physically present in space rather than as “mathematical representations of knowledge” as in the
Copenhagen interpretation. The transactional interpretation is shown to provide insight into the complex
character of the quantum-mechanical state vector and the mechanism associated with its “collapse.” It
also leads in a natural way to justification of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle and the Born probability
law (P =y)*), basic elements of the Copenhagen interpretation.

CONTENTS E. The Freedman-Clauser experiment and Herbert’s
I. Introduction 647 paradox 676
II. What Is The Copenhagen Interpretation? 649 F. The Hanbury-Brown-Twiss effect 678
A. Identity: What is the state vector? 651 G. The Albert-Aharonov-D’ Amato predictions 679
B. Complexity: Why is the state vector a complex quan- V. Conclusion 681
tity? 653 Acknowledgments 681
C. Collapse: How and why does the state vector abrupt- Appendix: Alternative Interpretations Of Quantum Mechanics 682
ly change? 653 1. Hidden-variable theories 682
D. Nonlocality: How are correlations of separated parts 2. Semiclassical interpretations 682
of the state vector arranged? 654 3. “Collapse” interpretations 683
E. Completeness: Do canonically conjugate variables 4. The many-worlds interpretation 684
have simultaneous reality? 657 5. Advanced-action interpretations 684
F. Predictivity: Why can we not predict the outcome of 6. Stapp’s nonlocal model 685
an individual quantum event? 657 References 685
G. The Copenhagen interpretation and the uncertainty
principle 658 |. INTRODUCTION
III. The Transactional Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics 658
A. Advanced waves and Wheeler-Feynman absorber “There was a time when the newspapers said that only
theory 659 twelve men understood the theory of relativity. I do not be-
ge Ei ea er Degree ae ool 660 lieve that there ever was such a time. ... On the other
C. The transaction model and relativistic quantum : ——
mechanics 663 hand, I think it is safe to say that no one understands
D. The transactional interpretation 665 quantum mechanics. ... Do not keep saying to yourself, if
E. The transactional interpretation and the quantum- you can possibly avoid it, ‘But how can it be like that?’ be-
mechanical formalism 666 cause you will get ‘down the drain’ into a blind alley from
F. Identity and complexity in the transactional interpre- which nobody has yet escaped. Nobody knows how it can
aie ad be like that.”
G. Collapse and nonlocality in the transactional interpre- R. P. Feynman
tation 667 .
H. Completeness and predictivity in the transactional in- The Character of Phy. sical Law
terpretation 668 (1967a, p. 129)
I. Relativity and causality in the transactional interpre- It has been over half a century since that remarkable
ance 668 period of 1925—1927 when modern quantum mechanics
J. The arrow of time in the transactional interpretation 669 suddenly emerged from the work of Heisenberg
Iv. a of Application of the Transactional Interpreta- = (1925,1927), de Broglie (1926,1927a, 1927b), Schré. dinger
A. Renninger’s negative-result Gendankenexperiment 670 (1926a,1926b, 1926c,1926d,1927a,1927b), and Born (1926a,
B. Wheeler’s delayed-choice experiment 671 1926b,1927) and quickly replaced Newtonian mechanics
C. Schrédinger’s cat and Wigner’s friend 673 and the “old quantum theory” of Planck, Einstein, and
D. Transmission of photons through noncommuting po- Bohr as the standard theory for dealing with all micro-
Jarizing filters 674 scopic phenomena. The mathematical formalism of
quantum mechanics, although refined and generalized in
the intervening decades, has never been seriously chal-
lenged either theoretically or experimentally and remains
“Present address. as firmly established today as it was in the 1930s.

Reviews of Modern Physics, Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986 Copyright ©1986 The American Physical Society 647


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 2 = RMP 58 page 648 =====

648 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

Yet over the entire period since the original develop-
ment of quantum mechanics there has been controversy
surrounding its interpretation. The questions of the
meaning of the mathematics and of the underlying reality
behind the laws and procedures of quantum mechanics
have been a battlefield for 5 decades, and no truce is yet
in sight. The controversy has, in fact, recently been inten-
sified. The “spooky actions at a distance” that Einstein
(1947) perceived in quantum mechanics seem to have been
demonstrated by the theoretical work of Bell (1964,1966)
and the experimental work that has followed from it
(Freedman and Clauser, 1972; Clauser and Shimony,
1978; Aspect et al., 1982a,1982b). This body of work
(Stapp, 1975,1982; Clauser and Shimony, 1978) makes a
compelling case that quantum mechanics (and nature)
cannot simultaneously have the properties of “locality”
and “contrafactual definiteness,” but rather must lack one
or the other (or both).

The term contrafactual definiteness' (CFD) used here
was introduced by Stapp (1971; see also Herbert and
Karush, 1978) as a minimal assumption. It means that
for the various alternative possible measurements
(perhaps of noncommuting variables) which might have
been performed on a quantum system, each would have
produced a definite (but unknown and possibly random)
observational result and further that this set of results is
an appropriate matter for discussion. CFD is actually a
rather weak assumption and is often employed by practic-
ing physicists in investigating and discussing quantum
systems. It is completely compatible with the mathemat-
ics of quantum mechanics but is in some conflict with the
positivistic element of the Copenhagen interpretation (Sec.
ID) and with certain other interpretations (see the Appen-
dix).

The term Jocality” means that the separated parts of the
system described are assumed to remain correlated only so

long as they retain the possibility of speed-of-light contact.

and that when isolated from such contact the separated
parts can retain correlations only through “memory” of

lThere have been several attempts in the literature to answer
the question “what is the minimum assumption about the physi-
cal world that one must relinquish in order to retain the locality
assumption in the face of the Bell inequality experimental
results?” d’Espagnat (1976,1979) has suggested that the
minimum assumption is the existence of an objective external
reality that is independent of the knowledge of observers.
Clauser and Shimony (1978) have suggested the slightly weaker
assumption of “realism,” i.e., that external reality exists and has
definite objective properties whether we measure them or not.
Stapp’s (1975) CFD assumption described in the text is, in the
opinion of the author, a considerably weaker assumption than
others proposed in the literature and is therefore the minimum
assumption of choice.

2Some authors use the terms “separable” and “separability,”
which are synonymous with “local” and “locality” in the
present context.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

previous contact. The term nonlocality implies the con-
verse of this, e.g., correlations established faster-than-light
across spacelike or negative timelike intervals. One
should make the distinction between nonlocal enforcement
of correlations, which is at issue here, and nonlocal com-
munication, which (although sometimes confused with
the former) is a far stronger condition. This distinction
will be clarified later.

The mathematics of quantum mechanics does not deal
explicitly with such nonlocal correlations. It does, howev-
er, require that any separated measurements of the prop-
erties of an extended system be treated as: parts of the
same quantum-mechanical “state,” regardless of the de-
gree of separation of the measurements in time and/or
space. This common-state requirement could be inter-
preted as a kind of de facto nonlocality, but that associa-
tion is not conventionally made in applying the
Copenhagen interpretation to the mathematics.

Mermin (1985) has suggested that on the question of
whether there is some fundamental problem with quan-
tum mechanics signaled by tests of Bell’s inequality, phy-
sicists can be divided into a majority who are “indif-
ferent” and a minority who are “bothered.” If there were
a prevailing view among this concerned minority as to the
resolution of the above dichotomy, CFD versus locality, it
would probably be that CFD, although pragmatically use-
ful in practical applications and discussions of quantum
mechanics, must be philosophically abandoned to positiv-
ism because the alternative of nonlocality is unacceptable.
It is perceived by some that nonlocality must be in direct
conflict with special relativity because it could be used, at
least at the level of Gedankenexperimente, for “true”
determinations of relativistic simultaneity and must be in
conflict with causality’ because it offers the possibility of
backward-in-time signaling. But this view is at best ques-
tionable. While it is clear that nonlocal communication
between observers could lead to such conflicts, the
minimum nonlocal correlations required to invalidate the
Bell locality postulate are compatible with both relativity
and causality.

The alternative approach to the dichotomy, advocated
in this work, is to retain CFD while abandoning locality.
Contrary to what might be expected, this does not require
any revision of the mathematical formalism of quantum
mechanics, but only a revision of the interpretation of the
formalism. The transactional interpretation of quantum
mechanics, presented below, is explicitly nonlocal but is

3Here we must distinguish between causality in the sense that
an effect must follow its cause in time sequence, and causality
as used, for example, by Heisenberg (1927) to mean that the ef-
fect is completely and uniquely determined by its cause(s). The
former concept as applied to macroscopic systems is assumed
here to be a valid and fundamental law of nature: the latter
concept is presumably invalid because it is in conflict with the
statistical interpretation of quantum mechanics (see Sec. II). In
this paper we shall take causality to have the former meaning
and reserve the term determinism to refer to the latter concept.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 3 = RMP 58 page 649 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 649

also relativistically invariant and fully causal. It is con-
sistent with all of the familiar theoretical predictions and
experimental demonstrations of conventional quantum
mechanics,* and indeed provides new insights into some
of the more counterintuitive aspects of the quantum-
mechanical formalism, as will be discussed in Sec. IV.

In the body of this paper we review the Copenhagen in-
terpretation and the interpretational problems of the
quantum-mechanical formalism which it is designed to

‘resolve. We then present the transactional interpretation
and examine the way in which it deals with the same
problems. Finally, we consider a number of new and
traditional Gedankenexperimente and _interpretational
paradoxes as illustrative examples of the applications and
power of the transactional interpretation. We find that
the transactional interpretation deals with these problems
in a deeper and more intuitive way.

In the main body of this paper we shall not consider
other alternatives to the Copenhagen interpretation that
have been proposed, but rather reserve discussion of some
of these for an appendix. Furthermore, we shall not con-
sider the rather orthogonal approach of quantum logic,
which would bypass considerations of interpretation and
supply instead a revision of conventional logic better suit-
ed to the quantum-mechanical formalism. We find here
that standard logic can meet the needs of the quantum-
mechanical formalism when a proper interpretation of
that formalism is provided.

In this paper, when we explicitly examine a formalism
of quantum mechanics in the context of interpretation, we
shall restrict our consideration to the Schrddinger-Dirac
formalism (Dirac, 1930) of wave mechanics. Although
that formalism is perhaps less elegant than some of its al-
ternatives, we find it to be the most transparent to inter-
pretation. Because of the complete equivalence
(Schrédinger, 1926c) between the wave mechanics formal-
ism and its principal alternatives, no loss of generality is
incurred through this restriction. For reasons that will be
discussed later, we shall assume that the wave equations
describing the system under consideration are relativisti-
cally invariant.

The task that we have undertaken here is a critical
comparison of the Copenhagen interpretation with the
new transactional interpretation presented below. Inter-
pretations of a physical theory cannot normally be sub-
jected to experimental verification. For this reason, it will
be necessary to use criteria other than appeal to experi-
ment to make any sort of critical comparison. We should

4There are experimental predictions associated with the
Wheeler-Feynman approach which differ from those of ortho-
dox quantum mechanics, but only for special situations involv-
ing very weak and anisotropic absorption (Partridge, 1973;
Pegg, 1975; Cramer, 1980,1983). However, even in the unlikely
event that such effects were observed, no revision of the
quantum-mechanical formalism would be required. Rather, the
same formalism would be used in a slightly different way in-
volving altered boundary conditions for such cases.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

like to list those criteria explicitly here.

(1) Economy (Occam’s razor). It is preferable in con-
structing the interpretation to use a minimum number of
independent postulates.

(2) Compatibility. It is preferable that the nonobserv-
able construction of the interpretation be compatible with
physical laws, even when such laws are not directly relat-
ed to the theory being interpreted, i.e., quantum mechan-
ics. In the present case we shall employ the laws of rela-
tivistic invariance, macroscopic causality, and time-
reversal invariance in this context. (The violation of this
criterion, i.e., the violation of a physical law by an inter-
pretational construction is what is sometimes called an
“4nterpretational paradox.” These are to be avoided.)

(3) Plausibility. It is preferable that the mechanisms, if
any, employed by the interpretation should be physically
plausible. Common sense is not always a reliable guide in
physics, but it can often help make a relative choice be-
tween otherwise equal alternatives.

(4) Insightfulness. It is preferable that an interpretation
provide insight into the underlying mechanism of nature
behind the mathematical formalism. Providing insight
into the fundamental processes of nature is an important
function of an interpretation. For example, the interpre-
tational concept of field lines introduced by Faraday,
while unnecessary to the formalism of electrodynamics,
provides a rich and powerful medium for gaining insights
into the operation of electromagnetic phenomena.

Il. WHAT IS THE
COPENHAGEN INTERPRETATION?

As was implied in the Introduction, we consider the
theory of quantum mechanics to be divisible into a for-
malism and an interpretation. We shall assume for the
purposes of this work that the formalism of quantum
mechanics is correct and is well supported by experimen-
tal evidence. We shall therefore focus on the interpreta-
tional part of the theory and, in particular, on the
Copenhagen interpretation.

Despite an extensive literature that refers to, discusses,
and criticizes the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum
mechanics, nowhere does there seem to be any concise
statement that defines the full Copenhagen interpretation.
We require a definition of this interpretation for the dis-
cussion that follows, and so we have attempted to provide
a definitive statement by summarizing the extensive dis-
cussions by Jammer (1966) and Audi (1973) in a few sen-
tences, identifying what we consider to be the key con-
cepts. We have been able to identify five principal ele-
ments.

(C-1) The uncertainty principle of Heisenberg (1927):
this includes wave-particle duality, the role of canonically
conjugate variables, and the impossibility of simultane-
ously measuring pairs of such variables to arbitrary accu-
racy.

(C-2) The statistical interpretation of Born (1926b):
this includes the meaning of the state vector (see Sec.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 4 = RMP 58 page 650 =====

650 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

IIA) given by the probability law (P=WW*) and the
predictivity of the formalism only for the average
behavior of a group of similar events.”

(C-3) The complementarity concept of Bohr (1928):
this includes the “wholeness” of the microscopic system
and macroscopic measurement apparatus, the comple-
mentary nature of wave-particle duality, and the charac-
ter of the uncertainty principle as an intrinsic property of
nature rather than a peculiarity of the measurement pro-
cess.

(C-4) Identification of the state vector with “knowledge
of the system” by Heisenberg:® this includes the identifi-
cation itself and the use of this concept to explain the col-
lapse of the state vector’ (see Sec. II.C) and to eliminate
simple nonlocality problems (see Sec. II.D).

(C-5) The positivism of Heisenberg:* this includes de-
clining to discuss “meaning” or “reality” and focusing in-

5Some authors (Ballentine, 1970) extend the statistical interpre-
tation further by asserting that the formalism of quantum
mechanics is applicable only to groups of similar events and
should not be applied to isolated events. In our opinion this ex-
treme view is unwarranted as long as it is appreciated that the
predictivity of the quantum-mechanical formalism is severely
limited in its application to isolated events. We note that the
discovery of an important particle in the development of parti-
cle physics, the .~ baryon, was accomplished with the observa-
tion of a single isolated quantum event.

6The “our knowledge” element of the Copenhagen interpreta-
tion was not explicitly stated in the early interpretational papers
of Bohr and Heisenberg. It apparently played an important role
in the general discussion that followed Einstein’s criticism of
quantum mechanics at the 5th Solvay Conference in 1927 (Jam-
mer, 1966). It was also clearly articulated in the later writings
of Heisenberg (1958): “The laws of nature which we formulate
mathematically in quantum theory deal no longer with the par-
ticles themselves but with our knowledge of the elementary par-
ticles. ... The conception of objective reality ... evaporated
into the ... mathematics that represents no longer the behavior
of elementary particles but rather our knowledge of this
behavior” (italics by author). See also Hartle (1969) and Peierls
(1979) for discussions of the ‘our knowledge” interpretation of
the state vector.

7Heisenberg states “the act of recording, on the other hand,
which leads to the reduction of the state, is not a physical, but
rather, so to say, a mathematical process. With the sudden
change of our knowledge also the mathematical presentation of
our knowledge undergoes of course a sudden change.” [As
translated by Jammer (1974) from a letter to Renninger dated
February 2, 1960.] .

8Heisenberg (1927) states “... it is possible to ask whether
there is still concealed behind the statistical universe of percep-
tion a ‘true’ universe in which the law of causality [=determin-
ism] would be valid. But such speculations seem to us to be
without value and meaningless, for physics must confine itself
to the description of the relationships between perceptions.”

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

terpretive discussions exclusively on observables.?

These five elements comprise, for the purposes of the
present discussion,'° the Copenhagen interpretation.

Two distinct functions are performed by the
Copenhagen interpretation (or, for that matter, by any
physical interpretation of a mathematical formalism).
First, as many authors have emphasized, the interpreta-
tion must provide a connection between the mathematics
of the formalism and the physical world. This connection
makes it possible to test the formalism by confronting its
predictions with experimental results. Without some in-
terpretation of the symbols of the formalism in terms that
can be related to experimental observables, the formalism
remains as abstract mathematics without .a physical con-
text. It is perhaps in this sense that Bohr maintained
(Popper, 1967) that the Copenhagen interpretation had
been “proven by experiment.”

However, there is another function of the interpretation
that is sometimes overlooked. This function relates to the
question of how the theory deals with unobserved objects
(Reichenbach, 1944). While participating in a colloquium
at Cambridge, von Weizsaecker (1971) denied that the
Copenhagen interpretation asserted “What cannot be ob-
served does not exist.” He suggested instead that it fol-
lows the principle “What is observed certainly exists;
about what is not observed we are still free to make suit-
able assumptions. We use that freedom to avoid para-
doxes.” This principle does not, of course, uniquely de-
fine the Copenhagen Interpretation, but it does give an
important criterion for developing a consistent interpreta-
tion of a formalism. The interpretation must not only re-
late the formalism to physical observables. It must also
define the domain of applicability of the formalism and
must interpret the nonobservables in such a way as to
avoid paradoxes and contradictions.

It may seem surprising that the interpretation of a
physical theory can perform the function of avoiding
“paradoxes,” i.e., internal contradictions and conflicts
with other established theories. It is therefore useful to

°The strict positivism of (C-5) is the most “detachable” ele-
ment of the Copenhagen interpretation. It was later softened by
many of the proponents of the Copenhagen interpretation, in-
cluding Heisenberg (1960). For example, consider the statement
by Feynman et al. (1965): “Just because we cannot measure po-
sition and momentum precisely does not a priori mean that we
cannot talk about them. It only means that we need not talk
about them. The situation in the sciences is this. A concept or
an idea which cannot be measured or cannot be referred directly
to experiment may or may not be useful. It need not exist in a
theory.”

10To our list of Copenhagen interpretation elements some
might add Bohr’s correspondence principle, the reduction of
quantum-mechanical predictions to those of classical mechanics
in the limit of large principle quantum numbers. In our opinion
this is a useful property of the quantum-mechanical formalism
rather than an aspect of its interpretation.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 5 = RMP 58 page 651 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 651

consider some examples. Newton’s second law, F=ma,

is of no physical significance until the symbol F is identi-
fied as a vector representing force, a as a vector represent-
ing acceleration, and m-as a scalar representing mass.
Furthermore, while F and a can have any (real) magni-
tude and direction, the formalism is interpreted as mean-
ingful only when m>0. This is because zero and nega-
tive masses lead to unphysical (or paradoxical) results,
e.g., infinite acceleration or acceleration in a direction op-
posite that of the force vector.

As another example, consider the Lorentz transforma-
tions. of special relativity for the case v>c. Until fairly
recently, physicists had always applied to this case inter-
pretation (A): “The transformations with v>c produce
unphysical imaginary values for the transformed variables
and are therefore meaningless.” But recently an alterna-
tive has been suggested by Feinberg (1967,1978) as inter-
pretation (B): “The transformations in the v >c domain
describe a new kind of particle called the tachyon, which
has the characteristic of imaginary mass, which always
travels at velocity v>c, and which approaches the v =c
limit asymptotically from above when it is given addition-
al kinetic energy.”

While the tachyons of interpretation (B) are by no
means an established physical phenomenon, this example
illustrates how a change in interpretation can alter the
meaning of.a formalism, can extend the range of its appli-
cation, and can deal with “paradoxical” or unphysical re-
sults,” e.g., v>c and imaginary mass. A study of the de-
bate over interpretation in the early history of quantum
mechanics (Jammer, 1966) will show a similar process at
work in early attempts to interpret the quantum-
mechanical formalism. It is this process that produced
the Copenhagen interpretation. ‘

In the present context it should be clear that elements
(C-1) and (C-2) fulfill the function of relating the formal-
ism to experiment, while elements (C-3) through (C-5)
perform the function of avoiding paradoxes, and particu-
larly those associated with the collapse of the state vector
and with nonlocality (see Secs. II.C and II.D). Moreover,
it is only elements (C-1) and (C-2) that are employed by
working physicists in using quantum mechanics. Indeed
(C-1) and (C-2) are represented in many quantum-
mechanics textbooks as “the Copenhagen interpretation.”
Elements (C-3) through (C-5) are held in reserve and usu-
ally employed only in pedagogical and philosophical dis-
cussions. Thus Bohr’s contention that the Copenhagen
interpretation has been “proven by experiment” is perhaps
correct as it applies to elements (C-1) and (C-2), but not as
it applies to (C-3) through (C-5). Moreover, (C-4) has, in
effect, been tested by experiment (see Sec. II.D) and found
wanting, in that it has failed to neutralize the manifest
nonlocality exhibited by carefully designed Bell inequality
experiments.

In the remainder of this section. we shall list the inter-
pretational problems presented by the quantum-
mechanical formalism and examine these problems from
the point of view of the Copenhagen interpretation as de-
fined above.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

A. Identity: What is the state vector?

In the formalism of quantum mechanics the possible
states of a system are described by a state vector (SV), a
function (usually complex) that depends‘ on position,
momentum, time, energy, spin, and isospin variables, etc.
The SV (which will be represented as |S) in the notation
of Dirac) is the most general form of the quantum-
mechanical wave function VW. The central problem of the
interpretation of the quantum-mechanical formalism is to
explain the physical significance of the SV. This we shall.
call the problem of identity.

The early semiclassical interpretations of de Broglie
(1926,1927a,1927b) and of Schrédinger (1927c) attempted
to make the obvious and straightforward analogy between
the matter waves of quantum mechanics and the classical
waves of Maxwellian electrodynamics. This approach as-
serts that the state vector of an electron, for example, is
the quantum-mechanical equivalent of the electric field of
an electromagnetic wave. Thus the SV of an electron
would be considered to start at the point of emission and
to travel physically through space as a wave. It would ex-
hibit the properties of a particle only when (and if) it in-
teracted with a scatterer or an absorber.

This apparently simple interpretation was found to lead
to many conceptual problems. In particular, severe prob-
lems were found with the intrinsic nonlocality of such an
interpretation (see Sec. II.D). Heisenberg recognized these
problems and argued strongly and successfully against the
semiclassical interpretation.!! He devised (C-4) and (C-5)
specifically to avoid any association of nonlocal implica-
tions with the formalism. ;

The Copenhagen interpretation approaches the problem
of identity through elements (C-2) and (C-4). The statisti-
cal interpretation and the probability law of (C-2) give
limited meaning to the SV by representing it as the vehi-
cle for describing the probabilities of various possible out-
comes in a quantum event. This provides the needed con-
nection between quantum-mechanical calculations and ex-
perimental observations. Element (C-2) is, however,
vague on the question of whether there is some unique SV
that describes the present and evolving state of the system
and on the question of whether the SV has a physical lo-
cation in space, as the semiclassical interpretation would

~ imply.

Element (C-4) is a more radical departure from the
semiclassical interpretation in its description of the SV.
According to (C-4) the SV is not analogous to the electric
field of a classical light wave or indeed to any other
directly observable entity. Rather it is a mathematical
representation of “our knowledge of the system” (see foot-

'Schrédinger’s visit to Copenhagen in the summer of 1926
and his discussions with Heisenberg and Bohr over his semiclas-
sical interpretation represented a crucial test in the development
of the Copenhagen interpretation. See Jammer (1974), pp. 56
and 57 and Wheeler and Zurek (1983), pp. 50 and 51.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 6 = RMP 58 page 652 =====

652 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

note 6) or more properly, that knowledge which is ob-
tained by an ideal observer in an optimum experiment, the
latter qualification covering the possibility that the actual
experiment performed may be less: than optimum due to
noise, insensitivity, or other instrumental problems. The
SV is approachable only through the results of a physical
measurement. The observations from measurements, in
an average and statistical way, determine the values of the
absolute square of components of the SV. When a mea-
surement is performed, our knowledge of the system
changes, and therefore the SV also changes. It instantane-
ously changes all of its components, even those which
describe the quantum state in regions of space quite dis-
tant from the site of the measurement.

The instantaneous “propagation” of this change gives
the appearance of action at a distance, but it is accommo-
dated by (C-4) by associating it with a change in
knowledge. According to (C-4), when the SV describing
the state of a particle (perhaps an electron) has a nonzero
value at some position in space at some particular time,
this does not mean that the SV is physically present at
that point, but only that our knowledge (or lack of
knowledge) of the system allows the particle the possibility
of being present at that point at that instant. Therefore,
in (C-4) the wave function that the Schrédinger equation
or its relativistic equivalent provides as a solution is not a
physical entity, but rather an encoded mathematical mes-
sage describing our knowledge of a physical entity.

The identification of the SV in this way raises a num-
ber of questions about the phrases “our knowledge” and
“the system.” This type of language begs the questions
“Whose knowledge?” and “What is meant by ‘the sys-
tem’?” The notion that the solution of a simple second-
order differential equation (particularly, an equation that
is only an operator relationship between mass, momen-
tum, and energy) is somehow a mathematical representa-
tion of “knowledge” is a very curious and provocative
one. The concept of knowledge implies an observer who
is the recipient of that knowledge, and because the results
of a given experiment often contain information about the
state of the system only in a very indirect and highly en-
coded way, that knowledge may be accessible only to a
conscious and intelligent observer. Therefore the observer
implicit in the Copenhagen interpretation has degrees of
freedom that are not any explicit part of the quantum-
mechanical formalism and that are not characteristics re-
quired of the observers used, for example, in the interpre-
tation of special relativity.

Furthermore, the concept of knowledge implies stored
information, i.e., a memory to store the knowledge, a time
sequence before and after the creation of the memory in
the mind of the observer, and a flow of information
representing a time-dependent change in knowledge.
Thus the Copenhagen interpretation implicitly associates
with quantum events a time directionality that, while ap-
propriate to macroscopic observers, is quite alien to and
inconsistent with the even-handedness with which micro-
physics deals with the flow of time. Somehow the ther-
modynamic irreversibility of the macroscopic observer is

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

intruding into the description of a fully reversible micro-
scopic process.

Moreover, the assertion that knowledge is changed by
measurement is not free of ambiguity. Measurements
performed on any real physical system invariably contain
an element of noise, which partially obscures the
knowledge obtained from the measurement. (C-4) makes
no provision for such noise, but treats all measurements
in the same way, even when the actual signal-to-noise ra-
tio would be such as to preclude any real gain in
knowledge from the measurement. The “measurement”
that changes the “knowledge” is not the real measurement
actually performed, but an ideal measurement from which
optimum information is assumed to have been extracted.
Furthermore, the measurement event is implicitly given a
special status, which distinguishes it from otherwise iden-
tical interaction events, presumably because the measure-
ment interaction effects the knowledge of the observer,
while otherwise similar interactions do not.

The question of the uniqueness of the SV is not directly
addressed by (C-4). This leads to two possible ways of ap-
plying the (C-4) “knowledge” interpretation when more
than one observer makes observations (perhaps simultane-
ously) on the same quantum-mechanical system. These
are the following: (C-4a) There is one unique SV that de-
scribes the overall state of knowledge of the system, and
this SV is changed when any observer makes a measure-
ment of the state of the system; or (C-4b) there are several
nonunique SV’s for a given system, each describing the
knowledge of some particular observer of the system, and
the SV for one such observer is different and distinguish-
able from the SV for any other observer of the system. In
Sec. II.D we shall see that each of these alternatives has
its own problems.

The seemingly innocuous phrase “the system” has also
been found to provide semantic difficulties. Attempts to
formulate a quantum-mechanical version of general rela-
tivity and to employ the Copenhagen interpretation for its
interpretation have foundered in attempting to treat the
universe as a whole as a quantum-mechanical “system” in
the sense of (C-4). In such a system there are (presum-
ably) no external observers and no “knowledge of the sys-
tem” that can be changed by experiments external to the
system. Therefore (C-4) cannot be used for a SV describ-
ing the universe as a whole. This calls into question the.
whole concept.

Moreover, Wigner (1962) has demonstrated (see Sec.
IV.C and the Appendix) that severe conceptual problems
arise when (C-4) is applied to the SV of any system that
includes a conscious observer within it, particularly when
measurements on this system are performed by a second
conscious observer external to the system. This has led
him and others to conclude that the Copenhagen interpre-
tation implicitly must give a special role to consciousness
in the application of (C-4).

It is our conclusion from the above considerations that
the approach of (C-4) to the problem of identity is a rela-
tively superficial one. It has raised as many problems as
it has solved and has led its practitioners into very deep


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 7 = RMP 58 page 653 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 653

philosophical waters. We suspect that the broad accep-
tance of the Copenhagen interpretation’s identification of
the state vector with knowledge is attributable more to the
lack of a satisfactory alternative than to its compelling
logic.

B. Complexity: Why is the state vector a complex
quantity?

One of the serious objections to Schrédinger’s (1927c)
early semiclassical interpretation of the SV, as recounted
by Jammer (1974), is that the SV is a complex quantity.
Complex functions are also found in classical pliysics, but
are invariably interpreted either (1) as an indication that
the solution is unphysical, as in the case of the Lorentz
transformations with v>c, or (2) as a shorthand way of
dealing with two independent and equally valid solutions
of the equations, one real and one imaginary, as in the
case of complex electrical impedance. In the latter case
the complex algebra is essentially a mathematical device
for avoiding trigonometry, and the physical variables of
interest are ultimately extracted as the real (or imaginary)
part of the complex variables. Never in classical physics
is the full complex function “swallowed whole” as it is in
quantum mechanics. This is the problem of complexity.

Born’s (1926b) probability law (P= *) is the basis of
the statistical interpretation that is embodied in (C-2).
Together with (C-4) it provides a way of dealing with the
problem of complexity. The SV is not directly observable
and is not a real physical entity, and therefore its complex
character is irrelevant. All physical observables depend
on the absolute squares of the components of the SV,
which are always real. (C-4) interprets the SV as an en-
coded mathematical representation of “knowledge” re-
moved from the domain of physical reality and thus
makes its complex character more acceptable.

However, this solution of the problem raises some ques-
tions of its own. Why is the probability equal to the abso-
lute square of SV elements, rather than to the absolute
value, or to the real part [as Born (1926a) first suggested],
or to the square of the real part, or some other similar
quantity? Why, moreover, is this mathematical represen-
tation of “our knowledge of the system” characterized by
complex quantities that are very remote from our
knowledge? In particular, who does the SV involve an
overall complex phase that can never, by any conceivable
experiment, become a part of “our knowledge’?

Some insight into these questions can be gained from
the observation that the time-reversal operator of Wigner
(1950) is the operation of complex conjugation, i.e., re-
versing the sign of the imaginary part or the complex
phase of the SV elements. Thus the complex character of
the SV is a manifestation of its time structure. The real
part of the SV is time-reversal even, and the imaginary
part is time-reversal odd. Moreover, a reversal of the
complex phase of the SV reverses its time sense and the
signs of its energy and frequency observables. Thus (C-2),
Born’s probability law, implicitly tells us that the proba-
bility of a particular observation is obtained by taking the

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

product of a component of the SV with its time reverse.
However, the Copenhagen interpretation provides us with
no insight into why this should be the case. Why should
probability be compounded of “knowledge” and the time
reverse of knowledge (“information loss”)?

C. Collapse: How and why does the state vector
abruptly change?

The SV of a system before a measurement is performed
is very different from the SV immediately after the mea-
surement, even when the measurement is not the final
state of the system but rather one of a series of sequential
measurements or operations, e.g., transmission through a
polarizing filter or Stern-Gerlach apparatus. Wigner
(1962), following von Neumann (1932), has pointed out
that there are two distinctly different types of changes
that the SV undergoes: Type (1) changes the SV smoothly
and continuously with time as the system evolves; Type
(2) changes the SV abruptly and discontinuously with
time in accordance with the laws of probability when (and
only when) a measurement is made on the system. He
further observed that from the point of view of classical
physics these changes seem to be inverted: one would ex-
pect classically that the laws of probability and uncertain-
ty would assert themselves in the time evolution of a wave
but not in the act of measurement.

A change in the SV of type (2) described above is con-
ventionally referred to as the “collapse of the state vec-
tor,” and we shall use this terminology.!? It is an aspect
of the formalism of quantum mechanics (von Neumann,
1932) rather than its interpretation, and it is the source of
many of the most severe interpretational problems. As
will be discussed in Sec. IV, Gedankenexperimente have
been devised to demonstrate that, for example, the col-
lapse can be precipitated by the absence of an interaction
with experimental apparatus (Sec. IV.A), but on the other
hand, that the SV must remain uncollapsed after a photon
has interacted with a pair of slits on the way to an experi-
ment that may determine through which slit the photon
has passed (Sec. IV.B).

Element (C-4) deals with the problem of collapse by
identifying the SV with “our knowledge of the system,”
so that measurements which alter such knowledge will
produce an abrupt change of type (2), described above, in
the SV as a direct consequence of this change in
knowledge. Since the SV is not physically present at the
locations in space where it has a nonzero value, an abrupt
change in these values does not lead to any problems with

!2In this paper we shall employ the term “collapse of the state
vector.” Other authors sometimes use the terms “reduction” in
place of “collapse” and/or “wave packet” or “wave function” in
place of “state vector” with the same meaning. Bohr
(1935a,1935b) employs the term “rupture of description.” von
Neumann (1932) describes the phenomenon mathematically
with his projection postulate.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 8 = RMP 58 page 654 =====

654 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

propagation times or speed-of-light delays in information
transfer. On the other hand, Schrédinger’s (1927c) inter-
pretation of the SV as a real semiclassical wave physically
present in space has severe intrinsic problems with SV
collapse.

However, the (C-4) account of collapse is not without
its own problems. Wigner (1962) has pointed out (see Sec.
IV.C) the conceptual difficulties implicit in the
Copenhagen description of collapse when the SV describes
a system containing an intelligent observer. Wigner and
others have suggested that the process of collapse should
involve a special role for consciousness (Wigner, 1962),
for permanent recording of experimental results
(Schrédinger, 1935) or for entry of the system into the
domain of thermodynamic irreversibility (Heisenberg,
1960). In fact, most of the efforts to revise or replace the
Copenhagen interpretation have focused on the problem
of collapse, which remains the most puzzling and coun-
terintuitive aspect of the interpretation of quantum
mechanics.

D. Nonlocality: How are correlations of separated
parts of the state vector arranged?

The problem of nonlocality is closely related to that of
the collapse of the SV. The problem in a simple form was
first raised by Einstein (1928) at the 5th Solvay Confer-
ence. Later it was presented in a more subtle form as one
of the criticisms of quantum mechanics by Einstein, Po-
dolsky, and Rosen (1935). Einstein (1949) stated the
problem as follows: “But on one point we should, in my
opinion, absolutely hold fast: the real factual situation of
system S is independent of what is done with system S>,
which is spatially separated from the former.” Since
these words were written the thrust of the nonlocality
problem has been sharpened considerably through
theoretical and experimental investigations, but the issue
remains essentially the same.

For the purposes of the present discussion we shall dis-
tinguish between two kinds of nonlocality. Nonlocality of
the first kind arises from the interpretation of the SV as a
physical wave. When the SV collapses the change impli-
cit in the collapse occurs at all positions in space
described by the SV at the same time. A physical wave
undergoing such a change would seem to require faster-
than-light propagation of information. Indeed, even the
phrase “at the same time” is only meaningful relativisti-
cally in a particular inertial reference frame. It was this
kind of problem that was the basis of Einstein’s (1928)
original objections to quantum mechanics. Similar nonlo-
cality problems brought about the rejection of
Schrédinger’s semiclassical interpretation (see footnote
11).

(C-4) was constructed to avoid difficulties with nonlo-
calities of the first kind by denying the physical reality of
the SV and identifying it instead with “our knowledge of
the system.” Therefore, when a measurement is made
showing that a photon is located at point A (and not at B
or C), our knowledge of the photon’s location abruptly

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

changes and the magnitude of the SV’s value must sud-
denly drop to zero at B and C, although no spatial propa-
gation, according to (C-4), is associated with that abrupt
change.

(C-4) works well in this context. Its effectiveness may,
however, reflect the naive statement of the nonlocality
problem, which seems to require attribution of physical
reality to the SV. The intrinsic nonlocality of the
quantum-mechanical. formalism runs deeper than this.
This becomes clear when more complicated situations are
considered which involve separated measurements of
parts of a correlated system. In that situation, definitions
of the SV become irrelevant because real measurements
are involved. This leads to a nonlocality of the second
kind, which is associated with the enforcement of correla-
tions in spatially separated measurements.

This kind of nonlocality is demonstrated by the
Freedman-Clauser experiment (1972) illustrated by Fig.
l(a). In this figure, calcium atoms undergo a
0+—>1--+0* atomic cascade and provide a pair of pho-
tons, assumed to be emitted back-to-back, which are in a
relative L=O angular-momentum. state. Because of
angular-momentum conservation these photons are re-
quired to have identical helicities or linear combination of
helicities, i.e., they must be in identical states of circular
or linear polarization. For this reason the SV of the two-
photon system permits the photons to be in any polariza-
tion state, provided only that both are in the same state.
Experimentally this means that if the photons are
transmitted through perfect polarizing filters . before
detection, they must be transmitted with 100% probabili-
ty if the polarizations of the filters select matching states
and 0% if the filters select orthogonal states, no matter
what orientation or polarization selectivity the filters have.

The Freedman-Clauser (FC) experiment employs linear
polarizing filters and measures the coincident transmis-
sion yield of the two photon detectors when the principal
axes of the two filters are set at angles 04, and 0,, which
are varied independently. Quantum mechanics predicts
that the experimentally observed yield will depend only on
the relative angle 0,..=0,—Og between the two principal
axes, and further that for ideal filters the yield will have
the normalized angular dependence 7

R(O,¢)) = COS*(Ore1) « (1)

Note that this is just the expression for the Malus law,
which gives the transmission probability of a single pho-
ton (or a beam of unpolarized light) through two crossed
linear polarizers with an angle 0,., between their principle
axes. Thus the coincidence rate predicted when there is
one polarizing filter in arm A and one in arm B of the ex-
periment [Fig. 1(a)] is the same as if the photon in arm A
went direct and unfiltered to its detector while the photon
in arm B went through both polarizing filters in succes-
sion before reaching its detector [Fig. 1(b)]. Fhe coin-
cidence rate is also the same as if one of the photons, on
encountering its polarizer, reached across with “spooky
action at a distance” and placed the other photon in the
same State.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 9 = RMP 58 page 655 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 655

The FC experiment (1972) was the first definitive ex-
perimental test of the Bell inequality (1964,1966), which
for local theories with CFD places limits on the strength
of changes in the polarization correlation function when
the polarimeters differ in alignment by an increasing
amount. A detailed discussion of the Bell inequality is
beyond the scope of the present review, and we refer the
reader to the original papers of Bell (1964,1966), the re-
view by Clauser and Shimony (1978), Herbert (1975),
d’Espagnat (1979), and Mermin (1981,1985). The actual
FC experiment used nonideal filters and consequently had
a rather more complicated expression for the correlation
function than that given in Eq. (1). The measured func-
tion was found to be in excellent agreement with the
quantum-mechanical prediction and to show a 60 viola-

Tiny
ANH

R (@)

{o} 30 60 90 {20 ISO {80
Bre (deg )

(d)

FIG. 1. (a) Schematic representation of the Freedman-Clauser
(FC) experiment (1972). Polarization-correlated photons are
emitted from source S, pass through rotated polarizing filters,
and are detected by quantum-sensitive photomultiplier tubes A
and B. (b) The “Malus” modification of the FC experiment, in
which the photon in arm A passes through no filters while the
photon in arm B passes through two filters. (c) The “Furry”
modification of the FC experiment, in which both photons are
placed in a definite but random polarization state on leaving the
source S through the use of auxiliary filters rotated through
random angle g. (d) Coincidence-rate angular dependence
R(6,) in the above three experiments, with “Malus” corre-
sponding to (a) and (b) and “Furry” corresponding to (c).

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

tion of the limit imposed by the Bell inequality. A more
recent series of similar experiments by Aspect ef al.
(1982a,1982b) has demonstrated consistency with quan-
tum mechanics and a 460 violation of the Bell inequality.
These results indicate, assuming CFD, that the predic-
tions of all local theories (see Sec. I) are inconsistent with
experimental observation.

To illustrate that nonlocality of the second kind is ex-
hibited by the FC result, let us consider the local modifi-
cation of quantum mechanics. Furry (1936a,1936b) sug-
gested this modification as a way of clarifying the content
of the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (1935) criticism of quan-
tum mechanics. Furry suggested that quantum mechan-
ics would become a local theory if, when two parts of the
system (like the two photons in the FC experiment)
separate and become isolated from the possibility of
speed-of-light contact, the SV describing them immediate-
ly collapses into a definite but random state. In the FC
case the SV would collapse into a definite but random
state of linear polarization shared by the two oppositely
directed photons. This modified version of quantum
mechanics would be a local theory because the Furry con-
dition would satisfy the definition of locality given in Sec.
I. The correlated state of the two photons would only be
the result of “memory” of the correlation that had existed
before they became séparated. The Furry modification
has no effect on many of the predictions of conventional °
quantum mechanics. However, does it significantly
modify the predictions for the FC experiment that are
predicted by quantum mechanics and observed in the ex-
periment? Also, do the Furry predictions obey Bell’s in-
equality? The answers to both questions are yes.

We cannot readily modify quantum mechanics so that
it becomes local in this way. We can, however, simulate
the Furry modification within the FC experiment by plac-
ing near the source an additional pair of aligned linear po-
larizing filters, which are rapidly and randomly changed.
By this mechanism each pair of photons emerging from
the source will be placed in definite and identical but
sequentially random: states of linear polarization as the
photons are transmitted through these filters near the
source. This arrangement is illustrated in Fig. 1(c).

The quantum-mechanical prediction for this case can
easily be obtained by calculating the predicted rate of
two-photon detection for a particular orientation angle p
of the randomizing filters and then averaging over all
possible values of g. The result of this calculation is

Ry (ce) = F[1+2 cos*(Oye1)] « (2)

Figure 1(d) compares the functions R(6,.;) (labeled
“Malus”) and R,(6,.) (labeled “Furry”). The angular
dependence of R,(6,.) is weaker than that of R(0,.)). In
particular, R,(6,)) has a maximum value of 3,4
minimum value of +, and cannot go to zero for any value
of 6,1. The Ry(6,:) correlation satisfies Bell’s inequality
but is inconsistent with the FC results and with quantum
mechanics.

Thus the SV of the photons cannot be described as in a


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 10 = RMP 58 page 656 =====

656 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

definite but random state. Rather, the SV must contain
components that describe the photons as being in all pos-
sible states of polarization. Only when at least one of the
two photons is detected is the SV allowed to collapse into
a definite state of polarization, which must be the same
for both photons. Until the detection(s) takes place, the
polarizations of the photons must remain in states that
are connected but not specified, in a way that is incon-
sistent with locality. It is this connectedness that is ad-
dressed by the Bell inequality and that cannot be ex-
plained away by the “our knowledge” definition of the
SV. It is this which we have called nonlocality of the
second kind. .

The Furry modification of quantum mechanics is only
one example of a local theory. Other local theories can
give a variety of predictions, including transmissions of
100% when @=O0° and 0% when @=90°, but none can
reproduce fully the FC result or the quantum-mechanical
prediction. Bell’s theorem demonstrates that no realistic
local theory, no matter how cleverly contrived, can repro-
duce the experimental result of the FC experiment.

One might be tempted to think that the connectedness
between the two measurements of the FC experiment, i.e.,
their nonlocal correlation, might be exploited for nonlocal
communication to transmit messages - instantaneously
from one arm of the experiment to the other. Perhaps,
for example, one observer could telegraph a message in
Morse code by rotating his polarimeter. It has been
demonstrated (Eberhard, 1977,1978; Ghirardi and Weber,
1979; Ghirardi et al., 1980; Mittelstaedt, 1983) that no
such observer-to-observer communication is possible,
essentially because the quantum-mechanical operator cor-
responding to any measurement done on the right photon
commutes with the operator for any measurement on the
left photon. The nonlocal character of the connectedness
is a subtle one, which permits the instantaneous enforce-
ment of correlations across spacelike separations but does
not permit signaling. See Sec. IV.E for further discussion
of this point.

As previously mentioned in Sec. ILA, the (C-4)
“knowledge” interpretation of the SV may be applied in
two different ways.

(C-4a) There is a unique SV that describes the overall
state of knowledge of the quantum-mechanical system
and that changes when any observer changes that state of
knowledge by making a measurement of the state of the
system.

(C-4b) For each possible observer there is a nonunique
SV that describes his knowledge of the system and that
changes only when his knowledge of the system changes.

Application of these variants of the “knowledge” inter-
pretation to the FC experiment allows us to demonstrate
that alternative (C-4a) above, which may appear to be the
more reasonable of the two, leads to a relativity and/or
causality paradox.

As a Gedankenexperiment consider a “stretched” ver-
sion of the Freedman-Clauser experiment in which the
two arms of the apparatus are lengthened to very large
distances. Let us also assume the use of 100% efficient

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

linear polarimeters of the type used.by the Aspect group,
that split the incident beam into two orthogonal polariza-
tion states, so that a given photon is always detected by
one or the other of a pair of photomultiplier detectors
sensing the two orthogonal states, i.e., linear polarization
states parallel and perpendicular to the principal axis of
the polarimeter.

We assume that a previous arrangement has been made
with an assistant at the light source to direct a pair of
correlated photons to the two measurement sites, with the
photons leaving the source apparatus at a well-defined
time 7. The left photon travels to the location of the left
observer, who sets his polarimeter angle 6, and makes a
measurement that we shall call M,. Similarly, the right
photon travels to the location of the right observer, who
sets his polarimeter to another angle 0, and makes mea-
surement M,. Each observer always knows in advance
when a photon will arrive and always obtains a definite
result from each polarization measurement. Let us con-
sider the SV collapse event that occurs as a result of one
or the other of these measurements, under assumption
(C-4a) that there is some universal SV which is a repre-
sentation of the overall knowledge of the system.

We choose to describe the experiment as it occurs in
some inertial reference frame F, in which the measure-
ment event M, occurs earlier in the time sequence than
does event M,. Accordingly (C-4a) tells us that event M,
alters the SV describing the entire system because that
measurement alters “our knowledge of the system.” The
formalism of quantum mechanics requires that the SV
collapse to a state that is consistent with the result mea-
surement M,, and from (C-4a) this collapse is triggered
by a local event occurring at the location and time of M,.
Later, when the other photon reaches the right polarime-
ter and measurement M) is made, the system is already in
a definite quantum-mechanical state, determined by the
result of M,. Therefore, measurement M, produces no
further SV collapse because the knowledge gained is
redundant with that already obtained by M,.

On the other hand, relativity tells us that since the two
detection events are separated by a spacelike interval, ei-
ther detection event can be made to precede the other in
time sequence by an appropriate choice of reference
frames. Therefore, suppose that we describe the same ex-
periment from some second reference frame F, in which
measurement event M, occurs after M, in the time se-
quence. Now (C-4a) tells us that event M, alters the SV
describing the entire system. The SV collapses to a state
that is consistent with the results of measurement M),
and this collapse is a local event occurring at the location
and time of M,. When the other photon reaches the left
polarimeter and measurement M, is made, the system is
already in a definite quantum-mechanical state, deter-
mined by the result of M,. Therefore, measurement M,
produces no further SV collapse because the knowledge
gained is redundant with that already obtained by M).

Clearly, these two histories of the collapse of the
overall SV are mutually exclusive and contradictory.
Moreover, they conflict with the principle of relativistic


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 11 = RMP 58 page 657 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 657

invariance, because the collapse event is not a
phenomenon that is independent of the reference frame in
which it is viewed. Thus relativity is inconsistent with
(C-4a).

One might try to avoid this conflict with relativity by
making the ad hoc assumption that one of these descrip-
tions (say that describing M, as producing the SV col-
lapse) is the correct one independent of the reference
frame. This assumption becomes troublesome because it
favors one measurement and one observer over the other
for no apparent reason. But it does reduce the level of
conflict with relativity. However, it has another problem.
In the reference frame F, it permits a cause, the collapse
event at M,, to occur after its effect, the arrival of the
other photon at M, in a definite quantum-mechanical
state.

Thus (C4-a) leads to conflicts at the interpretational
level with either special relativity or the principle of
causality. There has been some recognition of this dilem-
ma among the founders of quantum mechanics. For ex-
ample, Dirac (Hiley, 1981) said the following with refer-
ence to this problem: “It is against the spirit of relativity,
but it is the best we can do... . We cannot be content
with such a theory.”

We should emphasize that the contradictions discussed
above do not apply to (C-4b), which uses a different SV
for each observer. In any case, these contradictions do
not have consequences at the observational level because
state vector collapse is not an observable event. Collapse
is a construct perceived in the formalism (von Neumann,
1932), a pseudoevent that is asserted by the Copenhagen
interpretation to occur when the state of knowledge
changes. It is only when we require that the Copenhagen
interpretation give an account of the collapse of some
unique overall state vector and require that this account
be interpretationally consistent with other established
laws of physics that we reveal an interpretational paradox.
The paradox is not a new one. It is the Einstein-
Podolsky-Rosen paradox, but it is restated here in the
language of the Copenhagen interpretation itself.

If (C-4a) is to be rejected because it leads to interpreta-
tional paradoxes, is (C-4b) an acceptable alternative? In
our opinion (C-4b) is acceptable in the sense that it suc-
cessfully dodges nonlocality problems of the second kind.
But it does this ostrich fashion, retreating behind a
solipsistic blindfold of local knowledge and positivism.
The most serious criticism of (C4-b), in the view of the
author, is that the account of the SV given by (C-4b) bears
little resemblance to the SV most physicists think they are
calculating (Weisskopf, 1980) when they perform
quantum-mechanical calculations implicitly involving SV
collapse. Nonlocality is dealt with by (C-4b) in an airtight
but counterintuitive way.

E. Completeness: Do canonically conjugate variables
have simultaneous reality?

Another problem raised in the Einstein-Podolsky-
Rosen (EPR) paper (1935) is that of the correspondence
between the quantum-mechanical formalism and reality

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

for the case of pairs of canonically conjugate variables,
ie., pairs of variables like position and momentum having
quantum-mechanical operators that. do not commute.
The EPR paper argues that “every element of the physi-
cal reality must have a counterpart in the physical
theory” and points out that, in terms of the quantum-
mechanical formalism, “when the operators correspond-
ing to physical quantities do not commute, they cannot
have simultaneous reality.” Thus (goes the argument)
there is a lack of correspondence between quantum
mechanics and reality, and the former must be “incom-
plete.” It is this part of the EPR criticism of quantum
mechanics which received the most subsequent discussion
in the literature. It became the central focus of the debate
over quantum mechanics and its interpretation for a long
period thereafter.

Yet, from one point of view, the quantum-mechanical
formalism contains the solution to the completeness prob-
lem. The uncollapsed SV of the formalism that describes
a particle (say an electron) is clearly complete in the sense
that it contains components or projections which can lo-
calize either of a pair of conjugate variables. For the case
of position and momentum, the SV contains projections
which localize the position of an electron to arbitrary pre-
cision and other components which will similarly localize
its momentum. When a measurement is made that col-
lapses the SV, only one of these two kinds of components
can be projected out by the collapse, so the simultaneous
measurement of both variables can only be made to the
precision specified by the uncertainty principle. Thus the
variables do have “simultaneous reality” in the uncol-
lapsed SV but can never have simultaneous reality in a
single component of the SV which results from the col-
lapse. This should satisfy the EPR criterion of complete-
ness.

The above resolution of the EPR completeness criti-
cism is, however, demolished by the Copenhagen interpre-
tation itself, since (C-4b) denies the objective reality of the
SV and associates it instead with the “knowledge” of an
observer. If the SV is not a physical entity, but rather an
ephemeral construction existing only as “knowledge”. in
the mind of one observer (as beauty in the eye of the be-
holder), then the “reality” of the conjugate variables be-
comes only a subjective one arising from the observer’s
lack of information, in support of the EPR criticism.

This leads us to the conclusion that there is indeed a
completeness problem associated with quantum mechan-
ics as the EPR paper (1935) asserted. It is not, as was
supposed, a problem with the quantum-mechanical for-
malism, however, but with the interpretation of the for-
malism. An interpretation that gives physical reality to
the SV of the formalism provides a de facto solution to
the problem of completeness.

F. Predictivity: Why can we not predict the outcome
of an individual quantum event?

The third criticism of quantum mechanics by the EPR
paper (1935) was that a proper theory should enable the


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 12 = RMP 58 page 658 =====

658 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

user to, “without in any way disturbing the system, ...
predict with certainty ... the value of a physical quanti-
ty.” Quantum mechanics, on the other hand, provides the
user with a way of predicting only average behavior of an
ensemble of quantum events but not the behavior of a
particular particle in a particular event.'? This is the
problem of predictivity.

Born’s statistical interpretation as. embodied in (C-2)
meets the problem of predictivity head on. It asserts that
there is an intrinsic randomness in the microcosm which
precludes the kind of predictivity we have come to expect
in classical physics, and that the quantum-mechanical
formalism provides the only predictivity possible, the pre-
diction of average behavior and of probabilities as ob-
tained from Born’s probability law (P= VW*).

While the element of the Copenhagen interpretation
may not satisfy the desires of some physicists for a com-
pletely predictive and deterministic theory, it must be
considered as at least an adequate solution to the problem
unless a better alternative can be found. Perhaps the
greatest weakness of (C-2) in this context is not that it as-
serts an intrinsic randomness but that it supplies no in-
sight into the nature or origin of this randomness. If
“God plays dice,” as Einstein (1932) has declined to be-
lieve, one would at least like a glimpse of the gaming ap-
paratus that is in use.

G. The Copenhagen interpretation
and the uncertainty principle

Element (C-1), the uncertainty principle of Heisenberg
(1927), is one of the most important aspects of the
Copenhagen interpretation. It is also an interpretational
aspect of quantum mechanics that has received a large
amount of attention in the literature. It has been the sub-
ject of books and symposia, and it was the focus of the
famous Bohr-Einstein debate.

Yet it is the aspect of quantum-mechanical interpreta-
tion that has perhaps the best grounding in analogous
classical phenomena and that is easiest to understand
from the viewpoint of classical physics. Heisenberg’s un-
certainty relations are a direct consequence of the charac-
ter of the solutions of the Schrédinger equation and its
relativistic equivalents, solutions that are functions of
products of conjugate variables such as k-r and Et. In
fact, Heisenberg’s original derivation of the uncertainty
principle dealt directly with this property of the wave
equation solutions by showing that the Fourier transform

13The formalism of quantum mechanics can predict the out-
come of a single isolated quantum event in the unusual cir-
cumstance when one particular outcome of the event has a
predicted probability of 1.0 and all.other outcomes have predict-
ed probabilities of zero. An example is the measurement of a
particular variable after the system has been prepared in a
unique state of that variable, e.g., transmission of a photon
through successive aligned linear polarizers.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

of a localized Gaussian position wave function is a local-
ized Gaussian momentum-space wave function, with the
momentum width of the latter Gaussian proportional to
the reciprocal of the position width of the former Gauss-
ian. This property of Gaussian distributions under
Fourier transformations is well known. Perhaps more im-
portant, it has many analogs in classical physics.

As an example, consider the representations of fast
electrical pulses in the time and frequency domains. Such
a pulse can be represented either in the time domain as a
set of voltages varying continuously as a function of time,
or in the frequency domain as a continuous set of Fourier
components, i.e., a set of voltages varying continuously as
a function of frequency. These representations of fast
electrical pulses have exactly the Bohr-Heisenberg com-
plementary relationship and exhibit their own “uncertain-
ty principle.” The localization of a fast pulse in the time
domain (by making it extremely short in duration) re-
quires a corresponding delocalization in the frequency
domain, since the Fourier frequency spectrum of such a
pulse must include a broader range of frequencies includ-
ing very high ones. Conversely, one can increase the lo-
calization of the pulse in the frequency domain by passing
the pulse through an electrical “bandpass filter,” which
eliminates the Fourier components that do not fall within.
the frequency “window” of the filter. The observable re-
sult of this frequency localization is a corresponding
broadening of the pulse in the time domain. Here then is
a purely classical phenomenon which exhibits an “uncer-
tainty principle.” This fast pulse uncertainty principle
can be observed directly on an oscilloscope screen in any
well-equipped electronics laboratory.

However (C-4b) asserts that the SV that is the carrier of
these canonically conjugate quantities is not a real wave.
Rather, according to (C-4b), the SV is a mathematical
representation of the knowledge of some observer. This
renders more questionable any association of the uncer-
tainty principle of quantum mechanics with similar phe-
nomena of classical physics. If it is not-a physical wave
but the observer’s knowledge that is being localized or
delocalized, one is less secure in associating that behavior
with classical analogs that show an “uncertainty princi-
ple” directly in the object itself.

iil. THE TRANSACTIONAL INTERPRETATION
OF QUANTUM MECHANICS

In the preceding section we applied the criteria of Sec. I
to the Copenhagen interpretation as it deals with the in-
terpretational problems of the quantum-mechanical for-
malism. This exercise has shown that several interpreta-
tional problems are handled only superficially by the
Copenhagen interpretation. The problem area is centered
on (C-4), the association of the state vector with subjective
knowledge of the system by an observer. In this section
we shall present the transactional interpretation of quan-
tum mechanics, an alternative to the Copenhagen inter-
pretation, which retains the interpretational links between
formalism and experiment but which replaces the subjec-


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 13 = RMP 58 page 659 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 659

tivity and the nonlocality evasions of (C-4) with an objec-
tive and explicitly nonlocal description of quantum pro-
cesses.

Our survey has illuminated several interpretational
problems intrinsic in the Copenhagen interpretation.
Based on this discussion, we can now define as goals a set
of characteristics desirable in a more “ideal” interpreta-
tion: (1) it should permit the operation of the microcosm
to be isolated from the macrocosm and particularly from
intrinsically complicated macroscopic concepts, e.g.,
knowledge, intelligent observers, consciousness, irreversi-
bility, and measurement; (2) it should account for the
nonlocal correlations of the Bell inequality tests in a way
consistent with relativity and causality; (3) it should ac-
count for the collapse of the state vector without subjec-
tive “collapse triggers” (e.g., consciousness); and (4) it
should give added meaning to the state vector and provide
insights into the problems of complexity, completeness,
and predictivity.

With these goals in mind, we now present the transac-
tional interpretation of quantum mechanics. We shall
find that this interpretation, which is objective and expli-
citly nonlocal, satisfies each of these goals. The interpre-
tation provides a description of the state vector as an ac-
tual wave physically present in real space and provides a
mechanism for the occurrence of nonlocal correlation ef-
fects through the use of advanced waves. The collapse of
the state vector of the transactional interpretation is the
formation of a transaction, which occurs by an exchange
of retarded and advanced waves. The transaction model
provides.a way of clearly visualizing and developing intui-
tion about the quantum phenomena that have remained
mysterious and counterintuitive for half a century.

A. Advanced waves and Wheeler-Feynman
absorber theory

The basic element of the transactional interpretation is
an emitter-absorber transaction through the exchange of
advanced and retarded waves, as first described by
Wheeler and Feynman (1945,1949; see also Feynman,
1967b). Advanced waves are solutions of the electromag-
netic wave equation and other similar wave equations that
contain only the second time derivative. Advanced waves
have characteristic eigenvalues of negative energy and fre-
quency, and they propagate in the negative time direction.
Figure 2 illustrates the propagation of advanced and re-
tarded waves. The advanced-wave solutions of the elec-
tromagnetic wave equation are usually ignored as unphys-
ical because they seem to have no counterpart in nature.

The classical electrodynamics described by Wheeler and
Feynman (WF) was intended to deal with the problem of
the self-energy of the electron in an innovative way. As-
suming the time-symmetric formalism of Dirac (1938)
combined with the ad hoc assumption that an electron
does not interact with its own field, Wheeler and Feyn-
man were able to formally eliminate the self-energy term
from their electrodynamics. But along with self-energy
these assumptions also removed the well-observed energy

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

=p gikx 2mitt
Fz=Foe oe

FIG. 2. Minkowski diagram showing the propagation of ad-
vanced and retarded waves from an emission locus at
(x,t)=(0,0).

loss and recoil processes (i.e., radiative damping) arising
from the interaction of the radiating electron with its own
radiation field.

Wheeler and Feynman accounted for these well-known
damping effects by allowing the emitting electron to in-
teract with the advanced waves sent by other electrons,
which would ultimately, at some future time, absorb the
retarded radiation. Thus the energy loss and recoil of the
emitter were accounted for without having it interact with
its own field. Moreover, the calculation succeeded in
describing electrodynamic interactions in a completely
time-symmetric way. To account for the observed asym-
metric dominance of retarded radiation, Wheeler and
Feynman invoked the action of external boundary condi-
tions arising from thermodynamics. Thus, they avoided
resorting to the ad hoc “‘causality” condition usually need-
ed to eliminate the advanced-radiation solutions.

Regrettably, the WF paper (1945), while mathematical-
ly ‘correct, proved to be an invalid way of dealing with
self-energy. As Feynman (1949) later pointed out, the
self-interaction is a necessary part of electrodynamics,
needed, for example, to account for the Lamb shift. It is
relevant that the WF ad hoc assumption of noninteraction
is not needed in their recoil calculations because, as later
authors have pointed out (Pegg, 1975; Cramer, 1980), the
electron cannot undergo energy loss or recoil, which are
intrinsically time-unsymmetric processes, as a result of in-
teracting with its own (or any other) time-symmetric
field.

When the offending assumption of noninteraction is re-
moved from the WF formalism, what remains is a classi-
cal self-consistent and time-symmetric electrodynamics
that cannot be used to deal with the problem of self-
energy. Furthermore, this WF formalism is not particu-
larly useful as an alternative method of calculating the


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 14 = RMP 58 page 660 =====

660 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

electrodynamics of radiative processes because the
mathematical description of radiation explicitly involves
the interaction of the emitter with the entire future
universe. Thus a simple integration over local coordinates
in the conventional formalism is replaced by an integral
over all future space-time in the light cone of the emitter
in the WF formalism.

However, this “difficulty” can be viewed as asset. The
WF mathematics can be used to investigate the properties
of cosmological models describing the future state of the
universe by relating such models to radiative processes.
In essence this approach provides a way of linking the
cosmological arrow of time (the time direction in which
the universe expands) to the electromagnetic arrow of
time (the complete dominance of retarded over advanced
radiation in all radiative processes). There is a consider-
able literature in this field, which the author has reviewed
in a previous publication (Cramer, 1983).

Although the original WF work dealt exclusively with
classical electrodynamics, later authors (Hoyle and Narli-
kar, 1969,1971; Davies, 1970,1971,1972) have developed
equivalent time-symmetric quantum-electrodynamic
(QED) versions of the same approach. The predictions of
these QED theories have been shown to be completely
consistent with those predictions of conventional QED
which can be compared with experimental observation
(see footnote 4). It has also been shown (Davies, 1972)
that despite this similarity of prediction, the time-
symmetric QED provides a qualitatively different
description of electromagnetic processes. It is essentially
an action-at-a-distance theory with no extra degrees of
freedom for the radiation fields and no second quantiza-
tion. The field in effect becomes a mathematical conveni-
ence for describing action-at-a-distance processes.

There may also be another advantage to the WF ap-
proach to electrodynamics. Dirac’s (1938) work on time-
symmetry electrodynamics, on which the WF theory is
based, was introduced as a way of dealing with singulari-
ties in the radiation field in the conventional theory near a
radiating electron. Konopinski (1980), in his Lorentz co-
variant treatment of the radiating electron, has pointed
out that this time-symmetric “Lorentz-Dirac” approach
eliminates such singularities and therefore amounts to a
self-renormalizing theory. This formulation may have
applications in eliminating related singularities in QCD
and in quantum field theory in curved space-time.

B. The emitter-absorber transaction model

There is a second application of the Wheeler-Feynman
approach, which was introduced by the author in a previ-
ous publication (Cramer, 1980). The WF description of
radiative processes can be applied to the microscopic ex-
change of a single quantum of energy, momentum, etc.,
between a present emitter and a future absorber through
the medium of a transaction, a Wheeler-Feynman ex-
change of advanced and retarded waves. Figure 3 illus-
trates a simplified form (one space dimension and one
time dimension) of the transaction process.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

FIG. 3. A plane-wave transaction between emitter and absorber
through the exchange of advanced and retarded waves (see the
text). Waves from emitter are indicated by solid lines and waves
from absorber by dashed lines. Relative phase of waves is indi-
cated schematically by sinusoids inscribed on lightlike world
lines. Double timelike world lines for emitter and absorber indi-
cate higher energy state. Wave amplitudes have the value
W+U* =2Re(W) at emitter and absorber loci and are therefore
real.

The emitter, e.g., a vibrating electron or atom in an ex-
cited state, attempts to radiate by producing a field. This
field, according to the Wheeler-Feynman description, is a
time-symmetric combination of a retarded field which
propagates into the future and an advanced field which
propagates into the past. For simplicity let us first con-
sider the net field to consist of a retarded plane wave of
the form F,~exp[i(k-r—ot)] for t>7T, (T, is the in-
stant of emission) and an advanced plane wave of the
form G,~exp[—i(k-r—ot)] for t<7T,. Since the re-
tarded wave F, has eigenvalues characteristic of positive
energy fio and momentum #k, while the advanced wave
G, has eigenvalues of negative energy —#w and momen-
tum —7k, the net loss of energy and momentum by the
emitter in producing the pair of waves (F,+G;,) is zero,
as might be expected from the time symmetry of the com-
posite wave.

Let us for the moment set aside consideration of the
advanced wave G, and follow the retarded wave F,. This
wave will propagate in the positive time direction (t > 7)
until it encounters an absorber. The process of absorp-
tion, as is well known, can be described as a movement of
the absorbing electron (or atom) in response to the in-
cident retarded field F, in such a way as to gain energy,
recoil, and to produce a new retarded field F,=—F,,
which exactly cancels the incident field F,. Thus the re-
tarded wave from the absorber exactly cancels the retard-


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 15 = RMP 58 page 661 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 661

ed wave from the emitter, and there is no net field present
after the instant of absorption T, i.e.,

Foot =(F,+F2)=0 for t>T, . (3)

The Dirac-Wheeler-Feynman assumption of time-
symmetric radiative processes requires that the absorber
only produce the canceling retarded field F, for t>T, if
it also produces an advanced field G, for t<7T . This
field G, will propagate in the negative time direction (i.e.,
into the past) from the instant of absorption T>, traveling
back down the track of the incident wave F, to the in-
stant of emission T,. There it interacts with the radiating
electron (or atom) at the instant of emission, causing it to
recoil and to lose energy. Furthermore, the advanced
wave G», continues to times such that t> 7 , where it is
superimposed on the advanced wave from the emitter G,
to produce a net advanced field:

Gra =G1+G, . (4)

The condition that F,—=—F, at the absorber for t <7,
brings with it a similar condition for the advanced fields,
so that G,=—G, at the emitter and for t<7T , and
Gnhet =0 for t<T,. The result of the cancellation of the
preemission and postabsorbtion waves is that only in the
interval T, <t <T> is there a nonzero field:

Pret =F} +G,. (5)

From this we see that even under the Dirac assumption of
time-symmetric radiation of retarded and advanced waves
the advanced field G, cannot produce “advanced effects”
such as backward-in-time signaling and the emission of
negative-energy radiation because it has been nullified by
the absorption process.

The above, in a simplified one-dimensional form that
will be expanded below, is the emitter-absorber transac-
tion. The emitter can be considered to produce an “offer”
wave F, which travels to the absorber. The absorber then
returns a “confirmation” wave G, to the emitter, and the
transaction is completed with a “handshake” across
space-time. To an observer who has not viewed the pro-
cess in the pseudotime sequence'* employed in the above
discussion, there is no radiation before T; or after T,, but
a wave has traveled from emitter to absorber. This wave
can be reinterpreted as a purely retarded wave because its
advanced component G2, a negative-energy wave travel-
ing backwards in time from absorber to emitter, can be re-
interpreted as a positive-energy wave traveling forward in

'4The account of an emitter-absorber transaction presented
here employs the semantic device of describing a process ex-
tending across a lightlike or timelike interval of space-time as if
it occurred in a time sequence external to the process. The
reader is reminded that this is only a pedagogical convention for
the purposes of description. The process is atemporal and the
only observables come from the superposition of all “‘steps’” to
form the final transaction. (See also the Appendix on this
point.)

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

time from emitter to absorber, in one-to-one correspon-
dence with the usual description.!*

Thus the WF time-symmetric description of electro-
dynamic processes is completely equivalent in all observ-
ables to the conventional electrodynamic description.
Time-symmetric electrodynamics, in both classical and
quantum-mechanical forms, leads to predictions identical
with those of conventional electrodynamics. For this
reason it is not possible to devise experimental tests that
will distinguish between time-symmetric and conventional
electrodynamics. The intrinsic untestability of time-
symmetric electrodynamics reveals that it should be con-
sidered an alternative interpretation of the electrodynamic
formalism rather than an alternative formulation.

It is this alternative interpretation of the electrodynam-
ic formalism which we have generalized (Cramer, 1980)
to include all quantum-mechanical processes and which
leads to the alternative interpretation of quantum
mechanics presented here. The fundamental element of
this interpretation is the emitter-absorber transaction, a
simple plane-wave version of which was described above.
The transaction is a “handshake” between the emitter and
absorber participants of a quantum event, occurring
through the medium of an exchange of advanced and re-
tarded waves. The description just presented is basically
one dimensional (in space) and is not fully applicable to
the case of three space dimensions with quantization
boundary conditions. Before discussing the applications
of the interpretation, we shall generalize the transaction
model from one to three spatial dimensions.

There are two problems with the one-dimensional
plane-wave description employed above: (1) it does not
explicitly deal with the attenuation and modification of
wave amplitude due to propagation through space or to
passage through attenuating media; and (2) it does not ex-
plicitly include the quantum conditions on the transfer of
energy, angular momentum, charge, etc., which are an
important aspect of all quantum-mechanical processes.
In the case of quantum electrodynamics, the photon ener-
gy quantization condition E =fm places an extra con-
straint on the electromagnetic wave equation, requiring
that an integer number of quanta be exchanged between
emitter and absorber despite the action of intervening
space, filters, mirrors, slits, wave plates, etc., in reducing
or modifying the amplitudes of the advanced and retarded
waves exchanged between emitter and absorber.

For this reason, the two-step pseudotime sequence (see

15The statement that an advanced wave may be reinterpreted
as a retarded wave (or vice versa), which is propagating in the
opposite direction with sign-reversed energy and frequency, is
actually a classical oversimplification of the quantum-
mechanical formalism. Advanced waves have the characteristic
time-dependent phase exp(iwt), while retarded waves have
phase exp(—iat). These functions are orthogonal and in princi-
ple distinguishable. Reinterpretation is permissible because it is
consistent with the observed transfer of energy, momentum,
etc., and because the time phases are no observed.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 16 = RMP 58 page 662 =====

662 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

footnote 14) of Fig. 3 and the associated plane-wave
description must be replaced by a multistep sequence al-
lowing for spherical and more complicated wave forms
and proceeding until all relevant conditions are met. In
particular, we must view the transaction as occurring in
pseudosequential form, which includes an “offer,” a “con-
firmation,” and a completed transaction.

Figure 4 illustrates this more general form of transac-
tion. In the first pseudosequential step (1) the emitter, lo-
cated at (R;,7,), sends out “offer” waves F,(r,t>T})
and G,(r,t <7) (which can be of spherical or more com-
plicated forms) in all possible spatial directions. In step
(2) the absorber located at (R», 7), receives the attenuated
retarded-wave front F,(R,,7>) and is stimulated to pro-
duce a response wave G,(r,t), which has an initial ampli-
tude proportional to the local amplitude of the incident
wave that stimulated it:

x
EIN
wf "offer" wave
NaS
ones (a)
a an
an ‘ \
waa
Sie
\N
SS
vss > “confirmation
Naren |b wave
YVoNONOS.
sos (b)
A
E transaction ~ | t ,
~~w

(c)

FIG. 4. Schematic representation of general transaction model.
(a) Emitter E sends out “offer wave” V in both time directions.
(b) Absorber A responds to incident wave by sending ‘“‘confirma-
tion wave” echo W* back to emitter. Echo amplitude at emitter
locus has value VW* = P (probability of transaction). (c) Process
continues to completion with satisfaction of quantum boundary
conditions at emitter and absorber loci, in analogy with a stand-
ing wave between terminating walls.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

Gy(r,t) « Fy(Ry,T>)go(r,t) « (6)

Here g,(r,t) is a unit advanced wave, i.e., the advanced
equivalent of the retarded wave F\(r,t) in that
22(4r,t —T,)=[Filr,t—T, )]*.

In step (3) the advanced wave G, propagates back to
the locus of emission, at which it has an amplitude pro-
portional to its initial amplitude F,(R»,7 ) multiplied by
the attenuation it has received in propagating from the
absorption locus to the emission locus. The advanced
wave G), travels across the same spatial interval and
through the same attenuating media encountered by F;,
but in reverse. For this reason, the unit amplitude wave
2(R,,7,) arriving back at the emitter has an amplitude
proportional to Ff (R, 7), the time reverse of the retard-
ed wave that reached the absorber. Thus at the emission
locus the advanced-wave amplitude G, is

Gy(R1,T1) «Fy (Ro, 72) Fj (Ry, T2)= | F,(Ro,T2) |? .
(7)

This means that the advanced “confirmation” or “echo”
wave that the emitter receives from the absorber as the
first exchange step of the incipient transaction is just the
absolute square of the initial “offer” wave, as evaluated at
the absorber locus. The significance of this YW* echo
and its relation to Born’s probability law will be discussed
in Sec. IT.H.

In step (4) the emitter responds to the “echo” and the
cycle repeats until the response of the emitter and ab-
sorber is sufficient to satisfy all of the quantum boundary
conditions (E =hv and various conservation laws), at
which point the transaction is completed. Even if many
such echoes return to the emitter from potential ab-
sorbers, the quantum boundary conditions can usually
permit only a single transaction to form. The transaction
formation can be considered as analogous to the establish-
ment of a four-vector standing wave across the interval
bounded by (R,,7;) and (R2,7>), the two loci forming
terminating “walls” outside which the wave amplitude
must make no contribution to the process. Note that at
the completion of step (4) the local fields in the vicinity of
both the emitter and the absorber are real (as opposed to
complex) because they are a superposition of an advanced
and a retarded wave of equal amplitude and the same
phase. The significance of this for the problem of com-
plexity is discussed in Sec. II.F.

To summarize the transaction model, the emitter pro-
duces a retarded offer wave (OW), which travels to the
absorber, causing the absorber to produce an advanced
confirmation wave (CW), which travels back down the
track of the OW to the emitter. There the amplitude is
CW, <OW3, where CW, is evaluated at the emitter locus
and OW, is evaluated at the. absorber locus. The ex-
change then cyclically repeats until the net exchange of
energy and other conserved quantities satisfies the quan-
tum boundary conditions of the system, at which point
the transaction is complete. Of course the pseudotime se-


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 17 = RMP 58 page 663 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 663

quence (see footnote 14) of the above discussion is only a
semantic convenience for describing the onset of the
transaction. An observer, as in the simpler plane-wave
case, would perceive only the completed transaction,
which he could reinterpret as the passage of a single re-
tarded (i.e., positive-energy) photon traveling at the speed
of light from emitter to absorber (see footnote 15).

An equally valid interpretation of the process is that a
four-vector standing wave has been established between
emitter and absorber. As a familiar three-space standing
wave is a superposition of waves traveling to the right and
left, this four-vector standing wave is the superposition of
advanced and retarded components. It has been establish-
ed between the terminating boundaries of the emitter,
which blocks passage of the advanced wave further down
the time stream, and the absorber, which blocks passage
of the retarded wave further up the time stream. This
space-time standing wave is the transaction we shall use
as a basis for the discussion that follows.

It should be emphasized that the transactional interpre-
tation is an interpretation of the existing formalism of
quantum mechanics rather than a new theory or revision
of the quantum-mechanical formalism. As such, it makes
no predictions that differ from those of conventional
quantum mechanics. It is not testable except on the basis
of its value in dealing with interpretational problems. We
have found it to be more useful as a guide for deciding
which quantum-mechanical calculations to perform than
as an aid in the performance of such calculations. As will
be demonstrated in Sec. IV, the main utility of the trans-
actional interpretation is a conceptual model which pro-
vides the user with a way of clearly visualizing complicat-
ed quantum processes and of quickly analyzing seemingly
“paradoxical” situations (e.g., Wheeler’s delayed-choice
experiments, Herbert’s paradox, the Hanbury-Brown-
Twiss effect, and the Albert-Aharonov-D’Amato predic-
tion), which would otherwise require elaborate mathemat-
ical analysis. It is a way of thinking rather than a way of
calculating. It may have value as a pedagogical tool for
the teaching of quantum mechanics to students. It also
seems to have considerable value in the development of
intuitions and insights into quantum phenomena that up
to now have remained mysterious.

C. The transaction model and relativistic quantum
mechanics

The transaction model discussed in the preceding sec-
tion deals with the emission and absorption of photons
arising from electromagnetic interactions. The model
uses advanced- and retarded-wave functions that are solu-
tions of the electromagnetic wave equation:

(Fie PV2p=ROW/dt? . (8)

Note that this differential equation is second order in the
time variable. As was shown in a previous publication
(Cramer, 1980), the same transaction model can be ap-
plied to the emission and absorption of massive particles,

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

either neutral or electrically charged, e.g., electrons.!®
The only requirement for this application is that the wave
equations describing the particles of interest, like the elec-
tromagnetic wave equation, have both advanced and re-
tarded solutions.

This requirement would seem to present a problem.
The wave equation that has been the focus of most of the
discussion surrounding the interpretation of quantum
mechanics is the Schrédinger equation,

—(#/°MVp=ihdp/at , (9)

where m is the mass of the particle described by the equa-
tion. This equation is first order in the time variable and
for this reason does not have advanced solutions. There-
fore, if ~=F (r,t) is a solution of the Schrédinger equa-
tion, then 4*=G(r,t) is not a solution, nor is a linear
combination of F and G as used in the transactional
model.

We must bear in mind, however, that the Schrédinger
equation is ultimately not physically correct because it is
not relativistically invariant.'’ It should properly be con-
sidered as the limiting case, in a restricted nonrelativistic
domain, of some more physically reasonable relativistical-

16A transaction involving charged particles, particularly in the
presence of external electric and magnetic fields, must be more
carefully described. To obtain the path of the advanced wave,
the operation of time reversal must be performed not only on
the charged-particle state vector but also on the external fields
that it “sees” as acting along its time-reversal path back to the
emitter. The time-reversal operation on such electric and mag-
netic fields must be applied to the proper Lorentz six-vector
describing the electromagnetic field.. This has the effect of re-
versing the signs of (real) magnetic fields while leaving the sign
of (real) electric fields unchanged. Since the particle momentum
also changes sign under time reversal, the Lorentz forces act in
the same way as on the “forward” particle, and the time-
reversed particle retraces the path of the former. Clearly there
is nothing about the time-reversal properties of a magnetic field
that causes problems for the transactional model because any
system with a uniform external magnetic field can be
transformed into a Lorentz frame in which the external field is
purely electric.

'7The time-dependent Schrédinger equation is an operator
equation version of the nonrelativistic kinematics equation
p’/2m =E, where p is the momentum and E is the kinetic en-
ergy of a particle of mass m. The momentum operator is
(H/i)V, and the energy operator is (i%)0/0t, in that the indicat-
ed operations when performed on a quantum-mechanical wave
function, e.g., = Aoexp[i(k-r—at)], yield the unaltered wave
function y multiplied by its momentum eigenvalue (7%k) or ener-
gy eigenvalue (fim). If these operators are substituted in the
above kinematic equation, the Schrddinger equation results.
The equivalent expression for relativistic kinematics is
(pc)*+(mc?)?= W?, where W is the total mass energy. The
operator equation version of this expression is the Klein-Gordon
equation (Bjorken and Drell, 1964).


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 18 = RMP 58 page 664 =====

664 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

ly invariant wave equation, e.g., the Dirac equation or the
Klein-Gordon equation. These relativistic equations, like
the electromagnetic wave equation, have both advanced
and retarded solutions.!®

Considering the Schrodinger equation as a limiting
case, we can resolve the apparent problem created by its
lack of advanced solutions. When a suitable relativistic
wave equation is reduced to the Schrodinger equation by
taking a nonrelativistic limit (Bjorken and Drell, 1964),
the reduction procedure leads to two distinct equations,
the Schrédinger equation and another equation of the
form

—(#/2mM\Vp= —ihdw/at , (10)

which is the complex conjugate or time reverse of the
Schrodinger equation. This equation has only advanced
solutions. Equations (9) and (10) are equally valid nonre-
lativistic reductions of relativistic dynamics, but Eq. (10)
is usually dropped because it has negative-energy eigen-
values. From this it should be clear that F(r,t) and
G(r,t) (or # and #*) are equally valid solutions of the
dynamics which underlies the Schrodinger equation. It is
therefore valid to use advanced solutions in the transac-
tional model in the nonrelativistic limit as if they were
solutions of the Schrddinger equation.

We can also look at the need for relativistic invariance
in another way. The interpretational problem of locality
(see Sec. II.D), which the recent tests of Bell’s inequality
have brought into sharp focus, is essentially a relativistic
problem. If the velocity of light were infinite, the locality
problem would not exist: there would be no difference be-
tween local and nonlocal descriptions. The Schrodinger
equation can be considered as the limiting case of a rela-
tivistically invariant wave equation when the velocity of
light goes to infinity. Therefore it is not particularly
surprising that an explicitly nonlocal description such as
the transactional model may have intrinsic inconsistencies
with the Schrédinger equation and may require certain
properties of relativistically invariant wave equations.
This is a subtle link between relativity and quantum
mechanics which has not, perhaps, been previously appre-
ciated.

There is another implication of relativistic quantum
mechanics which should also be discussed here. In the
relativistic domain the uncertainty principle of Heisen-
berg (C-1) must be reconsidered because of the added re-
strictions of special relativity (Landau and Peierls, 1931;
Berestetskii et al. 1971). In particular, introduction of
the limiting velocity c imposes.a new uncertainty relation
on the precision with which momentum p can be mea-

18See, for example, Messiah (1961), p. 61, for a clear statement
of the widely held supposition that proper quantum-mechanical
wave equations should be first order with respect to time so as
to uniquely specify the state and the time evolution of the sys-
tem. See also the discussion of “pathology” of the Klein-
Gordon equation in this context on p. 65.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

sured: Ap=%/(cAt). This relation can be considered to
arise from the fact that the position localization Aq (as-
sumed to be small initially) cannot spread at a rate greater
than c. The distance cAt is therefore the maximum pos-
sible amount by which the position localization can be
broadened in a time interval At to permit a smaller locali-
zation of momentum. This places a limit on the precision
Ap with which momentum p can be measured in a time
interval At.

There is an analogous limitation of the determination
of position g, which arises from another characteristic of
relativistic quantum field theories. As mentioned above,
the solutions to the relativistically invariant wave equa-
tions for massive particles include advanced or negative-
frequency solutions. When a particle is localized to a suf-
ficiently small region of space, these negative-frequency
functions appear explicitly in the expansion of its position
wave packet. Landau and Peierls (1931) have suggested
that in order to avoid the inclusion of ‘“‘physically mean-
ingless” negative-frequency solutions it is reasonable to
confine position determinations to a domain that does not
include such processes. This corresponds to a limiting
position uncertainty to Aqg=7ic/W, where W is the total
mass-energy of the particle. This position uncertainty
limit for a particle of mass m with an initially small
momentum is just Ag=#/mc, the de Broglie wavelength
of the particle. ;

Berestetskii et al. (1971) justify this limit on position
localization in a related but slightly different way. They
interpret the negative-frequency or negative-energy com-
ponents of the wave function as indicating the onset of
particle-antiparticle production when the momentum be-
comes large enough to correspond to a free energy greater
than 2mc?. They argue that when this threshold is
reached in a measurement, for example, in determining
the position of the electron, “the formation of new parti-
cles in a way which cannot be detected by the process it-
self clearly renders meaningless the measurement of the
electron coordinates.” Thus the broadening in momen-
tum is cut off at this limit, leading to the fic /W limit on
the position localization.

Landau and Peierls (1931) have argued that these rela-
tivistic limits on determinations of position and momen-
tum irretrievably compromise the utility of these dynami-
cal variables for measurement in the sense of nonrelativis-
tic quantum mechanics. Neither the position nor the
momentum of a particle can, even in principle, be deter-
mined to arbitrary accuracy in a finite time interval, nor
can either be considered to have a particular value at a
particular time. This would seem, in effect, to invalidate
Born’s statistical interpretation of quantum mechanics
(C-2), in that the description of the state vector as a
mathematical representation of the probability of finding
a definite value of a particular observable as a result of a
measurement made at a given instant is untenable. How-
ever, Bohr and Rosenfeld (1933; see also Rosenfeld, 1955)
defused this problem by demonstrating that in the relativ-
istic formalism of quantum electrodynamics, in which the
field quantities are not represented by point functions but


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 19 = RMP 58 page 665 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 665

by functions of space-time regions, there is no discrepan-
cy between limits imposed by the relativistic uncertainty
principle and the physical possibilities of measurement.

To state it slightly differently, this is a nonproblem.
The relativistic limits on the precision with which dynam-
ic variables can be measured do indeed make these vari-
ables less directly relevant to the coordinates of relativis-
tic particles. However, this invalidates neither their use
nor their usefulness. In a related nonrelativistic case, the
angle of rotation 0 remains a valid and sometimes useful
dynamical variable, although its measurable value is ren-
dered completely uncertain by quantization of the conju-
gate angular-momentum variable. The specification of a
dynamical variable “at a given instant” as considered by
Landau and Peierls (1931) is neither needed nor desirable.
In the relativistic formalism it is integrals over space-time
regions rather than point values which lead to the predic-
tions of observables. In this context, the atemporal and
nonlocal character of the transactional interpretation, as
discussed below, provides a natural way of describing the
atemporal collapse of the state vector to some localized
value of a dynamic variable. In fact, the notion that the
state vector collapses to a particular value of a variable
“at a given instant” is inconsistent with the transactional
description. See Sec. IV.C for a discussion of this point.

Another problem that raises some concern about the
statistical interpretation of quantum mechanics in the rel-
ativistic domain is the observation that the solutions of
the field equations cannot always be used to construct a
relativistically invariant or positive definite probability
density (Bjorken and Drell, 1964). Thus, while differen-
tial field equations and their solutions remain an in-
dispensable feature of relativistic quantum field theory
(Bjorken and Drell, 1965), the problem of the identity of
these solutions (see Sec. I].A) is made more severe because
of the statistical interpretation, at least in its simplest
form, has proved inadequate. The state vector cannot be
identified as a simple carrier of probability in the relativ-
istic domain.

The naive statement of the statistical interpretation is
clearly insufficient in the relativistic domain, particularly
when applied to space-time regions where no measure-
ment is actually made. Furthermore, some of the formal
procedures of nonrelativistic quantum mechanics, e.g., the
integration of wave-function products over a large volume
of space at a fixed time, are manifestly inconsistent with
special relativity. However, the development of relativis-
tic quantum theory has resulted in a formalism with cal-
culational procedures that are appropriate to the relativis-
tic domain. A generalized form of the statistical interpre-
tation is implicit in these procedures for calculation of ob-
servables and matrix elements. It is therefore our view
that the statistical interpretation should be (and has been)
generalized for the relativistic domain rather than dis-
carded.

The scope of this paper is limited to the interpretation
of quantum mechanics in the low-velocity nonrelativistic
limit, the arena where almost all of the previous discus-
sion on the interpretation of quantum mechanics has been

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

focused. For this reason we shall not discuss further the
interpretation of relativistic quantum mechanics. Howev-
er, we are not aware of any new interpretational problems
that are added be a fully relativistic quantum field theory
beyond those associated with particle creation and space-
time delocalization, as just discussed. The transactional
interpretation of quantum mechanics presented in the
next section is based on solutions of relativistically invari-
ant differential field equations, is fully consistent with
special relativity, and seems to accommodate these addi-
tional features of a relativistic quantum theory in a very
natural way. We are therefore confident that the interpre-
tation presented here, perhaps with minor embellish-
ments, is appropriate for the interpretation of a fully rela-
tivistic theory of quantum mechanics.

D. The transactional interpretation

Now we are prepared to specify the premises of the
transactional interpretation. In doing this we shall use a
framework as similar as possible to the description of the
Copenhagen interpretation given in Sec. II. We shall
similarly use five principle.elements, which we enumerate
here.

(T-1) The uncertainty principle is as in (C-1). It is a
consequence of the fact that a transaction in going to
completion can project out and localize only one of a pair
of conjugate variables from the other wave. This will be
discussed further in Sec. III.H.

(T-2) The statistical interpretation is unchanged from
(C-2). It is a consequence of the fact that the “echo” re-
ceived by the emitter in initiating the transaction follows
the Born probability law P =W*. This will also be dis-
cussed further in Sec. III.H, where the character of ran-
domness in quantum mechanics is examined.

(T-3) All physical processes have equal status. The ob-
server, intelligent or otherwise, has no special status.
Measurement and measuring apparatus have no special
status, except that they happen to be processes that con-
nect to observers. The “wholeness” of (C-3) exists, but is
not related to any special character of measurements but
rather to the connection between emitter and absorber
through the transaction. The “complementary” concept
of (C-3) likewise exists, but like the uncertainty principle
is just a manifestation of the requirement that a given
transaction going to completion can project out only one
of a pair of conjugate variables.

(T-4) The fundamental quantum-mechanical interac-
tion is taken to be the transaction, as defined in the
preceding section. The state vector of the quantum-
mechanical formalism is a real physical wave with spatial
extent and is identical with the initial “offer wave” of the

' transaction. The particle (photon, electron, etc.) and the

collapsed state vector are identical with the completed
transaction. The transaction may involve a single emitter
and absorber or multiple emitters and absorbers, but is
only complete when appropriate quantum boundary con-
ditions are satisfied at all loci of emission and absorption.
Particles transferred have no separate identity indepen-


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 20 = RMP 58 page 666 =====

666 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

dent from the satisfaction of these boundary conditions.
The correspondence of the state vector with “knowledge
of the system” of (C-4) is a fortuitous but deceptive conse-
quence of the transaction, in that such knowledge must
follow and describe the transaction.

(T-5) A distinction is made between observable and in-
ferred quantities. The former are firm predictions of the
overall theory and may be subjected to experimental veri-
fication. The latter, particularly those that are complex
quantities, are not verifiable and are useful only for inter-
pretational and pedagogical purposes. It is assumed that
both kinds of quantities must obey conservation laws,
macroscopic causality conditions, relativistic invariance,
etc. Resorting to the positivism of (C-5) is unnecessary
and. undesirable.

In summary, the transactional interpretation adopts the
first two elements of the Copenhagen interpretation and is
also able to accommodate aspects of elements (C-3). It
drops the assertion of (C-4) that the solutions of a simple
second-order differential equation relating mass, energy,
and momentum are somehow related to “knowledge,” and
instead employs a usually neglected solution of that equa-
tion to construct the emitter-absorber transaction of (T-4).
The transactional interpretation drops the positivism of
(C-5) because the positivist curtain is no longer needed to
hide the nonlocal backstage machinery.

It should also be pointed out that the substitution of
element (T-4) for (C-4), in giving objective reality to the
state vector, colors all of the other elements of the inter-
pretation. Although the uncertainty principle (T-1) and
the statistical interpretation (T-2) are formally the same
as in the Copenhagen interpretation, their philosophical
implications, about which so much has been written from
the viewpoint of the Copenhagen interpretation, may be
rather different.

E. The transactional interpretation and the
quantum-mechanical formalism

Comparison of the formal notation used in quantum
wave mechanics with the description of the transaction
model as discussed in Sec. III.B shows an excellent
correspondence between the two. Once the transactional
interpretation is in firm conceptual grasp, description of
quantum processes can be perceived in the mathematical
procedures and notations used in the calculation of ob-
servables. In particular, the quantum-mechanical formal-
ism makes extensive use of the operation of complex con-
jugation. For simple systems this operation is equivalent
to the operation of time reversal (Wigner, 1950), which
transforms retarded waves into advanced waves (see foot-
note 16). Thus, Y* is the advanced confirmation wave
equivalent to WY which is the retarded offer wave. As
mentioned above, VWW* is the offer-confirmation wave
echo, which the emitter receives from a particular direc-

tion. Similarly,
f wvrdo (11a)

is the sum of all such OW-CW echoes from all possible

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

locations in space.
We consider other examples. A quantum-mechanical
“overlap integral” of the form

f Vivid (11b)

can be interpreted in the transaction model as represent-
ing an average over all space of the “echoes” that an emit-
ter sending out OW YW, receives from all possible ab-
sorbers sending back CW’s which confirm transactions in-
volving a final state described by Vj. Moreover, the cal-
culation of an expectation value of the variable x, which

is deduced from a given wave function V by the operator
X, so that XV=xW, has the form

(x)= f VEX dd . (11¢)

This can be viewed as an average over space of the possi-
ble values of x that the operator X projects from the com-
ponents of the OW which appear in the completed
transaction. This interpretational approach can also be
applied to other aspects of the quantum-mechanical for-
malism.

From one point of view; the transactional interpretation
is so apparent in the Schrédinger-Dirac form of the
quantum-mechanical formalism, which its combinations
of normal and time-reversed waves, that one might fairly
ask why this obvious interpretation of the formalism had
not been made previously. No one can, of course, explain
why something did not occur in the history of the
development of quantum physics, but several relevant ob-
servations can be made. (1) The Schrédinger equation,
which has been the focus of interpretational investigations
from the 1920s to the present, does not have advanced
solutions because it involves only the first time derivative
(as discussed above in Sec. ITI.C), and so the association
of * with advanced solutions of the wave equation is by
no means obvious. (2) After Heisenberg devised (C-4),
concern about the nonlocality of quantum mechanics was
effectively quenched for a long period, and considerations
of interpretational problems were directed elsewhere, so it
is only recently that concern about the nonlocality of the
formalism has reemerged because of the Bell inequality
test. (3) The relativistic wave equations that do have ad-
vanced as well as retarded solutions have been treated
with suspicion because they do not uniquely describe the
state of a given system (see footnote 18). Furthermore,
the “purpose” of the advanced solutions was thought to
have been found with the discrepancy of the antimatter
counterparts of “normal” fermions (e.g., positrons, an-
tiprotons, etc.). Therefore other “purposes” for the
advanced-wave solutions were not sought, and they were
not associated with the Y* of the formalism. The Appen-
dix discussed the few previous attempts to used advanced
waves in quantum-mechanical interpretation.

F. Identity and complexity in the
transactional interpretation

In dealing with the problem of identity, (T-2) gives the
state vector the same meaning as did (C-2), as the medium


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 21 = RMP 58 page 667 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 667

for describing the probability of various possible quantum
events. (T-4) deals more directly with the problem of
identity and deals with it in a way quite different from
that of (C-4). It asserts that the state vector is a real
physical wave generated by the emitter, and travels
through space to the final absorber as well as to many
other space-time loci and many other potential absorbers.
The state vector is the “offer wave’ that initiates the tran-
saction. Because of the quantum-mechanical boundary
conditions, the transaction is only completed between a
single emitter and absorber in a one-quantum effect. The
particle itself (photon, electron, etc.) is not identical with
the state vector but with the completed transaction, of
which the state vector is only the initial phase.

Schrédinger’s (see footnote 11) original attempt to in-
terpret the state vector in a way similar to this was unsuc-
cessful because of two problems: (1) it was found that
quantum-mechanical waves exhibit nonlocal or action-at-
a-distance behavior when they are interpreted as real
waves physically present in space, and (2) it was found
not to be possible to describe a particle as a “wave pack-
et” which remained in a tight group envelope as it pro-
pagated. The transactional interpretation deal with prob-
lem (1) directly because it is explicitly nonlocal, and more-
over the components of the SV which travel in directions
other than that of the eventual absorber do not have to
“disappear”; they are only virtual in the sense that they
transfer no energy or momentum and participate in no
transaction. Problem (2) is not a problem for the transac-
tional interpretation because it is the formation of the
transaction which localizes the energy and momentum
transfer. The SV itself is therefore not required to stay in
a tight packet in order to account for the particlelike
behavior of the quantum event.

Since the transactional interpretation considers the SV
to be physically present in space, it must deal directly
with the problem of complexity. However, the transac-
tion model is able to do this because at each point of the
completed transaction at which there is a physical interac-
tion, e.g., at the emitter and absorber loci, there is also a
superposition of an advanced and a retarded wave of
equal amplitude. Since V+ W*=2Re(W), the collapsed
SV becomes real, and there is no residual imaginary part
of the SV to require explanation. The reader is referred to
Sec. IV.D for a detailed example showing the real net am-
plitude from a transaction. In regions of space where
there was no interaction, the SV is permitted to be com-
plex, but these components are “virtual”? and noninterac-
tive since they produce no transfer of energy or momen-
tum. Thus the transactional interpretation has restored
algebraic reality to the description of the microcosm.

G. Collapse and nonlocality in the
transactional interpretation

In the transactional interpretation the collapse of the
state vector is interpreted as the completion of the trans-
action started by the OW and the CW exchanged between
emitter and.absorber. The emergence of the transaction

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

from the SV does not occur at some particular location in
space or at some particular instant of time, but rather
forms along the entire four-vector that connects the emis-
sion locus with the absorption locus (or loci in the case of
multiple correlated particles). The transaction employs
both retarded and advanced waves, which propagate,
respectively, along positive and negative lightlike (or time-
like) four-vectors. Since the sum of these four-vectors can
span spacelike and negative timelike and lightlike inter-
vals, the “influence” of the transaction in enforcing the
correlations of the quantum event is explicitly both non-
local and atemporal.

Figure 5 shows an example of such combinations of
four-vector for a two-photon transaction corresponding to
an event in the Freedman-Clauser experiment. Note that,
although all of the waves in the transaction lie along
lightlike world lines, the “influence” that enforces. the
correlations between the two polarization measurements
spans a spacelike interval and is therefore nonlocal. This
nonlocality is an explicit feature of the transactional inter-
pretation arising from the use of advanced waves.

Schrodinger (1935), in analyzing the EPR paradox,
concluded that at least part of the problem lies in the way
that time is used in quantum mechanics (in the context of
the Copenhagen interpretation). The Copenhagen inter-
pretation treats time in an essentially classical nonrela-
tivistic way, and as we have seen in Sec. III.E, this 1eads
to inconsistencies with relativity or causality in any non-
subjective Copenhagen description of collapse in, for ex-
ample, the Freedman-Clauser experiment. The root of
the inconsistencies lies in the implicit assumption of the
Copenhagen interpretation that the SV collapse occurs at

. Avsorber
el
Z (on

N
absorber~
*¥2 +

(D2)
7 (a) ~
Aio + Roe A20+Roy
D2 DI D2 Dl
Ro2 Alo A2d Ror
so so

(b) (c)

FIG. 5. (a) Minkowski diagram of Freedman-Clauser experi-
ment showing lightlike world lines of advanced and retarded
waves from emitter (solid line) and absorbers (dashed line), pro-
viding nonlocal enforcement of polarization correlations be-
tween absorption loci D; and D». (b) Four-vector sum of ad-
vanced and retarded waves connecting D,; to D2. (c) Four-
vector sum of advanced and retarded waves connecting D, to
Di.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 22 = RMP 58 page 668 =====

668 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

a particular instant at which a particular measurement is
made and “knowledge” is gained, that before this instant
the SV is in its full uncollapsed state, and that there can
be a well-defined “before” and “after” in the collapse
description. In the transactional interpretation the col-
lapse, i.e., the development of the transaction, is atem-
poral and thus avoids the contradictions and inconsisten-
cies implicit in any time-localized SV collapse.

Furthermore, the transactional description does not
need to invoke arbitrary collapse triggers, such as con-
sciousness, etc., because it is the absorber rather than the
observer which precipitates the collapse of the SV, and
this can occur atemporally and nonlocally across any sort
of interval between elements of the measuring apparatus.
This will be discussed further in the context of Gedank-
enexperimente in Sec. IV.

H. Completeness and predictivity in the
transactional interpretation

As was shown in Sec. II.E, the solution of the problem
of completeness posed in the EPR paper is implicit in the
formalism of quantum mechanics, provided the SV is in-
terpreted as a real physical quantity. Since the transac-
tional interpretation treats the SV as a real physical quan-
tity, quantum mechanics as interpreted with the transac-
tion model is a complete theory. In particular, the SV
brings to each potential absorber the full range of possible
outcomes, and all have “simultaneous reality” in the EPR
sense. The absorber interacts so as to cause one of these
outcomes to emerge in the transaction, so that the col-
lapsed SV manifests only one of these outcomes. The
quantum-mechanical formalism ensures that if one of a
pair of canonically conjugate quantities is localized in
such a transaction, the other quantity is correspondingly
delocalized, as required by the uncertainty principle.

The transactional interpretation also clarifies, but does
not solve, the problem of predictivity. As was discussed
in Sec. III.B, the beginning of a transaction can be viewed
as the emitter sending out a retarded “offer” wave in vari-
ous directions and receiving an “echo” back from the ab-
sorber in the form of an advanced confirmation wave,
which has an amplitude proportional to ¥* (where W is
the complex OW evaluated at the absorber locus). In the
usual circumstances there are a very large number of po-
tential future absorbers, and if all provide such echoes,
the emitter, at the instant of emission, has a large number
of possible transaction possibilities from which to choose.
In a single quantum event the boundary conditions will
permit only one event to occur.

Born’s probability law is therefore a statement that the
probability of occurrence of a ‘given transaction is propor-
tional to the magnitude of the echo corresponding to that
transaction which the emitter receives. This would seem
to be a very plausible assumption. The quantum event,
from this point of view, is a solution to a differential
equation (the appropriate wave equation) for which a de-
finite set of boundary conditions restrict the solutions but
do not uniquely specify the solution. In this situation, the

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

probability of a given solution is proportional to the “con-
nectedness” of the participants, as indicated by the size of
the echo that the absorber sends back to the emitter. The
emitter is presented with echoes from potential absorbers
which form a weighted list of possible transactions, from
which only one may be chosen. The future absorbers can
influence the past emission event only through the
strength of their echo entry on this list, but cannot influ-
ence which entry is actually chosen for the transaction.

We note that there are analogous classical situations in
which a system is specified by a set of differential equa-
tions with incompletely specified boundary conditions, for
example, in the fluid dynamics of turbulent flow. In-
terestingly enough, there has been significant recent pro-
gress in these fields through the application of new
mathematical techniques, such as the catastrophe theory,
the theory of strange attractors, etc. It seems possible
that similar techniques might some day be applied to the
statistical processes of quantum mechanics.

Therefore, while the transactional interpretation does
not alter the essentially statistical character of quantum
mechanics, it has provided a glimpse of the “dice” that
are at work in the statistical processes. The “dice” work
to ensure an outcome consistent with the quantum boun-
dary conditions of a transaction and are “loaded” in pro-
portion to the magnitude of the echo that an emitter re-
ceives from potential absorbers.

|. Relativity and causality in the
transactional interpretation

Several times we have mentioned the related constraints
of nonlocality, relativistic invariance, and causality. As
was previously mentioned, it would seem that the nonlo-
cality of the transaction as defined above would give
severe problems with both of the latter constraints by per-
mitting both simultaneity tests across spacelike intervals
and backward-in-time communication. However, this is
not the case, as we shall show here.

The emitter-absorber transaction, although it has the
effect of enforcing nonlocal correlations between separat-
ed parts of the system, cannot be used for nonlocal com-
munication between observers. There are no residual ad-
vanced effects when the transaction is complete, and the
reinterpretation of the advanced waves ensures that the
result is observationally the same as if only retarded
waves were present. Furthermore, as shown mathemati-
cally (Eberhard, 1977,1978; Ghirardi and Weber, 1979;
Ghirardi et al., 1980; Mittelstaedt, 1983), the nature of
the correlations enforced between the separated parts of a
FC experiment is such as to preclude the possibility of
nonlocal communication between observers.

Since the transaction is atemporal, forming along the
entire interval separating emission locus from absorption
locus “at once,” it makes no difference to the outcome or
the transactional description if separated experiments
occur “simultaneously” or in any time sequence. There is
likewise no issue of which of the separated measurements
occurs first and precipitates the SV collapse, since in the


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 23 = RMP 58 page 669 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 669

transactional interpretation both measurements partici-
pate equally and symmetrically in the formation of the
transaction. Furthermore, the paths across which the
correlation enforcing exchange takes place are lightlike
four-vectors and remain so under any Lorentz transfor-
mation. Therefore the outcome and the transactional
description of any correlation experiment is the same in-
dependent of the inertial reference frame from which it is
viewed, as it must be if quantum mechanics and relativity
are to be compatible theories.

The obvious “backwards-in-time” character of the
transaction model warrants careful consideration of
whether causality is preserved. In a sense, the transac-

‘tional interpretation tells us that absorber “causes” the
transaction that precedes it in time sequence, in violation
of cause before effect. To come to terms with this aspect
of the transactional interpretation it is necessary to con-
sider carefully the nature of causality and the physical
evidence that supports it. In a previous paper (Cramer,
1980) we have made the distinction between the strong
principle of causality, which asserts that a cause must al-
ways precede its effect in any reference frame, and the
weak principle of causality, which asserts the same thing,
but only as it applies to macroscopic observations and
observer-to-observer communication. There is no present
experimental evidence in support of any causal principle
stronger than the weak principle.

The transactional interpretation is completely con-
sistent with the weak principle of causality. As discussed
previously, the completion of the transaction removes all
interacting advanced fields except the one connecting

emitter with absorber, and the remaining advanced plus.
retarded superposition can be reinterpreted as purely re- -

tarded. Thus there are no “advanced effects,”® no evident
acausal behavior, even at the microscopic level. Disper-
sion relations, etc., are completely consistent with micro-
causality at it is conventionally interpreted.

Nature, in a very subtle way, may be engaging in
backwards-in-time handshaking. But the use of this
mechanism is not available to experimental investigators
even at the microscopic level. The completed transaction
erases all advanced effects, to that no advanced-wave sig-
naling is possible. The future can affect the past only
very indirectly, by offering possibilities for transactions.

J. The arrow of time in the transactional
interpretation

The formalism of quantum mechanics, at least in its re-
lativistically invariant formulation, is completely even-
handed in dealing with the “arrow” of time, the distinc-
tion between future and past time directions. Even the
apparently asymmetric action of an ideal macroscopic
measurement in “preparing” a system in a definite
quantum-mechanical state can be formally described in
the context of the probability interpretation in a com-
pletely time-symmetric way (Aharonov et al., 1964).

In the discussion of the Copenhagen interpretation in
Sec. II.C, the point was made that the description of col-

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

lapse in the Copenhagen interpretation is intrinsically un-
symmetric in time. The transaction model of Sec. III.B
gives the appearance of being more symmetrical, in that it
treats past emitter and future absorber as equal termina-
tors of the transaction that develops between them. How-
ever, the careful reader will perceive that there is a more
subtle time asymmetry in the transactional description of
the quantum event which is implicit in (T-2). There, the
probability of a quantum event with emission from
(R,,7,) to an absorber at (R»,7>) is assumed to be

Py = | P(Ro,T2) |? (12)
rather than
Py, =| (R171) |*, (13)

ie., in the transaction model the emitter is given a
privileged role because it is the echo received by the
emitter, rather than that received by the absorber, which
precipitates the transaction. Thus the past determines the
future (in a statistical way) rather than the future deter-
mining the past. ,

The assumption of Eq. (12) is consistent with the usual
formulation of quantum mechanics, the “post” formula-
tion, which employs this rule in the evaluation of event
probabilities. The alternative “prior” formulation, which
employs Eq. (13) to evaluate probabilities, is rarely used
but in the absence of violations of time-reversal invariance
must give the same result for an exact calculation
(DeVries et al., 1974).

This symmetry between the post and prior formulations
and the equivalent symmetry between post and prior ver-
sions of the transactional interpretation based on Eqs. (12)
and (13) might be taken as a sufficient evenhandedness in
the handling microreversibility, except for one problem.
Nature has exhibited a clear violation of time-reversal in-
variance at the microscopic level in the decay of the K?
meson. From experimental investigations of the CP-
violating decay modes of the Kf? system, it is inferred
that the time direction of the reaction Kf? +e+t—>t +7,
will be apparent in its cross section, i.e., the inverse reac-
tion will have a qualitatively different reduced cross sec-
tion from that of the forward reaction. It is not possible
to provide a fixed target of any of the particles participat-
ing in this reaction, and therefore it is not experimentally
feasible to observe directly either of these reaction modes.
Therefore this should be considered as a Gedankenexperi-
ment. Even so, it implies that the post and prior formal-
isms and interpretations are in principle distinguishable
and therefore not equivalent.

The work of Aharonov et al. (1964) mentioned above
showed that for ideal systems and measurements a plausi-
ble time-symmetric probability interpretation could be
formulated to replace the usual one of Born (C-2). How-
ever, they found that in order to use this rule in a way
that gave the same quantum-mechanical predictions as
those of the conventional probability law of Eq. (12), they
were forced to employ a time-asymmetric side condition
on its use. Belinfante (1975) expanded this analysis to in-
clude nonideal measurements and systems and found that


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 24 = RMP 58 page 670 =====

670 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

the importance of time asymmetries was even more ap-
parent in the more general case. This body of work leads
to conclusions similar to those stated above concerning
the existence and inevitability of a quantum-mechanical
arrow of time.

This microscopic quantum-mechanical arrow of time
must be accounted for. Fortunately, a justification of
such a time asymmetry for the case of WF electrodynam-
ics has already been presented by the author in a previous
publication (Cramer, 1983). A boundary condition model
of the T =O big bang was used to relate the electromag-
netic arrow of time (the macroscopic dominance of re-
tarded electromagnetic radiation) to the cosmological ar-
row of time (the direction of expansion of the universe).
The arguments presented in that paper apply equally to
the transaction model presented here and justify the use
of probability law (12) rather than (13).

IV. EXAMPLES OF APPLICATION
OF THE TRANSACTIONAL INTERPRETATION

The previous discussion contrasting the interpretations
of quantum mechanics has been fairly abstract. Now we
conclude with a more concrete elucidation of the transac-
tional interpretation, demonstrating the power of its im-
agery by presenting examples of its application. The
transactional interpretation is a conceptual model which
provides a way of clearly visualizing complicated quan-
‘tum processes. It is a way of thinking rather than a way
of calculating. It may have considerable pedagogical po-
tential as a more intuitive way of teaching quantum
mechanics. It can provide insight and intuition that have
been unavailable up to now in considering quantum phe-
nomena. Here, we shall use the transaction model to ex-
amine and illuminate some of the “paradoxes,” Gedan-
kenexperimente, and real experiments that have been col-
lected in the quantum-mechanics museum of curiosities.

We have elected to describe most of these Gedanken-
experimente using photons of visible light passing through
polarizing filters or beam splitters before detection by
quantum-sensitive photomultiplier tubes. We have used
circular and linear polarization of light as archetypes of
noncommuting observables. Other authors (e.g., Feyn-
man et al., 1965) prefer to describe the equivalent experi-
ments using electrons instead of photons, electron-spin
orientation instead of photon polarization, Stern-Gerlach
apparatus instead of polarizing filters and splitters, and
electron counters instead of photomultipliers. While there
may be differences in detail in such descriptions, there
should be no fundamental change in the quantum effects
illustrated. We believe that on balance the polarized-
photon description is better connected to direct experience
and that once embarked on a particular mode of descrip-
tion it is desirable to use consistent apparatus. However,
the reader is assured that these Gedankenexperimente can
be “performed” with electrons, protons, or even neutrinos
with only minor descriptional differences. Analogous ex-
periments could, in most cases, have been constructed us-

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

ing as noncommuting observables electron-spin states
along the x axis and the y axis or even position and
momentum observables. In most cases a real experiment
could most easily be actually performed using photons of
visible light and polaration observables.

A. Renninger’s negative-result
Gendankenexperiment

This is a Gedankenexperiment focusing on the collapse
of the SV produced by the absence of an interaction of the
system measured (a photon) with measurement apparatus.
It was suggested by Renninger (1953) and was featured by
de Broglie (1964) in his book on the interpretation of.
quantum mechanics. Dicke (1981) has recently stimulat-
ed renewed interest in this kind of “interaction-free mea-
surement.” The experimental arrangement is shown in
Fig. 6.

Source S is located at the center of a spherical shell E,
of radius R2. The interior of FE, is lined with a scintillat-
ing material that will produce a detectable flash of light,
which will be seen by the observer, if E, is struck by a
charged particle, e.g., an a particle. Inside E, is a partial
concentric sphere £, of radius R,, also lined with scintil-
lator viewed by the observer. Partial sphere E, subtends
solid angle 0, as viewed from the position of source S.
The portion of EZ, that is not shadowed by E, therefore
subtends a solid angle 0,—47—Q),;. The source S is ar-
ranged so that on command it will emit exactly one a
particle with an angular dependence that is completely
isotropic, and with a velocity equal to V.

Now we consider the state vector | S(t)) as a function
of time t, where ¢ is the time that has elapsed since the
source S has been commanded to emit an a@ particle. Be-
fore the a particle has traversed the distance R, i.e., for

E2

FIG. 6. Schematic diagram showing Renninger’s (1953)
negative-result experiment. Source S isotropically emits an al-
pha particle, which is detected by scintillator at spherical sur-
faces E,; and E, depending on respective solid angles 0, and
Op.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 25 = RMP 58 page 671 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 671

O<t<(R,/V), the probability that the particle will pro-
duce a scintillation at E, is P; =0.,;/47, and the probabil-
ity that it will produce a scintillation at E, is
P,=0,/47. Thus the state vector might be written as

|S(t))=p,|E,)+p2|£2),
where . (14)
| pi |?=P, and |p, |*=P,.

Now suppose that time t becomes greater than R,/V
and that the observer does not observe a scintillation from
E,. Then the state vector must collapse, with the result
that the probabilities become P;=O and P,=1 and the
state vector becomes |.S(t))=|#,) for t>(R,/V). The
interpretational problem, as stated by Renninger and de
Broglie, is that the state vector has collapsed abruptly and
nonlinearly, and yet “the observer sees nothing at all on
screen E,, where nothing has happened.” Thus the ab-
sence of an interaction with the measurement apparatus
leading to the absence of an observation can collapse the
SV as readily as a positive and definite observation.

This Gedankenexperiment helps us to understand why
von Neumann (1932) and Wigner (1962) stressed the need
for a conscious and intelligent observer as the triggering
agent for the collapse of the SV. The change in
“knowledge” when no scintillation is observed at E, at
t =R,/V, requires a deduction on the part of the observer
as to what should have happened if the a particle had been
aimed at E,. It correspondingly casts some doubt on
Schrddinger’s (1935) principle of state distinction and on
Heisenberg’s (1960) irreversibility criterion, since no
state-distinguishing record is made at t=R,/V and no ir-
reversible process is initiated. Furthermore, one could
imagine a more elaborate version of this experiment with
a very large number of partial spheres inside E,, so com-
plicated that no human observer could possibly keep track
of all the times and expectations of flashes that would sig-
nal the occurrence or elimination of various possible out-
comes. One could speculate on how the SV collapse
might occur in that situation.

The transactional interpretation avoids the conceptual
problems implicit in this experiment by eliminating any
SV collapse that occurs at some definite instant, such as
t=R,/V. Instead it employs an atemporal four-space
description implicit in the transaction model: the state
vector is emitted from the source at t=O as a retarded
OW, which grows as a spherical wave front, part of
which encounters E, at t=R,/V and the remainder of
which encounters £, at t=R,/V. The boundary condi-
tion of S that only a single a particle is emitted permits
one and only one transaction to occur between S and EF,
or E,. The transaction will occur with a probability pro-
portional to the CW echoes that S receives from the two
possible absorbers. These echoes will be proportional to
the solid angles subtended by the two possible absorbers,
ie., OQ, and O,, as expected. A single transaction forms in
accordance with these probabilities through the exchange
of advanced and retarded waves characterizing the transi-
tion of an a particle from S to E.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

B. Wheeler’s delayed-choice experiment

The previous Gedankenexperiment illustrated how the
absence of an observation could collapse the SV. Now we
consider a Gedankenexperiment in which the SV must
avoid collapsing after interacting with the apparatus while
the experimenter decides what experiment he wishes to
perform. It is an example of the “delayed-choice” experi-
ments proposed by Wheeler (1978). It is shown schemati-
cally in Fig. 7. ,

Here we have the usual Young’s two-slit interference
apparatus, illuminated by an ideal source S, which is a
distance L from the slits. The source S emits one and
only one photon in the general direction of the slits, on
command from the observer who is operating the ap-
paratus. Downstream of the slits are two different
measuring devices. One of these devices is E, a photo-
graphic emulsion which, when placed in the path of the
photon, will record photons at the position where they
strike the emulsion. After many such events are recorded
they will form a two-slit interference pattern characteris-
tic of the photon’s wavelength A and momentum h/i.
The other measuring device consists of T, and T>, a pair
of tightly collimated telescopes with single-quantum-
sensitive photomultiplier tubes at their image foci, each of
which is focused on one of the two slits. A photon regis-
tered by 7, or T, means that the photon has passed
through slit 1 or 2, respectively. Therefore, T, and T)
constitute a determination of photon position.

Such an apparatus is often used to illustrate the wave-

FIG. 7. Schematic diagram showing Wheeler’s (1978) delayed-
choice experiment. Source S emits a single photon in direction
of the two-slit apparatus. On passing slits, the photon is ab-
sorbed by emulsion E if it is up. If emulsion is down, the pho-
ton continues on to detection in either telescope T, or telescope
T2, which are focused on slits. Operator decides position of
emulsion after photon has passed through slit system.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 26 = RMP 58 page 672 =====

672 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

particle duality of light. The light waves that form the
interference pattern on the emulsion must have passed
through both slits of the apparatus in order to interfere at
the emulsion, while the photon particles that strike the
photomultiplier surfaces can have passed through only
the one slit at which the telescope was aimed. The emul-
sion measures momentum and the telescopes measure po-
sition, i.e., conjugate variables. Thus the two experimen-
tal measurements are “complementary” in Bohr’s sense.
The uncertainty principle is not violated, however, be-
cause only one of the two experiments can be performed
on a given photon.

The emulsion E is mounted on a fast-acting pivot
mechanism so that it can on command either be raised
into position to intercept the photon from. S or alterna-
tively dropped out of the way so that the photon can
proceed to JT, or T,. Thus when E is up we make an in-
terference measurement requiring the photon to pass
through both slits. When £ is down we make a position
measurement requiring that the photon pass through only
one slit.

Wheeler’s innovative modification of this old Gedank-
enexperiment is the following: ‘The time t > L /c at which
the photon has safely passed the slits but not yet reached
the apparatus is known to the experimenter, and he re-
frains from deciding which experiment to do, i.e., whether
to place E up or down, until a time ¢ when the photon
must have already passed through the slit or slits. There-
fore, the photon has already emerged from the slit system
when the experimenter decides whether it should be
caused to pass through one slit (E down) or both slits (E
up). In a sense then, the cause (emulsion down or up) has
come after the effect (passage through one or two slits).

This Gedankenexperiment demonstrates that the physi-
cal interaction of the photon with the slit system has not
collapsed the SV, which must remain uncollapsed at least
until the experimenter decides which experiment to do.
Since the experimenter, after having made the decision,
knows whether the photon will pass through one or both
slits, it can be argued from (C-4) that it is his mental pro-
cess of deciding which has precipitated the collapse of the
SV rather than its subsequent interaction with E, T,, or
T,, since after that decision is made he has the unam-

biguous knowledge of how many slits the photon has
passed through. —

Wheeler has explored the physical and philosophical
implications of this and similar experiments, and has been
led to assert the often quoted paradigm: “No
phenomenon is a phenomenon until it is an observed
phenomenon.” In this statement he is emphasizing the
role of the observer in precipitating an underlying indefi-
nite reality into a definite observed state by the act of de-
ciding on a measurement and then performing it. Again
it would seem that observers, and indeed intelligent and
decisive observers, are required to interpret this class of
Gedankenexperimente using reasonable variants of the
Copenhagen interpretation.

The transactional interpretation, however, is able to
give an account of the delayed-choice experiment without
resort to such observers as the triggers of collapse. In the
transactional description the source S emits the retarded
OW, which propagates through both slits and reaches the
locus of E, where (a) it finds that the emuision E is up
and is absorbed by it, as illustrated in Fig. 8(a), or (b) it
finds E down and proceeds to T, where it is absorbed, as
illustrated in Fig. 8(b), or (c) it finds E down and proceeds
to T, where it is absorbed, as illustrated in Fig. 8(c). For
case (a), in which the photon is absorbed by E, the ad-
vanced CW retraces the path of the OW, traveling in the
negative time direction through both slits and back to
source S. Therefore the final transaction, as shown in
Fig. 8(a), forms along paths that pass through both slits in
connecting the source S with the emuision E. The
transaction is therefore a “two-slit” quantum event. The
photon can be said to have passed through both slits to
reach the emulsion.

For cases (b) and (c) the OW also passes through both
slits on its way to the photomultiplier telescopes T, and
T,. However, when the absorption takes place at one of
the telescopes (not both because of the single quantum
boundary condition), the collimation system of that tele-
scope prevents the CW from passing through more than
one of the slits, since the collimation only permits passage
through the slit at which the telescope is aimed. Thus the
CW passes through only one slit in passing from 7, (or
T2) to S, and the transaction that forms is characteristic

FIG. 8. Schematic diagram of possible transactions in Wheeler’s delayed-choice experiment (see the text). (a) Photon is detected at
emulsion £. (b) Photon is detected by photomultiplier telescope T,. (c) Photon is detected by photomultiplier telescope T}.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 27 = RMP 58 page 673 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 673

of a “one-slit” quantum event. The photon can be said to
have passed through only one slit to reach the telescope.

Since in the transactional description the transaction
forms atemporally, the issue of when the observer decides
which experiment to perform is no longer significant.
The observer determined the experimental configuration
and boundary conditions, and the transaction formed ac-
cordingly. Furthermore, the fact that the detection event
involves a measurement (as opposed to any other interac-
tion) is no longer significant, and so the observer has no
special role in the process. To paraphrase Wheeler’s para-
digm, we might say, “No offer is transaction until it is a
confirmed transaction.”

C. Schrédinger’s cat and Wigner’s friend

Perhaps the most famous Gedankenexperiment demon-
Strating an interpretational “paradox” of quantum
mechanics is the Schrédinger’s cat paradox (1935) illus-
trated in Fig. 9. Schrddinger describes a “hdllen-
maschine” which dramatizes the interpretational problem.
An ideally isolated system (a sealed, soundproof, and
well-insulated box with an adequate oxygen supply) is
prepared so that it contains a Geiger counter placed near
a radioactive source that emits y rays. The source of the
y rays is adjusted in strength so that in a period of 1 h it
has a probability of exactly 50% of causing the Geiger
counter to record one count. The counter mechanism is

connected to a solenoid device which, if a count occurs,
will shatter a flask of prussic acid, thereby filling the box
with lethal fumes. Of course there is also a probability of
50% that no count will occur and the flask will remain
intact.

The experimenter places a cat inside the box, seals it,
and leaves the system undisturbed for 1 h. At the end of
the hour the experimenter deactivates the counter, opens
the box, and observes the state of the system. Two states
are possible: a state |.) (alive cat) in which the flask is
unbroken and the cat remains alive and a state |Z)
(dead cat) in which the flask has shattered and the cat has
been killed. Schrédinger’s question is: “What is the
quantum-mechanical state vector of the system immedi-
ately before the box is opened and the observation is
made?”

Quantum mechanics, as interpreted by the Copenhagen
interpretation, would seem to tell us that the SV was
[a|./)+B|D)], where aa* =BB*=+. In other words,
the SV of the system consists of equal components of the
live cat wave function |.) and the dead cat wave func-
tion |@) until such time as the observer collapses the
SV into one or the other of these states by making an ob-
servation, since it is the change in the observer’s
knowledge that precipitates the SV collapse. In the period
just before the observation is made the SV describes the
cat as 50% alive and 50% dead. This description, which
may seem plausible enough when applied to a microscopic
system (or even to a Statistically large ensemble of

(William R. Warren, Jr., © 1985, reproduced with permission.)

FIG. 9. Schematic diagram illustrating the Schrédinger cat Gedankenexperiment (Schrédinger, 1935). A sealed and insulated box (A)
contains a radioactive source (B), which has a 50% chance during the course of the “experiment” of triggering Geiger counter (C),
which activates a mechanism (D) causing a hammer to smash a flask of prussic acid (E) and kill the cat (F). An observer (G) must
open the box in order to collapse the state vector of the system into one of the two possible states. A second observer (H) may be
needed to collapse the state vector of the larger system containing the first observer (G) and the apparatus (A)—(F). And so on.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 28 = RMP 58 page 674 =====

674 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

Schrodinger’s cat experiments), appears rather absurd
when applied to an individual complex organism like a
cat.

Wigner (1962) further heightened the weirdness impli-
cit in the Copenhagen description by replacing the cat
with a “friend,” i.e., an intelligent observer, and at the
same time replacing the prussic acid mechanism with a
less lethal piece of apparatus, e.g., a light bulb that is
switched on when a count is recorded. The experimenter
then performs the experiment, which can be considered as
two experiments: (a) treating friend + plus as a system,
the experimenter makes an observation and (b) treating
the counter mechanism ‘as a system, the friend makes an
observation that is subsequently reported to the experi-
menter.

We shall not reproduce Wigner’s detailed analysis of
this Gedankenexperiment here, but will state his con-
clusion: consciousness must have a special role in the col-
lapse of the SV, for otherwise one must deal (at least on
the philosophical level) with uncollapsed SV’s containing
conscious observers in a multiplicity of alternative states.
Several others have suggested alternative ways of avoiding
uncollapsed SV’s describing conscious observers. Heisen-
berg (1960) has suggested that the SV collapses when the
system enters the domain of thermodynamic irreversibili-
ty, e.g., aS soon as a piece of macroscopic apparatus be-
‘comes involved. Schrodinger (1935) suggested that as
soon as a permanent record of the system’s state is made,
e.g., by smashing the flask, the SV is collapsed. Everett
(1957) has dispatched the interpretational problem posed
by these Gedankenexperimente by suggesting that the SV
never collapses. Instead, in the Everett-Wheeler interpre-
tation of quantum mechanics (see the Appendix), the
universe “splits” with each quantum event into alternate
universes, each characterized by one of the possible out-
comes of the event. None of these modifications of the
basic Copenhagen interpretation has gained wide accep-
tance, and, as discussed in Sec. II and the Appendix, none
is without its own interpretational problems.

The central focus of the problems posed by
Schrédinger’s cat and Wigner’s friend is the question of
when the SV actually collapses. The transactional inter-
pretation avoids the implicit dilemma because in the
transaction model the SV collapse, i.e., the formation of
the transaction, is atemporal. During the entire 1-h
period that the box is closed the radioactive source S of
Schrédinger’s apparatus sends out a very weak OW. This
OW may or may not, with equal 50% probabilities, be
confirmed by a CW from the Geiger counter so that a
completed transaction is formed. If a transaction is
formed, then the count is recorded, the flask shattered,
the cat killed. If such a transaction is not formed, then
the cat remains alive. The SV (or OW) does indeed have
implicit in it both live and dead cat possibilities, but the
completed transaction allows only one of these possibili-
ties to become real. Because the collapse does not have to
await the arrival of the observer, there is never a time
when “the cat is 50% alive and 50% dead.” And the
need for consciousness, permanent records, thermo-

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

dynamics, or alternate universes never arises. The “buck
stops” at the absorber, in this case the Geiger counter, and
the uncollapsed SV need not be tracked any further.

To state this another way, Schrddinger’s question is:
“When can a quantum event be considered finished?” Is
it when the y ray leaves the radioactive nucleus? Is it
when it interacts with the Geiger counter? When the
flask is smashed? When the cat dies? When the observer
looks in the box? When he tells a colleague what he ob-
served? When he publishes his observation? When ...?
A billiard shot is over when the billiard balls stop collid-
ing and come to rest. The atomic “billiard balls” of a
quantum billiard shot continue to collide forever, never
coming to rest so that the shot can be considered finished.

The source of confusion here is that the wrong question
is being asked. The Copenhagen interpretation has led us
to ask when the SV collapses instead of how it collapses.
There is not a “when,” not a point in time at which the
quantum event is finished. The event is finished when the
transaction forms, which happens along a set of world
lines that include all of the events listed above, treating
none of them as the special conclusion of the event. If
there is one particular link in this event chain that is spe-
cial, it is not the one that ends the chain. It is the link at
the beginning of the chain when the emitter, having re-
ceived various CW’s from its OW, reinforces one of them
in such a way that it brings that particular CW into reali-
ty as a completed transaction. The atemporal transaction
does not have a “when” at the end.

D. Transmission of photons through noncommuting
polarizing filters

The behavior of quantum systems in response to mea-
surements of noncommuting variables is often cited as
one of the interpretational problems of quantum mechan-
ics and has been used as a justification for the develop-
ment of quantum logics. However, one can usually find
excellent classical analogs of such measurements, e.g., the
Fourier time-frequency complementarity of electric pulse
wave forms and the transmission of light through succes-
sive polarizing filters.

Therefore, it is instructive to consider the quantum-
mechanical treatment of the transmission of light through
polarizing filters as an illustration of the application of
the transactional interpretation. We shall specifically
select a case where the handling of complex amplitudes is
required so that this aspect of the transactional interpreta-
tion can be shown. Figure 10(a) shows the system to be
considered. A single photon of light in the form of a
plane wave is emitted by source S and travels along an
optical bench to the single-quantum-sensitive photomulti-
plier detector D. In traversing this path it passes through
three polarizing filters, which we shall call H, R, and V,
to indicate that they transmit with 100% efficiency light
in a pure state of horizontal linear polarization, right cir-
cular polarization, and vertical linear polarization, respec-
tively, while completely absorbing light that has the
orthogonal polarization.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 29 = RMP 58 page 675 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 675

source

detector.

Ce

source

C

HLP VLP
(b)

FIG. 10. (a) Schematic diagram showing the passage of a single
photon through successive noncommuting polarizing filters F;,
F,, and F3 (see the text). (b) Same diagram with filter F, re-
moved.

This example is chosen because the operators character-
izing linear polarization eigenstates do not commute with
the operators characterizing circular polarization eigen-
states, and so linear and circular polarization are noncom-
muting variables. The two descriptions linear and circu-
lar, represent two related bases. In particular, if |H),
|V), |R), and |L) represent pure states, respectively,
of horizontal linear, vertical linear, right circular, and left
circular polarization, then they are related by the
transformation equations

|R)=a(|H)4+i|V)), (15a)
|L)=—a(|H)—i|V)), (15b)
|H)=a(|R)+|L)), (15c)
| V)=—ia(|R)—|L)), (15d)

where a=(2)7!7 and i=(—1)!”,

The transactional interpretation provides the following
description of the transmission of a photon from S to D:
The source S produces a retarded OW in the form of a
general SV including all possible states of polarization.
This wave then passes through filter H. The filter
transmits!? only |H ), ie. that component of the SV
which corresponds to a state of pure horizontal linear po-
larization (HLP). This wave then travels to filter R,
which transmits only that component of | H) in a pure

state of right circular polarization (RCP). From Eq. (15c) °
this is a|R). This RCP wave then travels to filter V,.

which transmits only that component in a pure state of
vertical linear polarization (VLP). From Eq. (15a), this

19Here “transmits” means that the state vector (or offer wave)
is split into components that stop at the polarizer and com-
ponents that continue on the original path. The “transmitted”
OW is in the latter class. Thus a transaction involving com-
ponents that are not transmitted cannot form on the path
beyond the polarizer.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

will be a(|a|V))=(i/2)|V). This VLP wave then
strikes the photocathode of D and is absorbed and detect-
ed.

According to the transaction model this is only half of
the story. In absorbing the incident retarded wave, the
photocathode must produce a “time-mirrored” advanced
wave or CW. This wave will be the complex conjugate of
the incident OW and has the form

CW=OW* =[(i/2)| V)]*=(—i/2)V| . (16)

The advanced CW travels back along the track of the in-
cident OW until it encounters filter V, where it is perfect-
ly transmitted since it is already in a state of pure VLP.

The CW then proceeds along the track of the OW until
it reaches filter R, where only its RCP component is
transmitted. We can use Eqs. (15) for changing the basis
of advanced waves by taking the complex conjugates (i.e.,
the time reverse) of both sides of the equations to obtain a
new set of transformation equations, which we shall
denote as Eqs. (15’). Employing that procedure, Eq.
(15d’) shows us that the transmitted CW will have the
form

(—i/2)ia(R |)=Fa(R] . (17)

The CW then proceeds until it reaches filter H, where
only its HLP component is transmitted. Equation (15a’)
shows us that the transmitted wave will be

CW=tala(H|)=4(A| . ~ (18)

Thus the source has sent out an OW of unit amplitude
and has received back a CW in state (H | with an ampli-
tude of +. The amplitude factor is the product of the
OW amplitude at D, i.e., (1/2), and the complex conju-
gate of that amplitude or (—i/2), the complex conjugate
arising from the time-reversed character of the CW. Note
that the final amplitude of the echo CW is a real num-
ber,2° even though complex amplitudes were found at
many intermediate points of the transaction. This is a
general feature of the transactional interpretation.

‘This is a concrete example of the assertion (T-2) that
the probability of a transaction is proportional to the am-
plitude of the CW echo from a potential absorber and is
also an illustration of the operation of the Born probabili-
ty law P=WW*, The transaction will be confirmed and
the photon transmitted from S to D with a probability of
+ and will arrive at D in a state of pure vertical polariza-
tion. There will also be a probability of + that the pho-
ton will not be transmitted to D but instead will be ab-
sorbed by one of the filters. These are the same transmis-

20The net wave at the absorber locus is also real. Assume that
in the vicinity of the absorber |V) depends on x and t¢ as
|V)=exp[i(kx—ot)]. Then (V|=[|V)]*=exp[—i(kx
—ot)]. Thus at the absorber locus the net wave is the superpo-
sition (i/2)|V)+(—i/2){V| =—sin(kx—ot), which is a
real quantity.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 30 = RMP 58 page 676 =====

676 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

sion and absorption probabilities as are given by classical
optics”! for the transmission of an initially HLP beam of
light from S to D.

Now consider the modification of the apparatus shown
in Fig. 10(b), in which the second filter R has been re-
moved. Now the OW is placed in a pure state of HLP by
filter H, so that when it travels to filter V it cannot be
transmitted. Therefore, no OW reaches the detector D
and no transaction from S to D takes place. With filter
R removed, the transmission of the apparatus drops from
25% to 0%.

The transactional description of other experiments in-
volving noncommuting variables can be constructed by
employing the same procedures used above (see Sec. IV.G,
for example). In each case it will be found that the proba-
bility of the quantum event under consideration is just the
real and positive amplitude of the echo CW response to
the OW from the emitter.

E. The Freedman-Clauser experiment
and Herbert’s paradox

As discussed in Sec. I, the Freedman-Clauser experi-
ment (1972) and later tests of the Bell Inequality (Clauser
and Shimony, 1978; Aspect et al., 1982a, 1982b) have
demonstrated that quantum mechanics (and nature) can-
not simultaneously have the properties of CFD and locali-
ty. In the present work we have advocated the view that
the solution to this dichotomy is that quantum-
mechanical description of nature is intrinsically nonlocal.
Quantum mechanics as viewed by the transactional inter-
pretation is an explicitly nonlocal description of quantum
processes. It is therefore informative to apply this
description to the multiparticle quantum events of the
Freedman-Clauser experiment.

We refer to Fig. 1(a) describing the FC experiment in
Sec. II.D. Source S produces a pair of photons that are
only allowed to leave the source in directions 180° apart
and that are constrained by angular-momentum conserva-
tion to be in the same state of polarization—which may

21The transmission of the initial photon through the first po-
larizing filter has not been considered in this calculation. There
is a 50% probability that a photon of indefinite polarization
would be absorbed by the first filter, giving a net transmission
of a beam of photons from the source of the detector of + rath-
er than +, which is the transmission from the first filter on. It
should be emphasized that there is a difference in definition be-
tween “unpolarized” in the classical sense and ‘‘of indefinite po-
larization” in the quantum mechanical sense. This represents a
fundamental difference between the quantum-mechanical and
classical treatments of polarization and the lack thereof. It is
related to the Furry modification of quantum mechanics dis-
cussed in Sec. II.D. This difference is not related to the inter-
pretation, but to the quantum-mechanical formalism. The
latter accommodates randomly polarized light in the classical
sense by averaging over polarization orientations.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

be either a helicity (circular polarization) state or a linear
polarization state. As discussed in Sec. IV.D, we can use
any circular or linear basis to describe all such states.

The FC apparatus employs polarimeters consisting of
linear polarizing filters placed in front of single-
quantum-sensitive photomultiplier detectors. The linear
polarizing axes of the filters are rotated about the axis de-
fined by the line of flight of the photons. The coin-
cidence counting rate between photon events detected in
the two photomultiplier tubes is recorded as a function of
the angle settings of the two filters. This coincidence rate
is expected by symmetry to depend only on the relative
angle 0 between the angle settings of the two filters.

As discussed in Sec. II.D, quantum mechanics predicts,
if the filters are ideal, that the coincidence rate will be
proportional to cos’, i.e., maximum when the polarime-
ter axes are aligned and zero when they are at right an-
gles. It is this deceptively innocent result which stands in
violation of Bell’s inequality and which implies some non-
locality in the enforcement of this correlation between
separated measurements. .

The analysis of this experiment with the transactional
interpretation will be similar to that of Sec. IV.D. The
source S' generates two correlated OW’s | A,) and |B;),
which are constrained by angular-momentum conserva-
tion to be in the same state of polarization, but which are
in an indefinite and uncollapsed state. These OW’s prop-
agate down the two arms of the apparatus until they en-
counter the polarizing filters F4, and Fg. Each filter
transmits only | Az) or |B), the component of the OW
that matches its orientation angle. These components
then reach the photomultiplier tubes A and B and are ab-
sorbed. The absorption process produces CW’s (A,| and
(B,|, the time reverses of the incident OW’s, and these
propagate in the negative time direction back through the
apparatus to the filters. Since each CW is in a state that
matches the filter orientation, they are transmitted unmo-
dified to the source.

Thus, the source receives CW echoes (A,| and (B, |
in response to the two emitted OW’s. However, these
responses will not, for arbitrary settings of the polarizing
filters, satisfy the boundary condition that the two pho-
tons be in the same polarization state, and therefore they
cannot participate fully in the formation of the transac-
tion, which is a double quantum event involving the emis-
sion and detection of both photons. Rather, as required
by (T-4), the transaction will project from one of these
CW’s only the component that matches the other and will
ignore the nonmatching or orthogonal component. Thus,
if the polarizing filters are aligned, the CW’s will match
and there will be a maximum coincidence rate, while if
the polarizing filters are at right angles, the CW’s will be
in orthogonal states, no transaction can be formed, and
the coincidence rate will be zero.

As discussed in Sec. HI.F and illustrated in Fig. 5, the
combination of four-vectors in such a _ two-photon
transaction provides a “bridge” across the spacelike inter-
val between the two detection events to enforce their
correlation, even though the structural members of the


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 31 = RMP 58 page 677 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 677

bridge are lightlike four-vectors which transform properly
under Lorentz transformations. Thus the transactional
description of the FC experiment is explicitly nonlocal.
As. demonstrated by several authors (Eberhard), 1977,
1978; Ghiradi and Weber, 1979; Ghirardi et al., 1980), it
is not possible to exploit this nonlocality for the purposes
of nonlocal observer-to-observer communication.

Recently, however, Herbert (1982) has suggested a
Gedankenexperiment that is a modification of the basic
FC apparatus intended for communication. Herbert’s ar-
guments suggested that nonlocal observer-to-observer
communication might be experimentally possible. A sim-

‘plified version of Herbert’s apparatus is illustrated in Fig.
11. Essentially he has added a laser “gain tube” amplifier
to arm B of the FC apparatus so that the process of
stimulated emission is used to “clone” the photon from
the source, making multiple copies of the | B,) state vec-
tor so that its state of polarization can be definitively
determined by using beam splitters to route duplicate
photons to multiple measurements with polarimeters
aligned along many axes. Such measurements, it is assert-
ed, will reveal the kind of polarization measurement that
was performed oni | A; ), ¢.g., a circular polarization mea-
surement or a linear polarization measurement. This, it is
asserted, will permit an observer at arm A to “telegraph”
a message to a second observer at arm B across a space-
like interval by encoding the message in the time structure
of the measurements performed (e.g., as 1’s and 0’s in a
binary code).

To illustrate the paradox more explicitly, we consider a
simplified version of Herbert’s apparatus in which (in the
rest system of the apparatus) the single photon arriving in
arm A is measured slightly earlier than whatever mea-
surements occur in arm B. Moreover, we assume that the
photon in arm B is duplicated once and that each photon
separately is subjected to a linear polarization (LP) mea-

removable wave plate
two-photon source

>

P beam splitter

Detector A
laser
(sender) gain tube

PP beam

n 1 .
eutra splitter

beam splitter

Detector B
(receiver)

FIG. 11. Schematic diagram of Herbert’s (1982) suggested ex-
periment. The Freedman-Clauser apparatus is modified by
placing a laser gain tube in the path of photon 2, so that it is
“duplicated.” Beam splitters then permit separate polarization
measurements of the resulting photons.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

surement which determines whether it is in a horizontal
(H) or a vertical (V ) state of linear polarization. Herbert
argues that if the “sender” at arm A has chosen the LP
basis for his measurement, i.e., the same basis as that of
the pair of measurements in arm B, then the photons
reaching arm B will be in a pure state of linear polariza-
tion and the measurements there will always match, i.e.,
the measurements will always show H +H or V+V and
never H+V or V+H. On the other hand, it is argued, if
the sender at A uses the circular polarization (CP) basis
for his measurement then the photons reaching arm B
will be in a mixed state of linear polarization and the
measurements there will show matching (H+H or
V+V) and nonmatching (7 +V or V+4H) responses
with equal probability. Thus a repeated sending of the
message at arm A would permit its reception in arm B,
even in the presence of strong spontaneous emission noise
in the laser amplifier.

Herbert’s arguments are implicitly based on the
Copenhagen interpretation’s account of state vector col-
lapse. It is assumed that once the measurement at arm A
has occurred, the SV for the photons reaching arm B will
have collapsed into a definite state of polarization, which
can then. be determined to discover what A measurement
had been made. This description is consistent with the
Copenhagen interpretation, but it does give a special and
rather unsymmetric role to one of the three measurements
that are performed on the same system. This is perhaps
justified by the time sequence of the measurements if the
arm A measurement occurs first.

Even before Herbert’s paper appeared in print there
were several “refutations” published which concerned
themselves with spontaneous emission noise in the stimu-
lated emission process (Wooters and Zurek, 1982; Milonni
and Hardies, 1982) or with the description of the quan-
tum state that such an amplification process would pro-
duce. The former. analyses are probably irrelevant to the
heart of the problem because the envisioned communica-
tion could in principle persist even in the presence of such
noise. On the other hand, the analysis of Dieks (1982)
seems to provide a satisfactory (if rather formal) resolu-
tion of the “paradox.”

Analysis of the Gedankenexperiment with the transac-
tional interpretation is relatively straightforward. The
transaction corresponding to each detection event must
involve the absorption of all three photons and must con-
nect loci at the source, three of the detectors, and the laser
amplifier. The transaction can be verified only if all of
the CW’s are in nonorthogonal states. Thus the polarime-
ters in arm B can never record events that are H+ V or
V +H, no matter what measurement the sender performs,
because this would generate orthogonal CW’s, which
would not verify the overall multiphoton transaction.
Therefore, even under ideal circumstances (which may
not be realizable experimentally), the responses in arm B
must always match, and no observer-to-observer message
can be transmitted. Dieks used a more detailed analysis
employing the quantum-mechanical formalism to arrive
at the same conclusion: multiple polarimeters in arm B


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 32 = RMP 58 page 678 =====

678 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

of the apparatus will always give matching responses, no
matter what is measured in arm A.

The basic fallacy in Herbert’s argument, from the
viewpoint of the transactional interpretation is that he
was led by the Copenhagen interpretation to assume that
the measurement in arm A collapses the SV, so that the
apparatus in arm B is presented with a photon in a defi-
nite state, and that the correlations between arms A and B
are enforced by this collapse while the correlations be-
tween the duplicate photons in arm B are not. The tran-
sactional interpretation requires the enforcement of all
correlations equally. There is no single measurement that
collapses the SV presented to the others, but rather a tran-
saction enforcing correlation of all measurements, in-
dependent of the time sequence in which they occur. This
enforcement can only be accomplished if the measure-
ments in arm B match not only the measurement in arm
A but also match each other.

F. The Hanbury-Brown-Twiss effect

The Hanbury-Brown-Twiss (HBT) effect is an example
of the interference of radiation sources that are incoherent
(Klauder and Sudarshan, 1968). It has been applied to the
measurement of the diameters of nearby stars with radio
interferometry and to investigation of the “hot spot”
developed in a relativistic heavy-ion collision in which
pions are produced (Gyulassy et al., 1979). The effect
applies equally well to classical waves and to particlelike
quanta.

A simplified version of a HBT interference measure-
ment is illustrated in Fig. 12. Sources 1 and 2 are separat-

a 3

FIG. 12. Schematic diagram of the Hanbury-Brown—Twiss ex-
periment (Klauder and Sudarshan, 1968) demonstrating
coherent interference in light from incoherent sources. Sources
1 and 2 are separated by distance d,, and emit photons of iden-
tical wavelengths, which are detected by detectors A and B lo-
cated a distance d4, apart. The distance between source plane
and detector plane is L. A product of coincidence between
detector outputs results in a composition signal exhibiting an in-
terference effect depending on both dj and d4p.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

ed by a distance dj. Both sources emit photons of the
same energy hv but are completely incoherent. The radi-
ation from the two sources is detected by detectors A and
B, which are separated by a distance d4g. The line of
centers of the sources is parallel to the line of centers of
the detectors, and the two lines are separated by a dis-
tance L.

It will not be demonstrated here, but a signal that is a
product of (or coincidence between) the signals received at
A and B (indicating that photons have simultaneously
triggered both detectors) reflects the coherent interference
of the two sources and depends on the source separation
d,2 as well as the detector separation d4gz. Measurements
made at a number of values of d4z can therefore be used
to determine dj), in a manner analogous to moving a sin-
gle detector in an interference pattern to determine the
separation of a pair of coherent sources. This is the HBT
interference effect.

There is a lesson for applications of the transactional
interpretation in this kind of interference phenomenon:
particles like photons and electrons cannot consistently be
described as blobs that travel from point 1 or 2 to point A
or B. In the HBT effect a whole photon is assembled at
the detector out of half-photons contributed by each of
the two sources. Consider a transaction in which photons
are emitted by 1 and 2 and detected by A and B so that
their product signal exhibits HBT interference. In the
transactional description of such an HBT event, retarded
OW’s |x,) and |y,) are emitted by the source 1 and
travel to detectors A and B, respectively. Similarly, OW’s
|x.) and |y,) are emitted by the source 2. Detector A
receives a composite OW | A, ), which is a linear super-
position of |x,) and |x) and seeks to absorb the “of-
fered” photon by producing advanced CW (A,,|, the
time reverse of that superposition. Detector B similarly
responds to composite OW |B). These advanced
waves then travel back to the two sources, each of which
receives a different linear superposition of (A,)| and
(Bip |.

A HBT transaction is formed which removes one ener-
gy quantum hv from each of the two sources 1 and 2 and
delivers one energy quantum hv to each of the two detec-
tors A and B. For many combinations of source and
detector separation distances, the superimposed OW’s
and/or CW’s are nearly equal and opposite, so that the
composite wave is very weak and the transaction is very
improbable. For a few ideal combinations of source and
detector separation distances, all of the composite waves
are strong because their components coherently reinforce,
and in this case the transaction is much more probable.
The transaction probability depends on the separation dis-
tances in just the way predicted by quantum mechanics.
Thus the HBT effect is completely consistent with the
transactional interpretation.

However, there is an interesting point here: neither of
the photons detected by A or B can be said to have
originated uniquely in one of the two sources. Each
detected photon originated partly in each of the two
sources. It might be said that each source produced two


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 33 = RMP 58 page 679 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 679

fractional photons and that fractions from two sources
combined at a detector to make a full-size photon. This is
what (T-4) emphasized in stating that “particles
transferred have no separate identity independent from
the satisfaction of these (the quantum-mechanical) boun-
dary conditions.” The boundary conditions here are those
imposed by the HBT geometry and detection criteria.

‘This two-photon event may be viewed as a simple case
of more general multiphoton (or multiparticle) events,
which may involve many sources and many detectors.
Such transactions can be viewed as assembling particles at
a detector from contributions derived from a number of
sources, with no one-to-one correspondence between parti-
cles emitted and particles detected except in overall num-
ber. One way of stating this is to emphasize that the spa-
tial localization of the emitter (or the absorber) may be
very unclear and indefinite, as long as all boundary condi-
tions are satisfied. Likewise the time localization of the
emission event (or absorption event) can be made very in-
definite by a choice of experimental conditions, e.g., very
low emission probability as in the Pflegor-Mandel experi-
ment (1967).

‘

G. The Albert-Aharonov-D’Amato predictions

The predictions of Albert, Aharonov, and D’Amato
(1985) clarify an old problem, the question of retrospec-
tive knowledge of a quantum state following successive
measurements of noncommuting variables (Aharonov
et al., 1964). The assumption of contrafactual definite-
ness mentioned in the Introduction plays an important
role in the Albert, Aharonov, and D’Amato (AAD) pre-
dictions because these concern the retrospective
knowledge of the observer about the outcome of experi-
ments which might have been performed on the system in
the time interval between one of the measurements and
the other. We need the CFD assumptions (a) that the
various alternative possible measurements which might
have been performed on the system would each have pro-
duced a definite (although unknown and possibly random)
observational result and (b) that we are permitted to dis-
cuss these results. Under the assumption of CFD, the
AAD predictions provide a challenging quantum-
mechanical interpretational problem.

As a simple example of the AAD predictions, consider
the experiment illustrated in Fig. 13(a). A photon is emit-
ted from source S and is transmitted through a filter H,
which passes only horizontal linearly polarized light. It
then travels a distance L and is transmitted through a
second filter R, which passes only right circularly polar-
ized light. The photon is then detected by a quantum-
sensitive photomultiplier tube D, which generates an elec-
trical signal registering the arrival of the photon. The
questions that are addressed by AAD are (1) what is the
quantum state of the photon in the region L, which lies in
the region between H and R, and (2) what would have
been the outcome of measurements on the photon that
might have been performed in that region?

AAD use the formalism of quantum mechanics as ap-

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

(c)

FIG. 13. Schematic diagram showing the three experimental
situations considered in the Albert-Aharonov-D’Amato (1985)
predictions: (a) The photon emerges from the source S, passes
through a horizontal linear polarizing filter H, and then
through a right circular polarizing filter R, before being detect-
ed by a photomultiplier tube D. (b) An intermediate horizontal
linear polarizing filter H, is inserted. (c) An intermediate right
circular polarizing filter R, is inserted. These additional mea-
surements [(b) and (c)] are said (Albert et al., 1985) to demon-
strate that the photon is simultaneously in a state of linear and
circular polarization in the intermediate region.

plied to the joint probability of a series of measurements
(Aharonov et al. 1964) to demonstrate a remarkable pair
of predictions (here applied to the present example): (1) if
a linear polarization measurement had been performed
[Fig. 13(b)] in region L the photon would have been
found to be in a HLP state, and (2) if a circular polariza-
tion measurement [Fig. 13(c)] had been performed in re-
gion L the photon would have been found to be in a RCP
state. In other words, the intermediate measurement of
polarization appears to be equally influenced by the past
linear polarization measurement which was performed at
Hf and by the future circular polarization measurement
which will be performed at R, in that both seem equally
to prepare the system in a definite state which “forces”
the outcome of the intermediate measurement.

This completely valid application of the quantum-
mechanical formalism appears to be in at least interpreta-

_ tional conflict with the uncertainty principle (C-1) and

with complementarity (C-3), which assert that, since RCP
and HLP states are eigenstates of noncommuting vari-
ables, a photon cannot be in both of these eigenstates
simultaneously. AAD on the other hand, interpret their
result as indicating that “without violating the statistical
predictions of quantum mechanics, it can be consistently
supposed ... that noncommuting observables can simul-
taneously be well defined” and that indeed, “given those


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 34 = RMP 58 page 680 =====

680 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

statistical predictions, . it is inconsistent to suppose
anything else.” The AAD result has been summarized in
a popular account (“Science and the Citizen,” 1985) as in-
dicating that “the measurement on Friday caused, in
some sense of the word cause, the smeared-out values of
spin on Wednesday to collapse into some definite configu-
ration. The logical puzzle about time and causality that
this development engenders has not yet been fully ex-
plored.”

It is therefore of considerable interest to apply the
transactional interpretation to this new interpretational
puzzle, both as a means of gaining insight into the prob-
lem and as a test of the utility of the transactional inter-
pretation for resolving the interpretational paradoxes of
quantum mechanics. The transactional analysis of this
problem follows that of Sec. IV.D, which also dealt with
the transmission of a photon through polarizing filters.
The three experimental configurations considered are il-
lustrated in Figs. 13(a)—13(c). Figures 14(a)—14(c) show
diagrammatically the corresponding SV descriptions that
will be discussed. These ’experimental configurations
must be treated as separate (but related) quantum-
mechanical systems, and each must be analyzed separately
with the transactional interpretation. We first consider
Fig. 13(b).

The transactional interpretation provides the following
description of the transmission of the photon from S to D
with an intermediate HLP measurement: The source S
produces a retarded OW in the form of a general SV in-
cluding all possible states of polarization. This wave then
passes through filter H. The filter transmits only | H),
ie., that component of the SV which corresponds to a
state of pure horizontal linear polarization. This wave

Ss H R D
' | ! |
' Isv> | |H> | @lR> |
@ Y)
t I 1
1 S<HI | a<Rl | @<Ri |
| I ' I
' | (a) | |
1 | i 1
I { | ;
I ' -——-nN_H f
| ISV> 1 /TIH> >! TH> 1 aI R> |
te pl
ZY) it Nn 1 Q
! I |
1 SHI tS a<HIL/ 1 a@<Ri | a@<ri |
f ~+-7 | \
i { |
(b)
| \ | {
I! | _ | {
| isv> , IH> 0 ',/7aIRS\!  a@lR> |!
t I uf
@ 1 ; 1 Vy va) @
| g<Hl oi @<RIo! \@<Ri7 i a@<Ri
s H = D

(c)
FIG. 14. Schematic diagram showing the transactional inter-
pretation descriptions of the three Albert-Aharonov-D’ Amato
experiments. Note the changes in the quantum state in the in-
termediate region indicated by the dashed circles in case (b) and
case (c).

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

then travels to filter H,,. which transmits |H) un-
changed. This HLP wave then travels to filter R, which
transmits only that component in a pure state of right cir-
cular polarization. From Eq. (15c), this will be a|R).
This RCP wave then strikes the photocathode of D and is
absorbed and detected, producing the advanced wave
a(R |, the CW which travels back along the track of the
incident OW to confirm the transaction. When the CW
reaches R, it is transmitted without modification because
it is already in a state of RCP. However, when it reaches
,, only its HLP component is transmitted, so from Eq.
(15a) it becomes a(a{H | )=+4H |. It retains this form
as it passes through the filter H and back to the source S.

The description of the transmission of the photon from
S to D with an intermediate RCP measurement illustrat-
ed in Fig. 13(c) is very similar: The source S produces a
retarded OW in the form of a general SV including all
possible states of polarization. This wave then passes
through filter H, which transmits only |H). This wave
then travels to filter R,;, which transmits only that com-
ponent in a pure state of right circular polarization.
From Eg. (15c), this will be a|R). This RCP wave then
travels to filter R, which transmits a|R) unchanged. It
strikes the photocathode of D and is absorbed and detect-
ed, producing the advanced wave a(R |, the CW which
travels back along the track of the incident OW to con-
firm the transaction. When the CW reaches R and R, it
is transmitted without modification because it is already
in a state of RCP. However, when it reaches H, only its
HLP component is transmitted, so from Eq. (15a) it be-
comes a(a(H|)=+(H|. It retains this form as it
passes back to the source S.

In cases (b) and (c) of Fig. 13 the insertion of the inter-
mediate polarizing filter does not alter the statistical as-
pects of the measurement from that of case (a) of Fig. 13,
where there is no intermediate measurement, and so the
three cases are equivalent in the observational sense.
However, the transactional interpretation gives us the op-
portunity to examine the intermediate quantum states in
each case, and when this is done we find that the transac-
tion that is confirmed is quite different in each of the
three cases. This is illustrated in Fig. 14. In case (a)
where there is no intermediate measurement the state in
the intermediate region between H and R is in an indeter-
minate quantum state, in that the OW is |) while the
CW is a(R |. This is also the case for the region between
Hf, and R for case (b) and for the region between H and
R, for case (c). However, we see that for case (b) the pho-
ton in the region between H and H, is in a state of pure
HLP (circled), while for case (c) the photon between R,
and R is in a state of pure RCP (circled).

The transactional resolution of the riddle posed by the
AAD predictions is that the uncertainty principle is not
compromised, nor can noncommuting observables simul-
taneously be well defined, as AAD have suggested. How-
ever, aS was suggested above in another context, the circu-
lar polarization measurement that occurs later at R does
cause, in some sense of the word cause, the smeared-out
values of circular polarization between R and H to earlier


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 35 = RMP 58 page 681 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 681

“collapse into some definite configuration.” The transac-
tions that form in the three cases are not identical, even

though they have the same observables, because each tran-

saction is a separate self-consistent solution to the wave
equation. Each satisfies a different set of boundary con-
ditions. The insertion of the intermediate filter, while not
altering the statistics of the measurement, brings into be-
ing a different transaction, which has different charac-
teristic eigenstates in the intermediate region between H
and R. Thus the two predictions of the AAD calculation
concern intrinsically different quantum systems and can-
not be construed as implying the presence “simultaneous-
ly” of the eigenstates of non-commuting variables.

V. CONCLUSION

In Sec. I we set out the ground rules by which an inter-
pretation of quantum mechanics could be judged, assum-
ing that no experimental tests are possible. The suggested
criteria were economy, compatibility, plausibility, and in-
sightfulness. In the succeeding sections we examined the
Copenhagen interpretation and the transactional interpre-
tation in the ways that they deal with the problems of
quantum mechanics and can be applied to experiments
and Gedankenexperimente.

In the context of economy we have shown that the
Copenhagen interpretation is somewhat less compact than
the transactional interpretation because (C-1), (C-2), and
(C-4) are essentially independent and seemingly unrelated
elemental postulates of the interpretation. On the other
hand, the transactional model which is the essential con-
tent of (T-4) brings with it the uncertainty principle (T-1)
and the statistical interpretation (T-2) as consequences of
the model.

In the context of compatibility we have shown that the
SV collapse model implicit in (C-4), if the SV is taken to
be a mathematical description of the state of an extended
system common to all observers of the system (C-4a), is
descriptionally inconsistent with relativistic invariance
and/or causality, and also appears manifestly to violate
time-reversal invariance at the descriptional level. The
transactional interpretation applied to the same system is
fully consistent with relativistic invariance and macro-
scopic causality. While the transactional interpretation
implicitly involves an arrow of time in its account of the
statistical interpretation (T-2), this arrow has been ac-
counted for elsewhere in terms of a boundary condition
model (Cramer, 1983).

The criterion of plausibility is admittedly more subjec-
tive than the other criteria. However, we feel that the as-
sertion of the transactional interpretation that the ad-
vanced solutions of the relativistic quantum-mechanical
wave equations play a role in quantum events (T-4) is in-
trinsically more plausible than the assertion of the
Copenhagen interpretation that the solutions of these
equations are somehow mathematical descriptions of
knowledge (C-4). This is reinforced by the evidence of the
deep-rooted philosophical and epistemological problems
implicit in the “knowledge” assertion.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

Finally, in the context of insightfulness we have shown
that by providing an explicit nonlocal mechanism for
describing quantum events the transaction model has pro-
vided new insights into the reality behind the quantum-
mechanical formalism. In doing so, it has also shown
that a synthesis is possible between the ideas of Heisen-
berg and Bohr, who emphasized the intrinsic uncertainty
and complementarity of quantum processes, and the ideas
of Einstein, who emphasized the need to view the reality
behind the formalism with an interpretation that is com-
patible with our understanding in other areas of physics.

Despite these advantages, there are many who will find
the use of advanced waves in the transaction model diffi-
cult to accept because there is no experimental evidence
for the existence of such a phenomenon. Certainly there
are others who will feel that the whole notion of consider-
ing alternative interpretations of quantum mechanics
when there is no possible experimental means of deciding
between one interpretation and another is a kind of phi-
losphizing that has no place in physics.

We answer such criticisms by reiterating that interpre-
tation does have an important role on our understanding
of physical theory, even if it is untestable at the experi-
mental level, and that as far as possible, an interpretation
should interpret (rather than decline to do so). What is
presented here is a paradigm shift in the mode of
quantum-mechanical interpretation. As Kuhn (1962) has
made clear; such paradigm shifts are always difficult be-
cause of the intellectual gear changing they require. A
shift away from the Cophenhagen interpretation may be
particularly difficult because of its traditional role in the
teaching of quantum mechanics over 5 decades.

The value of new interpretational insights into physical
processes, however, should not be underestimated. Ex-
perience in many fields of physics has shown that pro-
gress and new ideas and approaches are stimulated by the
ability to visualize clearly physical phenomena.
Schrédinger described quantum mechanics as “a formal
theory of frightening, indeed repulsive, abstractness and
lack of visualizability” (Heisenberg, 1927). The visualiza-
tion of quantum phenomena has been denied us for half a
century, not by the abstract quantum-mechanical formal-
ism but by the Copenhagen interpretation. The transac-
tional interpretation of the same formalism now makes
this long-sought visualization possible.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by the Division of
Nuclear Sciences of the U.S. Department of Energy.
Teaching University of Washington undergraduates about
quantum phenomena provided much of the stimulation
and original inspiration for the ideas presented here. The
opportunity for much of the contemplation and writing
was provided by a sabbatical leave supported jointly by
the University of Washington and the Hahn-Meitner In-
stitute of Berlin. The author is indebted to many indivi-
duals for valuable discussions and correspondence, helpful
suggestions, and good advice (sometimes ignored), and to


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 36 = RMP 58 page 682 =====

682 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

many institutions for the opportunity to present these
ideas at various stages of evolutionary development to
varied audiences. Among the individuals who deserve
particular mention are David Boulware, Wil Braithwaite,
John Clauser, Kevin Coakley, Jorrit deBoer, Dieter Gross,
Ernest Henley, Nick Herbert, Max Jammer, Hans
Krappe, Dan Larsen, Albert Lazzarini, Chris Morris, Ru-
dolph Moessbauer, Riley Newman, Rick Norman, Pierre
Noyes, Rudi Peierls, Dennis Sciama, Saul-Paul Sirag,
Derek Storm, Dan Tieger, John Wheeler, and Larry Wi-
lets. Among the institutions that have made possible the
presentation of these ideas in colloquia, seminars, and dis-
cussions are Carnegie-Mellon University, Michigan State
University, the University of Washington, Los Alamos
National Laboratory, the Esalen Institute, the University
of Munich, the Hahn-Meitner Institute—Berlin, the
Demokritos Laboratory for Nuclear Research—Athens,
the Ruhr University—Bochum, and the University of
Cologne. Thanks are due to Bill Warren for the
SchrGdinger’s cat illustration. Finally, the author is deep-
ly indebted to his wife Pauline B. Cramer, a pragmatic
mechanical engineer, for many discussions, for the injec-
tion of much common sense, and for a great deal of en-
couragement.

APPENDIX: ALTERNATIVE INTERPRETATIONS
OF QUANTUM MECHANICS

In the discussion in the main body of this paper we
have focused on the orthodox formalism of quantum
mechanics and on its interpretation by the Copenhagen
and transactional approaches. In doing this we have not
discussed the efforts of individuals and groups who have
investigated other ways of dealing with the interpretation-
al problems of the quantum-mechanical formalism. For a
comprehensive review of such efforts the reader is re-
ferred to the excellent survey provided by Jammer (1974).
Here we briefly summarize some of the alternative inter-
pretations and theories that have had a significant impact
on the field and consider these in the framework of the
discussion of interpretational problems in Sec. II of this

paper.

1. Hidden-variable theories

The hidden-variable alternatives to the formalism of
quantum mechanics (Belinfante, 1973; Jammer, 1974)
have been aimed primarily at the problems of complete-
ness and predictivity (see Secs. II.E and II.F) and have
conventionally started from the assumption of locality.
By asserting the existence of unobserved variables, which
would eliminate the indeterminacy of quantum mechanics
if their values were known, the proponents of these
theories have attempted to demonstrate that quantum
mechanics is an incomplete theory.

Hidden-variable theories are able to deal at some level
with some of the interpretational problems of Sec. II by
avoiding SV collapse through the use of deterministic hid-

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

den variables. The SV is treated as an average and incom-
plete description of the system, and so the “knowledge”
issue does not arise. The Bell inequality experiments have
at a stroke invalidated all hidden-variable theories based
on the locality assumption. While a hidden-variable
theory could, in principle, be constructed that was nonlo-
cal and compatible with the Bell inequality experimental
results, such an approach would lose much of its intrinsic
classical appeal and would run the risk of conflicts with
relativity and causality. It remains to be seen whether
any new hidden-variable theory can successfully come to
terms with nonlocality, the experimental results, and
achieve compatibility with relativity and causality.

2. Semiclassical interpretations

Perhaps the most widely “accepted” semiclassical inter-
pretation is the “disturbance model” (Herbert, 1985).
This is the notion, often introduced as a pedagogical tool
in elementary textbooks on modern physics, that canoni-
cally conjugate variables of a particular system under
study, e.g., position and momentum, can “actually” have
simultaneous well-defined values, but that the act of mak-
ing a measurement of one of these variables “disturbs”
the other so that no knowledge of it can be obtained.
Heisenberg reportedly used this model in his early think-
ing (Rosenfeld, 1971a) but later discarded it when he real-
ized its inadequacy. The disturbance model has been re-
futed again and again, most recently by the experimental
tests of Bell’s inequality, but remains as a widely held in-
terpretation of quantum mechanics used by a sizable seg-
ment of the community of practicing physicists. A
second early and unsuccessful semiclassical interpretation,
that of Schrédinger, has already been discussed in Sec. II.

The “guide wave” interpretation of de Broglie, which is
also a semiclassical interpretation, was invented very early
in the development of quantum mechanics (about 1925)
and is said to be responsible for stimulating the develop-
ment of the Schrédinger equation and for the emphasis on
the wave aspects of quantum mechanics that were so im-
portant to the early development.

The guide wave interpretation suggests a specific
underlying mechanism for the interplay of waves and par-
ticles in a quantum event. It has been described in a
number of publications of de Broglie (1926,1927a,
1927b,1960,1964,1968). For example, de Broglie (1964)
gave the following summary: “... a particle is a very
small object which is constantly localized in space, and a
wave is a physical process which is propagated in space in
the course of time according to a given equation of propa-
gation. ... the wave has a very low amplitude and does
not carry energy, at least not in a noticeable manner. The
particle is a very small zone of highly concentrated energy
incorporated in the wave, in which it constitutes a sort of
generally mobile singularity. By reason of this incorpora-
tion of the particle in the wave, the particle possesses an
internal vibration which, as it moves, remains constantly
in phase with the vibration of the wave. . the mean
path of the particle is determined according to the shape


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 37 = RMP 58 page 683 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 683

of the wave by a certain ‘guidance law,’ but this motion
has superimposed on it continual fluctuations correspond-
ing to a hidden variable behavior of the particles.”

From this summary it should be apparent that the
guide wave interpretation presents a very different view of
quantum events from that of the Copenhagen interpreta-
tion. The “wave” in the above description is the SV itself,
which has a definite but limited reality in that it can
physically travel through space but cannot carry energy,
momentum, etc. The collapse does not occur, but is re-
placed by the action of the particle, which “rides” the SV
and arrives with the largest probability at the locations
where the SV has the largest amplitude, the general prop-
erties of the SV being separated from those of the specific
particle that tracks it.

The problem of complexity is not addressed, but is not
serious because the SV is given only limited reality. The
predictivity of the picture is a problem, since the particle
does not follow the path of greatest amplitude of the SV,
as might be expected, but rather follows the wave in a
random “thermodynamic” way.

The most serious problem of the guide wave interpreta-
tion is that it makes no provision of nonlocalities of the
second kind and is implicitly local. It is therefore incon-
sistent with the Bell inequality experiments. There are
also grounds for believing that it may be inconsistent with
the formalism of quantum mechanics. Recent papers
(Garuccio et al., 1981,1982) have asserted that there are
experimental tests that can distinguish the predictions of
the guide wave interpretation from those of orthodox
mechanics. This is because in certain situations involving
the interference of incoherent sources the guide wave in-
terpretation would predict interference effects that are ab-
sent in orthodox calculations. (See, also, Costa de Beaure-
gard, 1982.)

From a certain point of view, the guide wave interpre-
tation can be taken as a kind of preliminary version of the
transactional interpretation presented here. It is com-
pletely consistent with the transactional interpretation in
most of its aspects, and its principal shortcomings are its
lack of a nonlocal mechanism that can account for corre-
lations in separated measurements and the ad hoc way
that the particle and its properties are introduced. But if
de Broglie’s particle is identified with the transaction of
the transaction model, then the picture presented is very
close to that presented in Sec. III above. Thus the
penetrating intuitive insight of de Broglie was not only
crucial to the early development of quantum mechanics,
but it also came very close to the nonlocal interpretation
presented here.

3. “Collapse” interpretations

As discussed in Sec. II.C, the abrupt and discontinuous
collapse of the SV implied by the formalism of quantum
mechanics and its treatment by the Copenhagen interpre-
tation have been the source of many of the interpretation-
al problems. Therefore, there have been a number of at-
tempts to provide a more plausible account of the SV col-

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

lapse process.

One of the early alternative collapse models was sug-
gested first by Darwin (1929), but was more widely publi-
cized through the work of von Neumann (1932), London
and Bauer (1939), and Wigner (1962). Wigner in particu-
lar popularized the model, and we quote him to describe
it. “... the result of an observation modifies the wave
function of a system. The modified wave function is,
futhermore, in general unpredictable before the impres-
sion ‘gained at the interaction has entered our con-
sciousness: it is the entering of an impression into our
consciousness which alters the wave function because it
modifies our appraisal of the possibilities of different im-
pressions which we expect to receive in the future. It is at
this point that the consciousness enters the theory una-
voidably and unalterably.” Wigner goes on to introduce
what has become known as the Wigner’s friend paradox,
which was discussed in Sec. IV.F above. He uses this
Gedankenexperiment to illustrate the plausibility of his
model and the implausibility of several alternatives.

This “consciousness” interpretation, while it is a
reasonable working hypothesis for an observer who does
not wish to find himself dissolved into the state vector of
the system he is measuring, does beg a number of ques-
tions. Did the SV of the universe remain uncollapsed un-
til the first consciousness evolved? Where is the border-
line between consciousness and unconsciousness? Will
“smart” measuring instruments eventually achieve the
ability to collapse SV’s, and how will one know when they
do? And so on.

Schrodinger (1935) suggested an alternative to the con-
sciousness interpretation, which he called the principle of
state distinction and which asserts, “states of a micro-
scopic system which could be told apart by macroscopic
observation are distinct from each other whether observed
or not.” In other words, the SV collapses as soon as some
macroscopic record of the result of a measurement is
made, whether a conscious observer looks at that record
or not. Heisenberg (1960) and others have suggested a
variant of this position which asserts that as soon as the
quantum measurement passes from the domain of reversi-
ble processes into the domain of thermodynamic irreversi-
bility the SV collapses.

The latter two “collapse triggers” are more appealing to
most physicists than the former because they avoid giving
some special significance to consciousness and because, as
pointed out by Weisskopf (1959,1980), they correspond
more closely to the operating assumptions that practicing
physicists use in thinking about how quantum measure-
ments are done. However, these models also beg the ques-
tion of borders: Where precisely is the border between
macrophysics and microphysics and the border at which
irreversibility begins? This point seems particularly trou-
blesome when one realizes that present experimental tech-
niques permit the result of a quantum measurement to be
“recorded” in the spin orientation of a single electron in a
Penning trap or in the trapping of a single magnetic flux
quantum in a split superconducting ring.

Indeed, in the context of the latter apparatus this point


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 38 = RMP 58 page 684 =====

684 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

has been made more quantitative by recent work. Leggett
(1980) has carefully considered the question of macro-
scopic quantum effects. He has introduced a semiquanti-
tative measure called “disconnectivity” for characterizing
the degree to which a quantum system is isolated from ef-
fects that would average away any coherent quantum in-
terference phenomena. He has shown that this is a useful
criterion for separating the macrocosm from the micro-
cosm, i.e., classical from quantum phenomena. He finds
that while many experiments, and in particular the
Schrodinger’s cat Gedankenexperiment, do indeed have a
very small disconnectivity which places them in the clas-
sical domain, there remains a class of possible macroscop-
ic experiments that satisfy the criterion of high disconnec-
tivity and that should exhibit quantum interference ef-
fects at the macroscopic level. Of particular interest are
experiments involving macroscopic quantum tunneling of
magnetic flux in a superconducting Josephson junction,
because this collective behavior involves many degrees of
freedom as well as macroscopic dissipation. Recent ex-
periments (Voss, and Webb, 1981; Ouboter et al., 1982)
have confirmed some of Leggett’s predictions for macro-
scopic quantum tunneling in this macroscopic junction
phase of Josephson junctions. The border between macro-
physics and microphysics seems to have become less
sharp with the improvement of such experimental tech-
niques, making the issue of collapse less clear.

Another problem with these collapse models is that
they are not full interpretations of quantum mechanics.
They have focused only on the cause of collapse and have
provided no insights into the related interpretational prob-
lems listed in Sec. II. In particular, the nonlocal aspects
of the SV collapse, which have become the focus of the
recent Bell inequality tests, are not clarified by these in-
terpretations.

4. The many-worlds interpretation

At a conference on gravitation, Everett (1957) and his
thesis supervisor at Princeton, Wheeler (1957), presented
related papers on Everett’s thesis research, which has
come to be known (DeWitt, 1970; DeWitt and Graham,
1973) as the Everett-Wheeler, Everett-Wheeler-Graham,
or many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Like the interpretations discussed in the Appendix, the
many-worlds interpretation addresses the problem of col-
lapse. Unlike the other interpretations the many-worlds
interpretation asserts that collapse never occurs. Instead
each component of the SV of a quantum event represents
a separate and equal physically real reality. In other
words, with each quantum event the universe splits into a
number of. branch universes, each containing a different
possible outcome for the event. What we perceive as col-
lapse is, in the many-worlds interpretation, simply a result
of the fact that our consciousness took a particular path
through these branches and therefore observed one set of
results instead of another of the myriad possibilities.
Presumably other copies of our consciousness are observ-

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

ing all of the other possible outcomes in other branch
universes.

This is perhaps the most “heroic” of the efforts to deal
with the problem of collapse. It addresses identity by giv-
ing the SV the status of objective reality, for the electron
in each branch universe is identical with its component in
the original SV. Complexity is not addressed, and is
presumably more troublesome for the many-worlds inter-
pretation than for the Copenhagen interpretation because
the SV is a physical entity. Locality is not specifically ad-
dressed in Everett’s paper, but he labels the locality prob-
lem stated by Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen (1935) as a
“fictitious paradox” and asserts that it can be easily inves-
tigated and clarified with the many-worlds interpretation.

From one point of view this is perhaps true, for in a sit-
uation with two separated measurements the “earlier” of
the two measurements will, in the many-worlds interpre-
tation, split the universe containing the second measure-
ment such that its outcome is always correlated properly
with that of the first. From this point of view the many-
worlds interpretation is compatible with nonlocality.
However, from another point of view the many-worlds in-
terpretation would appear to have severe problems in this
area. With each splitting of the universe, spatial regions
megaparsecs distant from an event locus are instantane-
ously split into alternate realities due to the distant quan-
tum event. It would seem that both the propagation
speed of the splitting and its simultaneity are manifestly
inconsistent with relativistic invariance.

The many-worlds interpretation is interesting from
another point of view. It represents an interpretation of
quantum mechanics to which the assumption of con-
trafactual definiteness, as discussed in Sec. I, does not ap-
ply. The many-worlds interpretation characterizes our
world as one of many equally real alternatives, and so
some alternative experiment that might have been per-
formed would not have a single definite outcome as CDF
asserts, but rather would have had all possible outcomes,
one for each branch universe split off by the measure-
ment. Thus the CFD assumption is not applicable to the
many-worlds model. Therefore, in the context of the
many-worlds interpretation, the Bell inequality experi-
mental results can be taken as an experimental demonstra-
tion of the invalidity of CFD rather than of locality.

The many-worlds interpretation also has an intrinsic
time asymmetry. In its description, the universe splits
only in the future time direction, and never in the past
time direction. Thus there is an intrinsic arrow of time
built into the interpretation that is inconsistent, as has
been said of the Copenhagen interpretation, with the
evenhandedness with which microphysics deals with the
flow of time. Perhaps this kind of approach is just what
William of Occam had in mind in warning that hy-
potheses should not be multiplied beyond necessity.

5. Advanced-action interpretations

In addition to the present work, two other approaches
to the interpretation of quantum mechanics have ap-


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 39 = RMP 58 page 685 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 685

peared in the literature which have suggested the use of
advanced waves. The first of these is the ‘“advanced-
action” interpretation of Costa de Beauregard (1953,
1965,1976,1977a, 1977b,1978,1979a,1979b,1982,1985), as
discussed in a series of papers. He points out that the
timelike symmetry of electrons and positrons in the Feyn-
man picture can, in principle, account for the nonlocal
structure of quantum mechanics as applied to electrons
and positrons in a creation-annihilation event.

The approach, however, may have deficiencies. In a re-
cent paper, Garuccio and his co-workers (1980) have
pointed out that the advanced-action interpretation em-
ploys negative-energy solutions of the Dirac equation that
are assumed to propagate in the positive time direction,
an impossibility due to the complementarity of the time
and energy variables (see Cramer, 1980, for a discussion
of this point). They also argue that the advanced-action
interpretation violates causality and energy conservation.
Indeed there may be causality. problems with the
advanced-action approach, for Costa de Beauregard
(1979a,1985) has suggested this interpretation as an ex-
planation for parapsychological phenomena. Selleri and
Vigier (1980) have also argued that the advanced-action
interpretation is inconsistent with quantum electrodynam-
ics because it implies a rejection of Feynman’s D, propa-
gator.

A second interpretation using advanced waves was sug-
gested by Davidon (1976), who proposed that “an opera-
tor which factors into a tensor product of advanced and
retarded solutions of the time-dependent Schrédinger
equation” could lead to “a local and objective description
... for each of the remote parts in an Einstein-Podolsky-
Rosen situation.” Since the time-dependent Schrédinger
equation (see Sec. III.C), being first order in its time
derivative, does not have advanced solutions, it is not
clear what is the actual content of Davidon’s model.

Both of these advanced-wave approaches, from the
point of view of the present work, were on the right track,
but missed the crucial role of the transaction in mediating
the transfer of energy, momentum, etc., and in erasing all
residual traces of the advanced waves. Without this key
concept, these interpretations lead inevitably to causality
paradoxes and inconsistency with quantum-mechanical
predictions and experimental observations.

6. Stapp’s nonlocal model

Stapp (1976,1977,1980) has proposed a very general.
nonlocal model, which we regard as a precursor of the
present work. It is not an interpretation because it does
not propose any specific mechanism for quantum events.
Rather, it is a world model similar to that originally pro-
posed by A. N. Whitehead, but suitably modified to deal
with the manifest nonlocality demonstrated by the tests of
the Bell inequality.

A particular feature of this work is that although the
elemental events considered connect loci of space-time
across spacelike intervals, the events retain a sequentiality

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

that is independent of the reference frame and that
proceeds from the past to the future. Thus, the model is
atemporal (like the transaction model), but it preserves a
sequentiality consistent with causality and with our per-
ception of the causal arrow of time.

The transactional interpretation is fully consistent with
Stapp’s model, but goes beyond it in providing a specific
and plausible mechanism through which Stapp’s nonlocal
sequentiality can operate. In particular, if one equates the
transaction concept defined above and Stapp’s elemental
quantum event concept, then the transactional interpreta-
tion provides a meaningful context in which Stapp’s very
general but rather nonspecific world model can be seen in
operation.

REFERENCES

Aharonov, Y., P. G. Bergmann, and J. L. Lebowitz, 1964, Phys.
Rev. 134, B1410.

Albert, D. Z., Y. Aharonov, and S. D’Amato, 1985, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 54, 5.

Aspect, A., J. Dalibard, and G. Roger, 1982a, Phys. Rev. Lett.
49,91.

Aspect, A., J. Dalibard, and G. Roger, 1982b, Phys. Rev. Lett.
49, 1804.

Audi, M., 1973, The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
(University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois).

Ballentine, L. E., 1970, Rev. Mod. Phys. 42, 358.

Belinfante, F. J., 1973, A Survey of Hidden Variable Theories
(Pergamon, Oxford).

Belinfante, F. J., 1975, Measurements and Time Reversal in Ob-
jective Quantum Theory (Pergamon, Oxford).

Bell, J. S., 1965, Physics 1, 195.

Bell, J. S., 1966, Rev. Mod. Phys. 38, 447.

Berestetskii, V. B., E. M. Lifschitz, and L. P. Pitaevskii, 1971,
Relativistic Quantum Theory (Pergamon, Oxford).

Bjorken, J. D., and S. D. Drell, 1965, Relativistic Quantum
Mechanics (McGraw-Hill, New York).

Bjorken, J. D., and S. D. Drell, 1965, Relativistic Quantum
Fields (McGraw-Hill, New York).

Bohr, N., 1928, in Atti del Congresso Internazionale dei Fisici
Como (Zanchelli, Bologna), Vol. 2, pp. 565—588.

Bohr, N., 1935a, Nature (London) 136, 65.

Bohr, N., 1935b, Phys. Rev. 48, 696.

Bohr, N., and L. Rosenfeld, 1933, K. Dan. Vidensk. Selsk. Mat.
Fys. Medd. 12, 8; translated in Wheeler and Zurek (1983), pp.
479—534.

Born, M., 1926a, Z. Phys. 37, 863; translated in Wheeler and
Zurek (1983), pp. 52—55.

Born, M., 1926b, Z. Phys. 38, 803.

Born, M., 1927, Nature (London) 119, 354.

Born, M., and A. Einstein, 1979, The Born-Einstein Letters
(Walker, New York), with comments by M. Born.

Clauser, J. F., and A. Shimony, 1978, Rep. Prog. Phys. 41,
1881.

Costa de Beauregard, O., 1953, C. R. Acad. Sci. 236, 1632.

Costa de Beauregard, O., 1965, Dialectica 19, 280.

Costa de Beauregard, O., 1976, C. R. Acad. Sci. 282, 1251.

Costa de Beauregard, O., 1977a, Phys. Lett. A 60, 93.

Costa de Beauregard, O., 1977b, Nuovo Cimento B 42, 41.

Costa de Beauregard, O., 1978, Phys. Lett. A 67, 171.

Costa de Beauregard, O., 1979a, Lett. Nuovo Cimento 26, 135.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 40 = RMP 58 page 686 =====

686 John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics

Costa de Beauregard, O., 1979b, Nuovo Cimento B 51, 267.

Costa de Beauregard, O., 1982, Phys. Lett. A 89, 171.

Costa de Beauregard, O., 1985, Found. Phys. 15, 871.

Cramer, J. G., 1980, Phys. Rev. D 22, 362.

Cramer, J. G., 1983, Found. Phys. 13, 887.

Darwin, C. G., 1929, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 124, 375; see
also the discussion in Rosenfeld (1971).

Davidon, W. C., 1976, Nuovo Cimento B 36, 34.

Davies, P. C. W., 1970, Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 68, 751.

Davies, P. C. W., 1971, J. Phys. A 4, 836.

Davies, P. C. W., 1972, J. Phys. A 5, 1025.

de Broglie, L., 1926, C. R. Acad. Sci. 183, 447.

de Broglie, L., 1927a, C. R. Acad. Sci. 184, 273.

de Broglie, L., 1927b, J. Phys. Radium 8, 225.

de Broglie, L., 1960, Nonlinear Wave Mechanics, A Causal
Description (Elsevier, Amsterdam).

de Broglie, L., 1964, The Current Interpretation of Wave
Mechanics (Elsevier, Amsterdam).

d@’Espagnat, B., 1976, Conceptual Foundations of Quantum
Mechanics, 2nd ed. (Benjamin, Menlo Park, CA).

d’Espagnat, B., 1979, Sci. Am. 241, 158.

DeVries, R. M., G. R. Satchler, and J. G. Cramer, 1974, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 32, 1377.

DeWitt, B. S., 1970, Phys. Today 23(9), 30; see also the letter
comments, Phys. Today 24(4), 36, and 24(11), 10.

DeWitt, B. S., and N. Graham, 1973, Eds., The Many-Worlds
Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics (Princeton University,
Princeton, N.J.).

Dicke, R. H., 1981, Am. J. Phys. 49, 925.

Dieks, D., 1982, Phys. Lett. A 92, 271.

Dirac, P. A. M., 1930, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics
(Oxford University Press, London).

Dirac, P. A. M., 1938, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 167, 148.

Eberhard, P. H., 1977, Nuovo Cimento B 38, 75.

Eberhard, P. H., 1978, Nuovo Cimento B 46, 392.

Eberhard, P. H., 1982, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1474.

Einstein, A., 1928, in Electrons et Photons—Rapports et Discus-
sions du Cinquieme Conseil de Physique tenu a Bruxelles du 24
au 29 Octobre 1927 sous les Auspices de I’Institut International
de Physique Solvay (Gauthier-Villar, Paris).

Einstein, A., 1932, in a letter to M. Born, in Born (1979); see
also his remark in Wheeler and Zurek (1983), p. 8.

Einstein, A., 1947, in a letter to M. Born (see Born, 1979).

Einstein, A., 1949, in Albert Einstein, Philosopher Scientist, edit-
ed by P. A. Schilpp (Library of Living Philosophers, Evanston,
IL).

Einstein, A., B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, 1935, Phys. Rev. 47,
777.

Everett ITI, H., 1957, Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 454; see also Wheeler
(1957).

Feinberg, G. 1967, Phys. Rev. 159, 1089.

Feinberg, G., 1978, Phys. Rev. D 17, 1651.

Feynman, R. P., 1949, Phys. Rev. 76, 769. :

Feynman, R. P., 1967a, The Character of Physical Law (MIT,
Cambridge, MA), p. 129.

Feynman, R. P., 1967b; students of Wheeler-Feynman electro-
dynamics are directed to the comments of a certain “Mr. X”
on this subject in Gold (1967).

Feynman, R. P., R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, 1965, The Feyn-
man Lectures (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA), Vol. III.

Freedman, S. J., and J. F. Clauser, 1972, Phys. Rev. Lett. 28,
938.

Furry, W. H., 1936a, Phys. Rev. 49, 393.

Furry, W. H., 1936b, Phys. Rev. 49, 476.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

Garuccio, A., G. N. Maccarone, E. Recami, and J. P. Vigier,
1980, Lett. Nuovo Cimento 27, 60.

Garuccio, A., K. R. Popper, and J. P. Vigier, 1981, Phys. Lett.
A 86, 397.

Garuccio, A., V. Rapisarda, and J. P. Vigier, 1982, Phys. Lett.
A 90, 17.

Ghirardi, G. C., A. Rimini, and T. Weber, 1980, Lett. Nuovo
Cimento 27, 293.

Ghirardi, G. C., and T. Weber, 1979, Lett. Nuovo Cimento 26,
599.

Gold, T., 1967, Ed., The Nature of Time (Cornell University,
Ithaca).

Gyulassy, M., S. K. Kauffmann, and L. W. Wilson, 1979, Phys.
Rev. C 20, 2267.

Hartle, J. B., 1969, Am. J. Phys. 36, 704.

Heisenberg, W., 1925, Z. Phys. 33, 879.

Heisenberg, W., 1927, Z. Phys. 43, 172, translated in Wheeler
and Zurek (1983), pp. 62—84.

Heisenberg, W., 1958, Daedalus (Stockholm) 87, 95.

Heisenberg, W., 1960, Physics and Beyond (Harper and Row,
New York), pp. 60—62.

Heisenberg, W., 1961, Planck’s Discovery and the Philosophical
Problems of Atomic Physics, in On Modern Physics, edited by
C.N. Polter (Orion, New York), pp. 9 and 10.

Herbert, N., 1975, Am. J. Phys. 43, 315.

Herbert, N., 1982, Found. Phys. 12, 1171.

Herbert, N., 1985, Quantum Reality: Beyond the New Physics
(Anchor-Doubleday, Garden City, N.Y.).

Herbert, N., and J. Karush, 1978, Found. Phys. 8, 313.

Hiley, B., 1981, New Scientist 6, quoting P. A. M. Dirac.

Hoyle, F., and J. V. Narlikar, 1969, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 54, 207.

Hoyle, F., and J. V. Narlikar, 1971, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 62, 44.

Jammer, M., 1966, The Conceptual Development of Quantum
Mechanics (McGraw-Hill, New York).

Jammer, M., 1974, The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics (Wi-
ley, New York).

Klauder, J. R., and E. C. G. Sudarshan, 1968, Fundamentals of
Quantum Optics (Benjamin, New York).

Konopinski, E. J., 1980, Electromagnetic Fields and Relativistic
Particles (McGraw-Hill, New York), Chap. XIV.

Kuhn, T. S., 1962, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions
(University of Chicago, Chicago, IL).

Landau, L. D., and R. Peierls, 1931, Z. Phys. 69, 56; translated
in Wheeler and Zurek (1983), pp. 465—476.

Leggett, A. J., 1980, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 69, 80.

London, F., and E. Bauer, 1939, La Theorie de L’Observation en
Mécanique Quantique (Hermann, Paris); translation in Wheeler
and Zurek (1983), pp. 217—259.

Mermin, N. D., 1981, Am. J. Phys. 49, 940.

Mermin, N. D., 1985, Phys. Today 38(4), 38.

Messiah, A., 1961, Quantum Mechanics (North-Holland, Am-
sterdam), Vol. 1.

Milonni, P. W., and M. L. Hardies, 1982, Phys. Lett. A 92, 321.

Mittelstaedt, P., 1983, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 22, 293.

Ouboter, X., R. de Bruyn, and D. Bol, 1982, Physica 112B, 15.

Partridge, R. B., 1973, Nature (London) 244, 263.

Pegg, D. T., 1975, Rep. Prog. Phys. 38, 1339.

Peierls, R., 1979, Surprises in Theoretical Physics (Princeton
University, Princeton, N. J.).

Pflegor, R. L., and L. Mandel, 1967, Phys. Rev. 159, 1084.

Popper, K. R., 1967, in Quantum Theory and Reality, edited by
M. Bunge (Springer, Berlin).

Reichenbach, H., 1944, Philosophical Foundations of Quantum
Mechanics (University of California, Berkeley, CA).


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 41 = RMP 58 page 687 =====

John G. Cramer: Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics 687

Renninger, M., 1953, .Z. Phys. 136, 251.

Rosenfeld, L., 1955, in Quantum Theory and Measurement,
edited by J. A. Wheeler and W. H. Zurek (Princeton Universi-
ty, Princeton, N. J., 1983), p. 477.

Rosenfeld, L., 1971a, in Quantum Theory and Measurement,
edited by J. A. Wheeler and W. H. Zurek (Princeton Universi-
ty, Princeton, N. J., 1983), p. 58.

Rosenfeld, L., 1971b, Quantum Theory in 1929 (Nordita Publi-
cations No. 387, Copenhagen).

Schrédinger, E., 1926a, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 79, 361.

Schrodinger, E., 1926b, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 79, 486.

Schrodinger, E., 1926c, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 79, 734.

Schrédinger, E., 1926d, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 81, 109.

Schrédinger, E., 1927a, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 82, 257.

Schrodinger, E., 1927b, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 82, 265.

Schrédinger, E., 1927c, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 83, 956.

Schrodinger, E., 1935, Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 31, 555.

Science and the Citizen, 1985, Sci. Am. 252, 82.

Selieri, F., and J. P. Vigier, 1980, Lett. Nuovo Cimento 29, 7.

Stapp, H. P., 1971, Phys. Rev. D 3, 1303.

Stapp, H. P., 1975, Nuovo Cimento B 36, 34.

Stapp, H. P., 1977, Found. Phys. 7, 313.

Stapp, H. P. 1980, Found. Phys. 10, 767.

Stapp, H. P., 1982, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1470.

Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 58, No. 3, July 1986

von Neumann, J., 1932, Mathematische Grundiagen der Quan-
tenmechanik (Springer, Berlin).

von Weizaecker, C. H., 1971, in Quantum Theory and Beyond,
edited by T. Bastin (Cambridge University Press, London).

Voss, R. F., and R. A. Webb, 1981, Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 265.

Weisskopf, V., 1959, Daedalus 88, 592.

Weisskopf, V., 1980, letter to the editor in Sci. Am. 242, 8.

Wheeler, J. A., 1957, Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 463, see also Everett
(1957).

Wheeler, J. A., 1978, in The Mathematical Foundations of
Quantum Mechanics, edited by A. R. Marlow (Academic, New
York).

Wheeler, J. A., and R. P. Feynman, 1945, Rev. Mod. Phys. 17,
157.

Wheeler, J. A., and R. P. Feynman, 1949, Rev. Mod. Phys. 21,
425.

Wheeler, J. A., and W. H. Zurek, 1983, Eds., Quantum Theory
and Measurement (Princeton University, Princeton, N. J.).

Wigner, E. P., 1950, Group Theory (Academic, New York).

Wigner, E. P., 1962, in The Scientist Speculates, edited by I. J.
Good (Heinemann, London).

Wooters, W. K., and W. H. Zurek, 1982, Nature (London) 299,
802.
