                      1.13)     LAW WITHOUT                 LAW

                         JOHN ARCHIBALD             WHEELER

                                  *    *     F     K    *

      The second phase of the dialog began in Europe but
continued in America from Einstein’s arrival at Princeton in
October, 1933, to his death there in April, 1955. Here Ein-
stein tried to show that quantum theory— in making what
happens depend upon what the observer chooses to measure
—is incompatible with any reasonable idea of reality.'* Bohr’s
reply'® briefly summarized was this: Your concept of reality
is too limited.

                               THE    BEAM       SPLITTER

     Of all the idealized experiments taken up by the two
friends in their effort to win agreement, none 1s simpler than
the beam splitter of fig. 4. With the final half-silvered mirror
in place the photodetector at the lower right goes click-click
as the successive photons arrive but the adjacent counter
registers nothing. This is evidence of interference between
beams 4a and 4b; or, in photon                   language, evidence that each
arriving light quantum has arrived by both routes, A and B.
In such experiments,” Einstein originally argued, it is unrea-
sonable      for a single photon                 to travel simultaneously            two
routes. Remove the half-silvered mirror, as at the lower left,
and one will find that the one counter goes off, or the other.
Thus the photon has traveled only one route. It travels only
one route, but it travels both routes; it travels both routes, but
it travels only one route. What nonsense! How obvious it is
that quantum theory is inconsistent!
* A. Einstein, B. Podolsky and N. Rosen, “Can quantum-mechanical description of
  physical reality be considered complete?” Physical Review 47: pp. 777-780 (1935).

'°N. Bohr, “Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be considered
  complete?” Physical Review 48: pp. 696-702 (1935).

* The center of discussion in the Bohr-Einstein dialog was more often the so-called
  double-slit experiment than the beam splitter depicted in figure 4. The latter ts
  made the focus of aitention here because it presents the central point without
  getting into the physics of interference patterns.

The first section between stars (* * * * *) appeared in Wheeler, 1981a; the next section
between stars from Wheeler, 1979; the following from Wheeler, 1980; and the final section
(a single paragraph) from Wheeler, 1981b. Preparation for publication of all four items was
assisted by The University of Texas Center for Theoretical Physics and by NSF Grant PHY78-
                              1.13   LAW    WITHOUT   LAW                                 183

     Bohr emphasized that there is no inconsistency. We are
dealing with two different experiments. The one with the
half-silvered mirror removed tells which route. The one with
the half-silvered mirror in place provides evidence that the
photon traveled both routes. But it is impossible to do both
experiments at once. One can observe one feature of nature,
or the complementary feature of nature but not both features
simultaneously. What we choose to measure has an irretriev-
able consequence for what we will find.


                                                                                  ~


                                                            —                       a”
                                                                “>>... DELAYED ~~
                                                                        CHOICE:
                                                                     $$ IN OR OUT 9




              WHICH                        (~             BOTH                      )
             ROUTE ?                                     ROUTES ?




Fig. 4. Beam splitter (above) and its use in a delayed-choice experiment (below). An
electromagnetic wave comes in at 1 and encounters the half-silvered mirror marked
“WS” which splits it into two beams, 2a and 2b, of equal intensity which are reflected
by mirrors A and B to a crossing point at the right. Counters (lower left) located
past the point of crossing tell by which route an arriving photon has come. In the
alternative arrangement at the lower right, a half-silvered mirror is inserted at the
pommt of crossing. On one side it brings beams 4a and 4b into destructive interfer-
ence, so that the counter located on that side never registers anything. On the other
side the beams are brought into constructive interference to reconstitute a beam, 5,
of the original strength, 1. Every photon that enters at | is registered in that second
counter in the idealized case of perfect mirrors and 100 per cent photodetector
efhciency. In the one arrangement (lower left) one finds out by which route the
photon came. In the other arrangement (lower right) one has evidence that the
arriving photon came by both routes. In the new “delayed-choice” version of the
experiment one decides whether to put in the half-sitvered mirror or take it out at
the very last minute. Thus one decides whether the photon “shall have come by one
route, or by both routes” after it has “already done its travel.”
184                                        WHEELER


                         THE     DELAYED-CHOICE         EXPERIMENT

            In our own day we have learned to state the point even
      more sharply by way of a so-called delayed-choice experi-
      ment.”' There we make the decision whether to put the final
      half-silvered mirror in place or to take it out at the very last
      picosecond, after the photon has already accomplished its
      travel. In this sense, we have a strange inversion of the nor-
      mal order of time. We, now, by moving the mirror in or out
      have an unavoidable effect on what we have a right to say
      about the already past history of that photon.


                                       “PHENOMENON”

            The dependence of what is observed upon the choice of
      experimental arrangement made Einstein unhappy. It con-
      flicts with the view that the universe exists “out there” inde-
      pendent of all acts of observation. In contrast Bohr stressed
      that we confront here an inescapable new feature of nature,
      to be welcomed because of the understanding it gives us. In
      struggling to make clear to Einstein the central point as he
      saw it, Bohr       found      himself      forced     to introduce            the word
      “phenomenon.” In today’s words Bohr’s point — and the
      central point of quantum theory —can be put into a single,
      simple sentence. “No elementary phenomenon is a phenom-
      enon      until it is a registered (observed) phenomenon.”                              It is
      wrong to speak of the “route” of the photon in the experi-
      ment of the beam splitter. It is wrong to attribute a tangibility
      to the photon in all its travel from the point of entry to its
      last instant of flight. A phenomenon is not yet a phenomenon



      7! 1A. Wheeler, “The ‘past’ and the ‘delayed-choice’ double-slit experiment,” in AR.
        Marlow,   ed., Mathematical Foundations of Quantum     Theory (Academic      Press,    New
        York, 1978), pp. 9-48.

      ® “Closed by irreversible amplification”, p. 73; “irreversible amplification,” p. 88: N.
        Bohr, Atomic Physics and Human    Knowledge (Wiley, New    York,   1958).

      A homely illustration of this idea is provided by the old parlor game of Twenty
      Questions in the “surprise version” described by the author in several places, most
      recently in “Beyond   the black hole,” a chapter in H. Woolf, ed., Some Strangeness in
      the Proportions: An Einsten Centenary Celebration (Addison-Wesley,       Reading,       Mass.,
       1980).
                            1.13   LAW   WITHOUT   LAW                                   185.

until it has been brought to a close by an irreversible act of
amplification such as the blackening of a grain of silver bro-
mide emulsion or the triggering of a photodetector.” In
broader    terms,     we   find     that nature     at the quantum           level is
not a machine that goes its inexorable way. Instead what
answer we get depends on the question we put, the experi-
ment we arrange, the registering device we choose. We are
inescapably involv ed in bringing about that which appears to
be happening.”?


          CONCERN      ABOUT       OBSERVER-PAR     TICIPANCY      ‘TODAY

     Most applications of quantum theory deal with station-
ary states of elementary particles, of atomic nuclei, atoms,
molecules and larger systems, and with processes of collision
between one quantum system and another. Only in recent
vears has increasing attention come back to the point of cen-
tral concern of Bohr and Einstein, the elementary quantum
phenomenon, the process of measurement, the involvement
of the registering device in bringing about that which appears
to be happening, the strangest part of a strange subject. How
can one contemplate indeterminism, complementarity and
“phenomenon” without being reminded of the words of Ger-
trude Stein about modern art? “It looks strange and it looks
strange and it looks very strange; and then suddenly it doesn't
look strange at all and you can’t understand what made it
look strange in the first place.” Many investigators, believing
that the greatest insights are to be won from nature’s strangest
features, are —in research papers, review articles and books
— giving fresh coverage of the strange “observer-
partcipancy” forced to our attention by the quantum.”



* See lor example   B. d'Espagnat. ed... Foundations of Quantum   Mechames   (Academic
  Press. New York. 1978): EP. Wigner. “loterpretation of quantum mechanics,” 93
  pages of mimeographed notes of lectures delivered at Princeton University in
  1976 ou deposit in Fine Library. Princeton Universits, Princeton, N.J. MLM.
  Yantase. Mo Nantikt and $. Machida. eds.. Theory of Measurement in Quentum Me-
  chanis (Phissical Sodets of Japan, Tokyo, 1980); J. A. Wheeler, “Frontiersof ume,
  in. N. Voraldo di Fraucia. ed., Problems on the Foundations of Physics, Rendiconti
  della Scuola Imernazionate dit Fisica “Enrico Fermi, LXXLL Corso (North-Hol-
  land. Anasterdam. 1979).
186                                          WHEELER


                         MANY   QUANTA       VERSUS     ONE   QUANTUM

            How does quantum mechanics today differ from what
      Bishop George Berkeley told us two centuries ago, “Esse est
      percipi,” to be is to be perceived?” Does the tree not exist in
      the forest unless there is someone there to see it? Do Bohr’s
      conclusions about the role of the observer differ from those
      of Berkeley?        Yes, and in an important              way.    Bohr deals with
      the individual quantum process. Berkeley — like all of us
      under everyday circumstances — deals with multiple quan-
      tum processes.
            Pondering the difference between the individual quan-
      tum phenomenon and the tree that falls, unobserved, in the
      forest, we walk through the art gallery on our way to visit
      again a favorite picture. We pass by the painting “Impres-
      sions,” first shown by Claude Monet in 1863 at the Salon des
      Refusés. From a tiny dab of color on that canvas in the single
      second of our passage the pupil of our eye receives 50,000
      photons. Each is accidental in its direction and time of arrival.
      The quanta in that hail of information are so numerous that
      they give the impression of perfect steadiness of illumination.
      What one of us busy mortals has the time to count them all?
      We rely instead on some gross and handier measure of inten-
      sity, such as the eye so aptly passes to the brain. There is no
      place in that message for the qualifying words, “with a root
      mean square fluctuation of 224 relative to an average number
      of photons of 50,000.” Who needs to know about quanta to
      know the dot of color is there?
            Unexpectedly the power blacks out. A guard with electric
      torch pointed at the floor guides our return. Our eye receives
      no photons from the dab of paint on the canvas. However, a
      touch of the hand as we pass the painting in the dark is
      enough to comfort us that it is still there. It would outreach
      any on-the-spot bookkeeping to count the 10'° atomic points
      of contact between the fingers and the picture frame, or the
      even more numerous quantum processes that impinge from
      the frame onto the fingertips. The message is still clear. How-



      (5,   Berkeley   (1685-1783) in M.W.   Calkins, ed.. Berkeley: Essays, Principles, Dialogs,
        with Selections from Other Writings (Scribner, New York, 1929, as reprinted in 1957).
        pp. 125-126,
                            1.13   LAW   WITHOUT   LAW                                 187

ever, we now go through a longer chain of theory and inter-
pretation in reaching the conclusion that the dab of paint is
still there. Or was the luminous dot of color an illusion cre-
ated by trick illumination from a concealed lamp? That was
conceivable when we passed it first but highly unlikely given
the integrity of the museum and the difficulty of the under-
taking. During the exit through the dark it is more difficult
to check against deception but the best indirect evidence one
has says that the painting is still there with all its dots of color.
Moreover, one is free to stop and extend the investigation
and transform questionable evidence into convincing evi-
dence.
      When we emerge from the gallery and start thinking
again of the tree, we recognize that this problem differs from
the case of the picture only in degree, not in kind. The
supposition that it fell we can check more and more conclu-
sively according to the amount of effort we are willing to put
into investigating impact points, ground dislocations and
acoustic records. Anything macroscopic that happened in the
past makes, we know, a rich fallout of consequences in the
present. But whether we deal with the fall of the tree or the
evidence for the dab of paint on the canvas or the motion of
the moon through the sky, the number of quanta that come
into play is so enormous that the unseen quantum individu-
ality of the act of observation can hardly be said to influence
the event observed.
       In contrast the choice of question asked has a decisive
consequence for” the elementary quantum phenomenon.
 For illustration it is enough to recall the inquiry of fig. 4 about
the “track”      of the photon,          or a similar      inquiry     about    the
“path” of an electron through a beam splitter or the “motion”
of an electron in an atom. In each of these examples, more-
over, at least one of the available choices of question to be
asked (which route for the photon or electron; or what posi-
tion or momentum does the electron have in the atom) has a


* Why not change “has a decisive consequence for . . .” to “makes all the difference
  in the elementary quantum phenomenon”? The word “difference” is not allowa-
  ble. We can do the one experiment or the other experiment but the two experi-
  ments simply will not fit into one place at one time. We are dealing with one
  phenomenon, one “act of creation.” The very individuality of the quantum phe-
  nomenon leaves no place for comparing what is with what might have been.
188                                          WHEELER


      completely unpredictable answer. We can send a million pho-
      tons through the beam splitter when it is operated in the
      “which route” configuration at the lower left of fig. 4. Then
      we can be assured half a million photons, more or less (statis-
      tical variations of the order of magnitude +500) will be
      recorded      by each     counter.       However,       when      via the same       ar-
      rangement we deal with a single photon we have not the
      slightest possibility to tell in advance which of the two counters
      it will strike.



            QUANTUM       OUTCOME:         GOVERNED      BY   HIDDEN      VARIABLES?

            Is there not some underground                     machinery beneath the
      working of the world which one can ferret out to secure an
      advance indication of the outcome? Some secret determiner,
      some “hidden variable”? Every attempt, theoretical or obser-
      vational, to defend such a hypothesis has been struck down.”
      Not the slightest hard evidence has ever been found that
      would throw doubt on the plain, straightforward prediction
      of quantum        mechanics,         the prediction that no prediction is
      possible. Probability? Yes. A definite forecast? No. Einstein
      could be unhappy that “God plays dice”; but Bohr could tell
      him jokingly, “Einstein, stop telling God what to do.”*


                      QUANTUM         OUTCOME:        ALLAH     WILLED     IT?

            If no identifiable machinery                is at hand        to tell the lone
      photon which way to go then why not simply say of the route
      it actually    takes,   Allah       willed   it? And    willed      the outcome       of
      every other individual quantum process?
            To   strike    down       a    proposal     of    this     kind,     it has   been




      *” For a review of relevant experiments, see especially    FM.    Pipkin. “Atomic physics
        tests of the basic concepts in quantum mechanics, pp. 281-340 in Advances in
        Atomic and Molecular Phyucs (Academic Press. New York, 1978).

      *N. Bohr as quoted by J. Bronowski, Phe Ascent of Man (Little. Brown and             Co..
        Boston/Toronto, 1973), p. 122.
                          1.13   LAW     WITHOUT    LAW                                  189
pointed out more than once,” is beyond the power of logic.
One has to appeal instead to pragmatism. In the struggle for
survival,   other    things      being    equal,    that    way   of    life will   go
under that takes all that comes in a blindly fatalistic spirit. To
evade danger and to seize opportunity every faculty has to
be mobilized to predict what lies ahead of peril and promise.
Society charges science with the task of prediction. Science
makes some progress with the task. In the individual quan-
tum   process,      however,      prediction       comes     to the     end   of the
road. Science does not have to be ashamed of its finding. It
has only to be honest about it. Why demand of science a
cause when cause there is none?


      QUANTUM        OUTCOME:       ELEMENTARY        ACT    OF CREATION?

      How    did the universe come                 into being?         Is that some
strange,    far-off process,       beyond      hope    of analysis?        Or is the
mechanism that came into play one which all the time shows
itself?
      Of the signs that testify to “quantum phenomenon” as
being the elementary act of creation, none is more striking
than its untouchability. In the delayed-choice version of the
split-beam experiment,            for example,        we have no right to say
what the photon is doing in all its long course from point of
entry to point of detection. Until the act of detection the
phenomenon-to-be is not yet a phenomenon. We could have
intervened at some point along the way with a different meas-
uring device; but then regardless whether it is the new reg-
istering device or the previous one that happens to be triggered
we have a new phenomenon. We have come no closer than
before to penetrating to the untouchable interior of the phe-
nomenon. For a process of creation that can and does operate
anywhere, that reveals itself and yet hides itself, what could
one have dreamed up out of pure imagination more magic
—and more fitting— than this?




° For a discussion of this point I am indebted to Professor Andrew Gleason.
190                                                     WHEELER

                  DELAYED              CHOICE      AT   THE    COSMOLOGICAL                SCALE

               Of all the features of the “act of creation” that is the
      elementary quantum phenomenon,                                   the most startling is that
      seen in the delayed-choice experiment. It reaches back into
      the past in apparent opposition to the normal order of time.
      The distance of travel in a laboratory split-beam experiment
      might be thirty meters and the time a tenth of a microsecond;
      but the distance could as well have been billions of light years
      and the time billions of years. Thus the observing device in
      the here and now, according to its last minute setting one way
      or the other,             has an irretrievable consequence                           for what one
      has the right to say about a photon that was given out long
      before there was any life in the universe.
               Two     astronomical objects, known                         as 0957 + 561A,B              (fig.
      5), once considered to be two distinct quasistellar objects or
      “quasars” because they are separated by six seconds of arc,
      are considered now by many observers to be two distinct
      images of one quasar.”’ Evidence has been found for an in-
      tervening galaxy, roughly a quarter of the way from us to the
      quasar. Calculations indicate*' that a normal galaxy at such a
      distance has the power to take two light rays, spread apart by

      °D. Walsh. R.F. Carswell and R.J. Wevmann, °0957+4 56EA,B: iwi quasistellar
        objects or gravitational lens?" Nature 279: pp. 381-384 (1979); RJ. Weemann. FAL.
        Chaffee Jr. M. Davis. N.P. Carleton, D. Walsh. and R-FO Carswell. “Muliiple-
         mirror observations of the twin QSO 0957 4 561A. BY Astophyswal       Jow nal 233,
         L43-L46 (1979); PJ. Young. WLW. Sargent, J-A. Kristian and ].A. Westphal,
         “CCD photometry of the nucter of three supergiant elliptical galaxies: evidence
         for a supermassive object in the center of the radiogalaxy NGC625 17 Astrophysical
        Journal 234: pp. 76-85 (1979); D-H. Roberts, PE. Greenheld and BoP Baurke,
        “The double quasar 0957 + 561: a radio study at 6 centimeters wavelength” Sener
        205: pp. 894-896 (1979): G.G, Pooles. 1. Browne, EJ. Daintree. P-K. Moore, R.G.
        Noble and D. Walsh, “Radio stucies of the double QSO 0957 + S6EA,BS Nature
        280:    pp.   461-464     (1979):    PE.   Greenheld.     D.H.    Roberts   and    BF   Burke.   “The
        double quasar 0957 + 561: examination of the gravitational lens hypothesis using
        the vers large array.” Scrence 208: pp. 495-497 (1980): PJ. Young, J.-E. Guiue. JA.
        Kristian. J.B. Oke and J.A. Westphal, “Q0957         4 56LA.B: a gravitational tens
        formed bv a galaxs atz = 0.390 Astrophysical Journal in press (1980); B. Wills and
        D. Wills. “Spectrophotometrs of the double QSO 0957 + 561" Avtaphyswal        Jaw nal
        238: pp. 1-9 (1980): BIT. Soifer, G. Neugebauer. K. Matthews. E.E. Beckliu. C.G.
        Winn-Williams and R. Capps. “IR observations of the double quasar 0957 + 561A.B
        and the intervening galaxy.” Nature 285: pp. 91-93 (1980),

        C.C.    Dyer and        R.C.    Roeder, “Possible multiple imaging by spherical galaxies.”
        Asbaphyswal
                Jow nal 238,                L67-L.70 (L980):    C.G.     Dyer and   R.G.   Roeder, “A range
        of time delays for the double quasar  0957
                                                + 56LA.B. Astapiyseal                           Jow nal. sub-
        mitted for publication June 16, 1980.
                                1.13 LAW   WITHOUT    LAW                                   191,




                           ’                                           ar. >a   OY]

Fig. 5. Left, the double quasistellar object (“quasar”; red shift z = 1.41), identified
by its right ascension and declination as 0957 + 561A,B, and suspected to be the two
images    — produced by gravitational lens action—of one and the same quasar. This
photograph, made at the University of Hawaii telescope by Alan Stockton and
kindly communicated and discussed by Derek Wills of the University of Texas at
Austin, is the digital sum of five one-minute exposures in red light (5700 to 7000A).
The stellar images appear elongated because of a telescope tracking problem. Right,
the same digital photographic record after a stellar profile has been subtracted from
the southern image (B), the residual being compatible with the existence near B of
a lensing galaxy (G-1). Evidence has been found by Young, Gunn, Kristian, Oke
and Westphal at Caltech for such a galaxy (0.02” to the West and 0.8” North of B;
red shift   z =   0.39), much   closer to B than to A (which   is 1.2” to the West and 6”
North of B), and for its membership im a cluster of perhaps [000 to 10,000 galaxies
(centered 2” to the West and      15” North of B).
192                                     WHEELER


      fifty thousand light years on their way out from the quasar,
      and bring them back together at the Earth. This circum-
      stance, and evidence for a new case of gravitational lensing,”
      make it reasonable to promote the split-beam experiment in
      the delayed-choice version from the laboratory level to the
      cosmological scale as illustrated in fig. 6.
            We get up in the morning and spend the day in medita-
      tion whether to observe by “which route” or to observe inter-
      ference between “both routes.” When night comes and the
      telescope is at last usable we leave the half-silvered mirror out
      or put it in, according to our choice. The monochromatizing
      filter placed over the telescope makes the counting rate low.
      We may have to wait an hour for the first photon. When it
      triggers a counter, we discover “by which route” it came with
      the one arrangement; or by the other, what the relative phase
      is of the waves associated with the passage of the photon
      from source to receptor “by both routes”— perhaps 50,000
      light years apart as they pass the lensing galaxy G-1. But the
      photon has already passed that galaxy billions of years before
      we made our decision. This is the sense in which, in a loose
      way of speaking, we decide what the photon shall have done
      after it has already done it. In actuality it is wrong to talk of
      the “route” of the photon. For a proper way of speaking we
      recall once more that it makes no sense to talk of the phe-
      nomenon until it has been brought to a close by an irrever-
      sible act of amplification: “No elementary phenomenon is a
      phenomenon until it is a registered (observed) phenomenon.”




      * RJ. Weymann, D. Latham, J.R.P. Angel, R.E. Green, J.W. Liebert, D.A. Turnshek,
        D.E. Turnshek and J.A. Tyson, “The triple QSO PG1115 +08: another probable
        gravitational lens,” Nature 205: pp. 641-643 (1980).
                             1.13   LAW   WITHOUT      LAW                                193

    c—~\
 (RECEPTOR          (© DELAYED CHOICE              »

                                          FIBER
                                          OPTICS
                                          DELAY
                                          LOOP




                       ai


                                      TELESCOPE




Fig. 6. Proposed delayed-choice experiment extending over a cosmological reach
of space and time. Left, quasar Q recorded at receptor as two quasars by reason of
the gravitational lens action of the intervening galaxy G-1. Middle, schematic design
of receptor for delayed-choice experiment: (a) filter to pass only wave lengths in a
narrow interval, corresponding to a long wave train, suitable for interference ex-
periments; (b) lens to focus the two apparent sources onto the acceptor faces of two
optic fibers; (c) delay loop in one of these fibers of such length, and of such rate of
change of length with time, as to bring together the waves traveling the two very
different routes with the same, or close to the same, phase. Right, the choice. Upper
diagram, nothing is interposed in the path of the two waves at the crossing of the
optic fibers. Wave 4a goes into counter I, and 4b into counter II. Whichever of
these photodetectors goes off, that    — in a bad way of speaking  — signals “by which
route, a or b, the photon in question traveled from the quasar to the receptor.”
Lower diagram, a half-silvered mirror, S, is interposed as indicated at the crossing
of the two fibers. Let the delay loop be so adjusted that the two arriving waves have
the same phase. Then there is never a count in I. All photons are recorded in II.
This result, again in a misleading phraseology, says that “the photons in question
come by both routes.” However, at the time the choice was made whether to put in
‘4S or leave it out, the photon in question had already been on its way for billions of
years. It is not right to attribute to it a route. No elementary phenomenon is a
phenomenon untt it is a registered phenomenon.
194                                          WHEELER


                             THE    “PAST”    IN THE    LIGHT    OF
                         THE DELAYED-CHOICE EXPERIMENT
           To use other language,              we are dealing with an elemen-
      tary act of creation. It reaches into the present from billions
      of years in the past. It is wrong to think of that past as
      “already existing” in all detail. The “past” is theory. The past
      has no existence except as it is recorded in the present. By
      deciding what questions our quantum registering equipment
      shall put in the present we have an undeniable choice in what
      we have the right to say about the past.
           What we call reality consists (fig. 7) of a few iron posts of
      observation between which we fill in by an elaborate papier-
      maché construction of imagination and theory.**
            Spacetime in the prequantum dispensation was a great
      record parchment. This sheet, this continuum, this carrier of
      all that is, was and shall be, had its definite structure with its
      curves, waves and ripples; and on this great page every event,
      like a glued down grain of sand, had its determinate place.
      In this frozen picture a far-reaching modification is forced by
      the quantum. What we have the right to say of past spacetime,
      and past events, is decided by choices— of what measure-
      ments to carry out — made in the near past and now. The
      phenomena called into being by these decisions reach back-
      ward in time in their consequences as indicated in fig. 8, back
      even to the earliest days of the universe. Registering equip-
      ment operating in the here and now has an undeniable part
      in bringing about that which appears to have happened. Use-
      ful as it is under everyday circumstances to say that the world
      exists “out there” independent of us, that view can no longer
      be upheld. There is a strange sense in which this is a “parti-
      cipatory universe.”




      * In this connection see especially E.H. Gombrich, Art and Illusion: A Study in the
        Psychology of Pictortal Representation (Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J..,
         1961, 2nd edition. revised), pp. 273, 329 and 394.
                            1.13 LAW   WITHOUT     LAW                                  195




Fig. 7. What we call “reality,” symbolized by the letter “R” in the diagram, consists
of an elaborate papier-maché construction of imagination and theory fitted in
between a few iron posts of observation.
196                                          WHEELER


                          FROM      MEASUREMENT           TO   MEANING

           We cannot speak in these terms without a caution and a
      question. The caution: “Consciousness” has nothing whatso-
      ever to do with the quantum process. We are dealing with an
      event that makes itself known by an irreversible act of am-
      plification, by an indelible              record,”** an act of registration.
      Does that record subsequently enter into the “consciousness”
      of some person, some animal or some computer? Is that the
      first step in translating the measurement into “meaning” —
      meaning regarded as “the joint product of all the evidence
      that is available to those who communicate”??? Then that is a
      separate part of the story, important but not to be confused
      with “quantum phenomenon.”



             1S THE    UNIVERSE CONSTRUCTED OUT                     OF ELEMENTARY
                                  PHENOMENA?

           From this caution we turn to the question: If the ele-
      mentary quantum process is an act of creation, is an act of
      creation of any other kind required to bring into being all
      that is?
           At first sight no question could seem more ridiculous.
      How fantastic the disproportion seems between the micro-
      scopic scale of the typical quantum phenomenon and the
      gigantic reach of the universe!                    Disproportion, however, we
      have learned, does not give us the right to dismiss. Else how
      would we have discovered that the heat of the carload of
      molten pig iron goes back for its explanation to the random
      motions of billions of microscopic atoms and the shape of the
      elephant to the message on a microscopic strand of DNA? Is
      the term “big bang” merely a shorthand way to describe the



      * EY. Belinfante, Measurements and Time Reversalin Objective Quantum Theory (Oxford
        University Press, Oxford,     1975); terminology “indelible,” p. 39.

      © D. Fdllesdal, “Meaning and experience” in S. Guttenplan, ed., Mind and Language
        (Clarendon   Press, Oxford,    1975), pp. 254.    Fgllesdal’s article, the other articles in
       this book and the references they make to the still larger literature of meaning, a
       central topic of philosophy in Britain and America in recent decades, will indicate
       the representative character of this statement.
                                  1.13 LAW   WITHOUT     LAW                                   197

cumulative consequence of billions upon billions of elemen-
tary acts of observer-participancy reaching back into the past,
as symbolized in fig. 8?
     An old legend describes a dialog between Abraham and
Jehovah. Jehovah chides Abraham, “You would not even
exist if it were not for me!” “Yes, Lord, that I know,’ Abraham
replies, “but also You would not be known if it were not for
me   9936

     In our time the participants in the dialog have changed.
They are the universe and man. The universe, in the words
of some who would aspire to speak for it, says, “I am a giant
machine. I supply the space and time for your existence.
There was no before before I came into being, and there will

“ Thanks are expressed          here to Professors Lawrence P. Horwitz, Zvi Kurzweil,
  Yuval Ne’eman, Asher          Peres, Shmuel Sambursky, Lawrence Schulman and Elie
 Wiesel, each for his part in leading the author to this legend and documenting it,
 as follows: (i) H. Freedman and M. Simon, translators and eds., Midrash Rabbah,
 Genens I (Soncino Press, London, 1939), p. 238, commentary on “Noah walked
 with God”: “The God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, etc. (Genesis
 48:15). R. Berekiah in R. Johanan’s name and Resh Lakish gave two illustrations
 of this. R. Johanan said: It was as if a shepherd stood and watched his flocks. Resh
 Lakish said: It was as if a prince walked along while the elders preceded him
 (Footnote: As an escort, to make known his coming. Similarly, Abraham and Isaac
 walked before God, spreading His knowledge]. On R. Johanan’s view: We need
 His proximity, On the view of Resh Lakish: He needs us to glorify Him (Footnote:
 By propagating the knowledge of His greatness].” (it) /bid, p. 357, commentary
 on, “And he blessed him, and said: blessed be Abram of the God most high, who
 has acquired [Koneh = maker of] heaven and earth” (Genesis 14:19): “From
 whom then did He acquire them?— Said R. Abba: [Acquired is attributive,] as
 one says, So-and-so has (Koneh = in possession of] beautiful eyes and hair. R.
 Isaac said: Abraham used to entertain wayfarers, and after they had eaten he
 would say to them, ‘Say a blessing, ‘What shall we say?’ they asked. ‘Blessed be the
 God of the Universe of Whose bounty we have eaten,’ replied he. Then the Holy
  One, blessed be He, said to him: ‘My Name        was not known among      My creatures,
  and thou hast made it known among them: I will regard thee as though thou wast
  associated with Me in the creation of the world’... .” (iii) Deuteronomy 32:10:
  “He found him [Jacob] in a desert land, and in the waste howling wilderness; he
  led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye,” as com-
  mented on in Sifre [analogous to the Midrash of (i) and (ii) but contains in addition
  to the Aggadic or legend of the Midrash the Halakhic or law; ed, in the Holy
  Land before the end of the 4th century A.D.] §313, “he led him about”: “This is
  related to Genesis     12:1, ‘Get thee out of thy country’...    .; ‘he instructed   him’:
  .... before our father Abraham came into this world it seemed as if the Lord,
  Blessed Be He, reigned only in Heaven, since it is said, ‘The Lord, God of Heaven,
  which took me from my father’s house’ (Genesis 24:7). But once Abraham had
  come      into the world (=    was born], he Abraham    [thereby] enthroned    Him   over
  Heaven and Earth” (translation from the Hebrew by Y. Ne’eman). (iv) Isaiah 43:10:
  “Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen, that ye
  may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was no
  God formed, neither shall there be after me.”
198                                       WHEELER




      me                                  K ‘
                                       BIG          BANG
                             JME    ZL LNA                 KAZ.               Z

                                     — SPACE —=
      Fig. 8. Symbolic description how all that “has happened” im the past is influenced
      by choices made in the present as to what to observe. The upper tip of each “leaf”
      stands for the elementary act of registration. The lower end of each leaf stands for
      the beginning of the elementary phenomenon being investigated by the observa-
      tional means at hand. Is anything else required to make up space and time and all
      their burden of physical content except the information carrted in the elementary
      quantum acts thus symbolized? [Details in the original publication.]
                          1.13   LAW    WITHOUT     LAW                              199

be no after after I cease to exist. You are an unimportant bit
of matter located in an unimportant galaxy.”
    How      shall   we   reply?       Shall   we   say, “Yes,   oh   universe,
without you I would not have been able to come into being.
Yet you, great system, are made of phenomena; and every
phenomenon rests on an act of observation. You could never
even exist without elementary acts of registration such as
mine”?
     Are elementary quantum phenomena, those untoucha-
ble, indivisible acts of creation, indeed the building material
of all that is? Beyond particles, beyond fields of force, beyond
geometry, beyond space and time themselves, is the ultimate
constituent, the still more ethereal act of observer-partici-
pancy? For Dr. Samuel Johnson the stone was real enough
when he kicked it. The subsequent discovery that the matter
in that rock is made of positive and negative electric charges
and more than 99.99 per cent empty space does not diminish
the pain that it inflicts on one’s toe. If the stone is someday
revealed to be altogether emptiness, “reality” will be none the
worse for the finding.
      Roland M. Frye, in reminding us” of Shakespeare and
of ways of seeing, gives us opportunity to recall those words
of almost four hundred years ago,
    And as imagination bodies forth
    The form of things unknown, the poet’s pen
    Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing
    A local habitation and a name.
     Are billions upon billions of acts of observer-partici-
pancy the foundation of everything? We are about as far as
we can be today from knowing enough about the deeper
machinery of the universe to answer this question. Increasing
knowledge about detail has brought an increasing ignorance
about plan. The very fact that we can ask such a strange
question shows how uncertain we are about the deeper foun-
dations of the quantum and its ultimate implications.




"RLM. Frye, “Ways of seeing: unities and disunities in Shakespeare and Elizabethan
  painting,” infra, pp-43 ff.
200                                           WHEELER


                        THE     QUANTUM:      ITS   USES
                                                      — AND              ITS   USE

             To encounter the quantum                   is to feel like an explorer
        from a faraway land who has come for the first time upon an
        automobile.         It is obviously   meant      for use, and an important
        use, but what use? One opens the door, cranks the window
        up and down, flashes the lights on and off, and perhaps even
        turns over the starter, all the time without knowing the central
        point of the thing. The quantum is the automobile. We use
        the quantum in a transistor to control machinery, in a mole-
        cule to design an anesthetic, in a superconductor to make a
        magnet. Could it be that all the time we have been missing
        the central point, the use of the quantum phenomenon in
        the construction of the universe itself?
             We     have turned over the starter. We                           haven’t got the
        engine going.


      1. — Law    without    law.
                                                    species    will   never    vary,   and     have    renained
                                                    the sane     since    the creation       of each   species.

                                                    Charles LYELL [1], writing               almost three
                                                    decades before The Origin                of Species

                                                    [The astronomer Sir John Frederick Willian]
                                                    Herschel says my book
                                                    is ‘the law of higgledy-piggleddy °.
                                                    Charles Darwin [2], 18 days after
                                                    the November 24, 1859 publication
                                                    of The Origin of Species


          Are the laws of physics eternal and immutable?        or are these laws, like
      species, mutable [3] and of « higgledy-piggledy » origin?
          The hierarchical speciation of plant and animal life, we now know, arises
      owt of the blind accidents of genetic mutation and natural selection [5, 6].
      Likewise the gas laws, the pressure-volume-temperature relation for water
      and for other substances, and the laws of thermodynamics take their origin
      in the chaos of molecular collisions. But as for the molecules themselves, the
      particles of which they are made and the fields of force that couple them,
      is it conceivable that they too derive their way of action, their structure and
      even their existence from multitudinous accidents?
         Such questions about the «plan» of physics we would hardly raise if we
      had the skeleton of it in hand. But we don’t. Now and then we meet a colleague
      in another realm of thought who still thinks physics is in possession of this
      plan. He cites the words of Laplace[7] and reiterates the Laplacean vision
      as he understands it: the laws are definite, the initial co-ordinates and mo-
      menta are definite, and therefore the future is definite. The Universe is 4 machine.
                                      1.13 LAW     WITHOUT       LAW                                  201


No, we have to tell him; that is a cracked paradigm.    Quantum mechanies
allows us to know a co-ordinate, or a momentum, but not both. Of the initial-
valnte data that LarLack needed, the principle of complementarity    [8] or
indeterminacy [9] says half do not and cannot exist.


    You tell me what isn’t the plan of physies, our friend rejoins. Tf you under-
stand quantum mechanics so well, why don’t you tell we what zs the plan of
physics?
    No one knows, we reply. We have clues, clues most of all in the writings
of Bohr [23-25], but no answer.        That he did not propose an answer, not
philosophize, not go an inch beyond the soundest fullest statement of the in-
escapable lessous of quantum mechanics, was his way to build a clean pier for
some later day's bridge to the future.
     What kind of a «plan of physics» do you think Bour had in mind, our
colleague asks. I know Einstein’s words [26], « Physies is an attempt to grasp
reality as it is thonght independently of its being observed ». I know Bohr’s
reply [28], « These conditions [of measurement] constitute an inherent clement
of any phenomenon to which the term ‘ physical reality’ can be attached ...,
[This requires] a final renunciation of the classical ideal of causality and a
radical revision of our attitude towards the problem of physical reality ». But
if T could have asked Bour, how did he think the Universe came into being,
and what is its substance, what would he have said?
     It is too late to ask. The plan is up to us to find.
     The Universe can’t be Laplacean. It may be higgledy-piggledy. But have
hope. Surely someday we will see the necessity of the qnantum in its construc-
tion. Would you like a little story along this line?
     Of course! About what?
     About the vame of tweuty questions. You recall how it goes—one of the
after-dinner party sent out of the living room, the others agreeing on a word,
the one fated to be questioner returning and starting his questions. «Is it a
living object?» «No.»       «Is it here on earth?» «Yes.» So the questions go
from respondent to respondent aronnd the room until at length the word
emerges: victory if in twenty tries or less; otherwise, defeat.
     Then comes the moment when we are fourth to be sent from the room.
 We    are locked out unbelievably long. On finally being readmitted, we find
a   smile   on   everyone's   face,    sign   of   a joke   or   a plot.   We   innocently   start   our
questions. At tirst the answers come quickly. Then each question begins to
take longer in the answering—strange, when the answer itself is only a simple
«yes» or «no»     At length, feeling hot on the trail, we ask,   «Is the word
‘cloud’?»   «Yes»,   comes   the reply, and everyone bursts out laughing.
When we were out of the room, they explain, they had agreed not to agree in
202                                                 WHEELER


      advance on any word at all. Each one around the circle could respond « yes »
      or «no» as lie pleased to whatever question we put to him. But however he
      replied he had to have a word in mind compatible with his own rejly—and
      with all the replies that went before. No wonder some of thoxe decisions be-
      tween «yes» and «no» proved so hard!
          And the point of your story?
          Compare the game in its two versions with physies in its two formulations,
      classical and quantum.     First, we thought the word already existed « out
      there » as physies once thought that the position and momentum of the electron
      existed «out there», independent of any act of observation. Second, in ac-
      tuality the information about the word was brought into being step by step
      through the questions we raised, as the information about the electron is
      brought into being, step by step, by the experiments that the observer ¢hooses
      to make. Third, if we had ehosen to ask diflerent questions we would have
      ended up with a different word—as the experimenter would have ended up
      with a ditferent story for the doings of the electron if he had measnred dif-
      ferent quantities or the same quantities in a different order. Fonrth, whatever
      power we had in bringing the partienlar word «cloud » into being was partial
      only. A major part of the selection—unknowing selection—lay in the ¢ ves»
      or   «no»   replies   of   the   colleagues    aronnd   the   room.   Sinilarly.   tite   experi-
      menter has some sibstantial influence on what will ltappen to the electron
      by the choice of experiments he will do on it: but he knows there is naieh im-
      predietability about what any give one of lis measurements will disclose.
      Fifth, there was a «rule of the game » that reqnired of every participator that
      his choice of yes or no should be compatible with some word. Siuilariy. there
      ix a consistency about the observations made in physics. One person must
      be able to tell another in plain langnage what he finds and the second person
      must be able to verify the observation.
          Go on!
          That is difficult! Interesting (hongh our comparison is between the world
      of physies and the world of the game, there is an important point of difference.
      The game has few participants and terminates after a few steps. In contrast,
      the making of observations is a continuing process. Moreover. it is extraor-
      dinarily difficult to state sharply and ¢learly where the community of observer-
      patticipators begins and where it ends.
           This comparison between the world of quantum observations and the game
      of twenty questions misses much, but it makes the vital central point. In the
      real werld of quantum physics, no elementary phenomenon is a phenomenon
      until it is an observed phenomenon. In the surprise version of the game no word
      is a word until that word is promoted to reality by the choice of questions asked
      and answers given. «Cloud » sitting there waiting to be found as we entered
      the room?      Pure delnsion!    Momentnm, p, = 1.4-10 18 gems,       or position,
      e -= 0.31-10 8em, of the electron waiting to be found as we start to probe
      the atom? Pure fantasy! MANN may be going too far when he suggests [29]
      that «... we are actually bringing about what seems to be happening to us ».
      However, it is undeniable that each of us, as observer, ix also eve of the par-
      ticipators in bringing « reality » into being,
                                         1.13 LAW     WITHOUT        LAW                                         203



    To say «no elementary phenomenon is a phenomenon until it is an ob-
served phenomenon » is to make no small ehange in our traditional view that
something     has     «already         happened     » before   we    observe      it.   The    word   « clond »,
we niistakenly thought, already existed in the room before we «uncovered »
it. The photons of the primordial cosmic fireball radiation that enter our tele-
scope today, we customarily assume, already had an existence in the very
earliest days of the Universe, long before Hfe evolved. However, not until
we catch a partictlar one of those photons in a particular state with particular
parameters, not until the elementary phenomenon is an observed phenomenon,
do we have the right even to eall it a phenomenon. This is the sense, the imited
sense, bnt the ineseapable sense, in which we, here, now, have a part in bringing
 abont that which ¢ had already happened » at a time when no observers existed.
     But what about the nnbelievably more numerous relict photons that escape
 onr teleseope? Surely you do not deity them «reality »?
     Of course not; but their «reality » is of a paler and more theoretic hue.
 The vision of the Universe that is so vivid in our minds is framed by a few
 ivon posts of true observation—themselves also resting on theory for their
 meaning—but most of the walls and towers in the vision are of papier-nmaché,
 plastered in between those posts by an immense labor of imagination and theory.
 Tn this labor, «¢... we can never neatly separate what we see fron. what we
 know... what we call seeing is invariably coloured and shaped by our knowl-
 edge (or belief} of what we see» [61].     «Without some initial system, withont
 a first guess to which we can stick uniess it is disproved, we could ... make
 ho ‘sense’ of the millards of ambiguous stimuli that reach us from onr environ-
 ment. In order to learn, we must make mistakes ... the simplicity hypothesis
 eannot be learned. It ix... the only condition under which we contd learn at
 all» [62], «... ow mind will still react to the challenge of this conundrum
 fof what we ‘see*] by throwing ont a random answer, making ready to test
 it in terms of consistent possible worlds. It ix these answers that will transform
  the ambignous stimulus pattern into the image of something ‘out there’ » [63].
      What keeps these images of something «out there » from degenerating into
 separate and private wilverses: one observer, one universe: another observer,
another universe?
    That is prevented             by     the very    solidity of those iron posts,             the elementary
acts of observership-participaney. That is the importance of Bohr's point
that no observation is an observation unless we can communicate the results
of that observation to others in plain language [49].



    The only thing harder to understand than a law of statistical origin wonld
be a law that is not of statistical origin, for then there would be ne way for
it—or its progenitor principles—to come into being. On the other hand, when
we   view    each     of    the   laws     of   physies—and         no   laws    are    more    magnificent      in
scope   or   better        tested—as       at   bottom   statistical       in   character,     then   we   are   at
last able to forego         the idea of a law that endures               from   evevlasting     to everlasting.
204                                                  WHEELER


          Individual events. Events beyond law. Events so numerous and so unco-
      ordinated that, flaunting their freedom from formula, they yet fabricate firm
      form.
          « Fabricate form»?     Do you suggest that even the 4-dimensional space-
      tine manifold is only a fabrication, only a theory—irreplaeeable convenience
      though that theory is?
          Yes! Compare space-time with cloth. Each it is useful under everyday
      cireumstances to call a manifold.     Yet each is cxactly then most obviously
      not a manifold where it comes to an end, whether in the selvedge made by the
      loom, or in the geodesic terminations made by one of the «gates of time »—
      hig bang or big ernnich (31, 32] or black hole [33]. Nowhere more clearly than
      in the ending of space-time are we warned that time is not an ultimate category
      in the description of Nature [34].
          Aren’t you being extreme? I see the lesson of the game of twenty questions.
      T begin to believe with you that no elementary phenomenon is a phenomenon
      until it is an observed phenomenon. I accept that events of observer-partici-
      pancy, as you     call them, oeeupy a special place in the seheme of things.
      I agree that that word «cloud» was brought into being entirely through such
      elementary        events.    But that such events, however numerous,                 should be the
      sole blocks for building the laws of pliysies—and space and time themselves—
      scems to me preposterous,     You surely have been involved enongh in times
      past with nuts-and-bolts physies to know the difference between science and
      poetry: yet if appreciate the drift of what you say, vou might as well be quoting
      SIPVKUSPEARE [35],

                            ... These   onr    actors,
                            As I foretold you, were all spirits and
                            Are melted into air, into thin air:
                            And, like the baseless fabrie of this vision,
                            The cloud-eapp’d towers, the gorgeous palaces,
                            The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
                            Yeu, all which it inherit, shall dissolve
                            And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
                            Leave not a rack behind. We are such stuff
                            As dreams are made on...

          T can't believe any such dreamlike vision of the plrysical world.          As
      Sanutiel JOHNSON used to say, I have only to kick a stone to find it real enough.
          Why do you say «preposterous»?        Perhaps    SHAKESPEARE      understood
      this   universe    of ours   better     than   we   do   ourselves!   You   have   known   for years
      that the atom is more than 99.99 percent emptiness. If matter turns out in
      the end toe be altogether ephemeral, what difference can that make in the pain
      you feel when you kick the rock? And how can matter—and space-time—be
      anything but mutable, coming into being at one gate of time and fading out
                                1.13 LAW WITHOUT LAW                            205

of existence at the other? No physics before the big bang, or after the big
crunch?    No!   The lesson of Einstein’s standard closed-space cosmology is
different and stronger. It denies all meaning to such terms as « before the
hig bang» and «after the big crunch ».
    Particles or fields or mathematics won’t do for ultimate building blocks.
They can't come into being or fade out of existence [30].
    Yes, I appreciate the reasons given [36] against believing in any « magie
particle » or any « magic field » or [37] any «magic mathematics » as the foun-
dation of physics; but isn’t it even more difficult to think of acts of observer-
participancy as the magic ingredient?
   Difticult,   yes;   inconceivable,   no.
     Go on!
     No, we have to stop here. It is beyond the power of today to fit together
the pieces of the puzzle.
     Don’t stop! You've carried me halfway into an exciting mystery story.
You can’t leave me without the traditional half-way-point review of the im-
portant clues and first try at a working hypothesis.
     Review? A proper review would be impossibly ambitious. And how can
one advance a working hypothesis that will not be wrong tomorrow and
ridiculous the day after?
     I appeal to you to go on. You have told me more than once that science
advances onlv by making all possible mistakes; that the main thing is to make
the mistakes as fast as possible—and recognize them. You like to quote the
motto of that engine inventor, John Kris:        «Start her up and see why she
don’t run ». You point to Einstein’s definition of a scientist, « An unscrupulous
opportunist». If you believe all this, and are a true colleague of mine, you
must go on.
      You leave no escape!
      Good!
      Then let us agree to go on; but let us replace the comprehensive review of
clues that. you wanted by something more modest. How would it do, for ex-
ample, to survey some of the lessons we have learned from the study of time,
and how those lessons bear on « observer-participancy »?
      I accept, and with many thanks. But first tell me the central point as
you see it.
      The absolute central point would seem to be this: The Universe had to
have a way to come into being out of nothingness, with no prior laws, no Swiss
 watehworks, no nucleus of crystallization to help it—as on a more modest
 level, we believe, life came into being out of lifeless matter with no prior hfe
to guide the process [5, 6, 38].
    When we say «out of nothingness » we do not mean out of the vacuum of
physics. The vacuum of physics is loaded with geometrical structure and
vacuum fluctuations and virtual pairs of particles. The Universe is already
206                                      WHEELER


      in existenee when we have such a vacuum. No, when we speak of nothing:
      ness we mean nothingness: neither structure, nor law, nor plan.
           A eoneeption more clearly impossible I never heard!
           Preposterous we have to agree is the idea that everything is produced out
      of nothing—as preposterous, but perhaps also as ineseapable, as the view that
      life had its origin in lifeless matter.
           But how?
           « Omnibus ex nihil ducendis sufficit unum», LErBNIz told us [39]; for pro-
      ducing everything out of nothing one principle is enough.       Of all principles
      that might meet this requirement of Leibniz nothing stands out more strikingly
      in this era of the quantum than the necessity to draw a Hne between the ob-
      server-participator and the system under view.       Without that demarcation
      it would make no sense to do quantum mechanics, no sense to speak of quantum
      theory of measurement, no sense to say that «No elementary phenomenon is
       a phenomenon until it is an observed phenomenon ». The necessity for that
       line of separation is the most mysterious feature of the quantum.       We take
       that demarcation as being, if not the central principle, the clue to the central
      principle in constructing out of nothing everything.
          Let me ask if your reasoning couldn't be turned around. You talk of the
      observer-participaney of quantum theory as the mechanism for the Universe
      to come into being. Tf that is a proper way of speaking, would the converse
      not also hold: The strange necessity of the quantum as we see it everywhere
      in the scheme of physies comes from the requirement that—via observer-
      participancy—the Universe should have a way to come into being?
          Your point is exciting indeed. If true—and it is attractive—it should provide
      someday a means to derive quantum mechanies from the requirement that the
      Universe must have a way to come into being [40].
          I know that in that empty courtyard many a game cannot be a game until
      a Hne has been drawn—it does not matter where—to separate one side from
      the other. J know that no Gaussian flux integral can be a flux integral until
      the 2-surface over which it runs—bumpy and rippled though we make it and
      deform it as we will—has been extended to closure. But how much arbitrariness
      is there in this more ethereal kind of demareation, the Hne between     «system »
      and  «observing device »?
          Much arbitrariness! Bonn stresses [42] that the stick we hold ean itself
      be an object of investigation, as when we run our fingers over its surface. The
      same stick, when grasped firmly and used to explore something else, becomes
      ain extension of the observer or—when we depersonalize—a part of the meas-
      uring equipment. As we withdraw the stick from the one role, and recast it
      in the other role, we transpose the line of demareation from one end of it to
      the other, The distinction between the probed and the probe, so evident at
      this seale of the everyday, is the without-which-nothing of every elementary
      phenomenon, of every «closed » quantun process.
                                 1.13 LAW   WITHOUT   LAW                              207

    Do we possess today any mathematical or legalistie          formula   for what   the
line is or where it is to be drawn?
    No.
    Then whut is important about this demareation?
    Existence, yes; position, no. It is the mark of an observation to leave an
«indelible » reeord, according to BELINFANTE [43].      WiGXER argues that an
observation is only then an observation when it becomes part of «the con-
sciousness of the observer » [44] and points to « the impressions which the ob-
server reecives as the basic entities between         which quantum   mechanics pos-
tulates correlations » [45]. For Bonr the central point is not « consciousness »y
not even an « observer», but an experimental device—grain of silver bromide,
Geiger counter, retina of the eye—capable of an irreversible act of amph-
fication »[47]. This act brings the measuring process to a « close » [48]. Ouly
then, he emphasized,         is one person able «to describe the result of the mieas-
urement to another in plain language »[49].     He adds that «all departures
from common language and ordinary logic are entirely avoided by reserving
the word ‘phenomenon’ solely fer referenee to unambiguously communicable
information » [50].
    I would have felt very uncomfortable if Bomr had used the term « con-
sciousness » in defining the elemental act of observation.   I would not have
known what he meant. However, I am beginning to understand and aceept
the terms he actually adopts, «brought to a elose by an ‘.reversible act of
amplification » and «communicable in plain language », What iras his position
on Consciousness?
    We have asked Jorgen KALCKAR, who collaborated with Por in his iast
months, and he has kindly replied [51], «During work on the preparation of
some lecture, to define the phenomenon of consciousness, Bore used a phrase
somewhat like this: a behaviour s0 complex that an adequate account would
require references to the organism’s ‘self-awareness’.     | objected jokingly
that with this definition he wowd soon have to ascribe a consciousness to the
highly developed electronic computers.     This did not worry Bowr.     ‘I am
absolutely prepared’, said he, ‘to talk of the spiritual life of an clectronic
computer: to state that it is reflecting or that it is in a bad mood.... The
question whether the machine really feels or ponders, or whether it merely
looks ax though it did, is of course absolutely meaningless’. »
    Other outstanding thinkers have argued otherwise. For them « conscious-
ness» makes an unclimbable difference of principle between even the most
powerful imaginable computer and the brain [52].
   Do   you   agree   with    that   argument?
     How ean we possibly accept such a difference of principle?
    Do we not believe that brain function itself will someday be explained en-
tirely in terms of physical chemistry and clectrochemical potentials? What
escape is there from the reasoning of von Neumann [53] and Bohr and many
208                                           WHEELER


      active’ present-day investigators?  When one of the three discoverers of the
      mechanism of supereonductivity today gives us, ehapter by chapter and verse
      by verse, an entirely cellular aceount of the mechanism of memory [54-56],
      whe can dismiss it?
          When a distinguished computer expert and student of the structure of
      society details, one by one, the distinctions proposed in times past between
      « consciousness » and the computer, and painstakingly analyzes each down to
      Nothingness [57], what case can anyone possibly maintain for any distinction
      of principle between the computer and the brain?
          Iam happy not to have to delve today into the term « consciousness ».
      T find it hard enough to know what to make of «irreversible act of ampli-
      fication ». Never have I heard of an act of amplification that was not charae-
      terized by an amplification factor, or an equivalent quantity: and never an
      amplification factor that was not a finite number.
          Between infinity and a finite number there may be a difference of principle:
      but between one finite number and another there is only a difference of degree.
      How big does the grain of silver bromide have to be, or the avalanche of elec-
      trons in the Geiger counter, before we count the measuring process as brought
      to a close by an irreversible act of amplification?
          According as I specify one or another number           as the critical level of ampli-
      fication. don’t I make all the difference between          rating or not rating a given
      process as an «clementary phenomenon »?
           According as the closed Gaussian surface encloses a given elementary charge
      or not, we find an unmistakable difference in the surface integral of the electric
      flux. Nevertheless, we know enough about the relevant invariance principle
      never to question the correctness of always identifying fiux with enclosed charge.
      Abont «elementary quantum phenomenon» we have not today learned, but
      have a deep obligation someday to learn, enough to display a similar covariance
      with respect to where we draw the line. That is what « complementarity »
      is all abont.
         Even if neither you nor I know how           to define that line, I like the idea that
      the « game» in the empty conrtyard is only then possible when a linc is drawn.
      May I question you now about the game itself? How would you describe it
      if forced   to commit   yourself?

                                          *   *   *     *    *                 -
                                             1.13 LAW     WITHOUT      LAW                                209

     From “nothingness ruled out as meaningless,’’'’* to the line of distinction that rules it out;
from this dividing line to ‘‘phenomenon’’;            from one phenomenon to many; from the statistics of
many to regularity and structure: these considerations lead us at the end to ask if the universe is
not best conceived as a self-excited circuit'®’ (Fig. 22.13): Beginning with the big bang, the universe
expands and cools. After eons of dynamic development it gives rise to observership. Acts of
observer-participancy — via the mechanism of the delayed-choice experiment — in turn give tangi-
ble ‘reality’ to the universe not only now but back to the beginning. To speak of the universe as a
self-excited circuit is to imply once more a participatory universe.




Fig. 22.13   The universe viewed as a self-excited circuit. Starting small (thin U at upper right), it grows (loop
of U) and in time gives rise (upper left) to obsever-participancy — which in turn imparts ‘‘tangible reality’’
(cf. the delayed-choice experiment of Fig. 22.9) to even the earliest days of the universe.


 106, 107 See the original publication for these rather long references.
           210                                                WHEELER


            If the views that we are exploring here are correct, one principle, observer-participancy, suf-
      fices to build everything. The picture of the participatory universe will flounder, and have to be re-
      jected, if it cannot account for the building of law; and space-time as part of law; and out of law
      substance. It has no other than a higgledy-piggledy way to build law: out of the statistics of billions
      upon billions of acts of observer-participancy each of which by itself partakes of utter
      randomness.


                                                              Two Tests

            No test of these views looks more like being someday doable, nor more interesting and more
      instructive,    than   a derivation     of   the   structure   of   quantum   theory   from   the   requirement   that
      everything have a way to come into being'** — as the word ‘‘cloud’’ was brought into being in the
      surprise version of the game of twenty questions. No prediction lends itself to a more critical test
      than this, that every law of physics, pushed to the extreme, will be found to be statistical and
      approximate, not mathematically perfect and precise.


                                           The Challenge of ‘‘Law without Law’”’

            We can ask ourselves if it is not absolutely preposterous to put into a formula anything at first
      sight so vague as law without law and substance without substance. How can we hope to move
      forward with no solid ground at all under our feet? Then we remember that Einstein had to per-
      form the same miracle. He had to reexpress all of physics in a new language. His curved space
      seemed to take all definite structure away from anything we can call solidity. In the end physics,
      after being moved bodily over onto the new underpinnings, shows itself as clear and useful as ever.
      We have to demand no less here. We have to move the imposing structure of science over onto the
      foundation of elementary acts of observer-participancy.'°? No one who has lived through the
      revolutions made in our time by relativity and quantum mechanics — not least through the work
      of Einstein himself — can doubt the power of theoretical physics to grapple with this still greater
      challenge.




  Recent decades have taught us that physics is a magic window. It shows us the illusion that lies
behind reality—and the reality that lies behind illusion. Its scope is immensely greater than we once
   Bized. We are no longer satisfied with insights only into particles, or fields of force, or geometry, or
  mM space and time. Today we demand of physics some understanding of existence itself.




  108. 109 See the original publication for these rather long references.
                                                 1.13 LAW   WITHOUT    LAW                                         211

REFERENCES


[1]    C. Lyer.: Principles of Geology, being an attempt to explain the former changes
       oj the earth’s surfaces, by reference to cause now in operation, Vol. 11 (London,
        1830-1833).
       C. Darwin: as quoted in H. Warp: Darwin: The Man and His Warfare (India-
       napolis, Ind., 1927), p. 297.
       J. A. WHEELER: From relativity to mutability, in ref. [4], pp. 202-247.
       J. MeEnra, editor: The Physicists’ Conception of Nature (Dordrecht, 1973).
       M. ErezEn: The origin of biological information, in ref. [4], pp. 594-632.
       M. Eicen and R. WINKLER: Das Spiel: Naturgesetze steuern den Zufall (Mun-
        chen,        1975).
       P. S. Lariack: Essai philosophique sur les probabilités (Paris, 1814), 2nd edition,
       pp. 3-4.
       N. Bourn: Das Quanienpostulat und die neuere Entwicklung der Atomistik, Natur-
        wiss.,       16,   245-257     (1928).
[9]     W. HErseNBERG: Uber den auschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Kine-
        matik und Mechanik, Zeits. Phys., 43, 172-198 (1927).
[10]    J. BURCKHARDT: Die Kultur der Renaissance in Italien (Leipzig, 1860); authorized
        Enuglixh translation from the 15th edition, by 8. G. C. MippLemMorE:                            The Civiliza-
        lion of the Renaissance in Italy (New York, N.Y., 1929).
(11)    P. Gay: Style in History (New York, N. Y., 1974).
[12]    H. Everett ITI: The theory of the universal wave function, doctoral dissertation,
        Princetou University (1957); published in abbreviated form in ref. [13]; published
        in full for the first time in ref. [14].
        H. Everett            III: « Relative state» formulation of quantum mechanics,                     Rev.    Mod.
       Phys., 29, 454-462 (1957); reprinted in ref. [14].
       B. 8. DeWitT and N. Granam, editors: The Many-Worlds Interpretation of
       Quantum Mechanics (Princeton, N. J., 1973).
       J. von NEUMANN:       Mathematischen Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik (Berlin,
        1932); translated as Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Princeton,
       N. J., 1955).
[16]   J. A. WHEELER: Assessment of Kverett’s «relative state» formulation of quantum
       mechanics, Rev. Mod. Phys., 29, 463-465 (1974); reprinted in ref. [14].
(17]   E. P. Wigner: Epistemological perspective on quantum theory, in Contemporary
       Research in the Foundations and Philosophy of Quantum Theory, edited by C. A.
       Hooker (Dordrecht, 1973), pp. 369-385.
[18]   E. P. WicNER: Remarks on the mind-body question, in The Scientist Speculates,
       edited by I. J. Goop (London, 1962), pp. 284-302.
[19]   E. P. WicnER: Are we machines?, Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc., 118, 95-101 (1969).
[20]    E.      P.   WIGNER:         Physies     and the explanation   of life, Found.    Phys.,     1, 35-45     (1970).
[21]    C. F. von WEIzSACKER: Classical and quantum decriptions, in ref. [4], pp. 635-667.
[22]    J. A. WieEE Er: Include the observer in the wave function?, in Quantum Mechanics,
        a Half Century Later, edited by J. LErrE Lopres and M. Paty (Dordrecht, 1977).
[23]      . Bour: Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature (Cambridge, 1934).

       ZAA4 A
[24]       . Bonr: Atomie Physics and Human Knowledge (New York, N. Y., 1958).
[25]      . Bour: Essays 1958-1962 on Atomic Physics and Human Knovledge (New York,
             . Y., 1963).
[26]    A.      EInstein: Autobiological Notes, in ref. [27],             quotation      from   p.   81.
                                                               WHEELER


       P.    A.    Scuitpp,          editor:     Albert        Einstein:          Philosopher-Scientist                         (Evanston,           IIL,
       1949), and subsequent paperback editions elsewhere.
       N. Bour: Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be considered
       complete?, Phys. Rev., 48, 696-702 (1935); the quotation comes from p. 697.
       T. Mann: Ereud, Goethe, Wagner (New York, N. Y., 1937), p. 20; translated
       by    H.    T.      Lowk-Porter           from       Freud      und    die       Zukunft        (Vienna,                 1936);      the     cited
       words       were         included      in the lecture          given       at the       80th        birthday               celebration         for
       Sigmund            FREup,       8 May        1936.
[30]   C. S. Prerrce: The Philosophy of Peirce: Selected Writings, edited by J. BUCHLER
       (London, 1940); paperback reprint, Philosophical Writings of Peirce (New York,
       N.    Y.,        1955);     «fallibilist », p.       338,
(31)   B.    K.    Harrison, M. Wakano                      and J. A. WHEELER:                  Matter-energy at high density;
       end    point        of     thermonuclear       evolution,       in    La     structure         et        Vévolution            de    Vunivers,
       Onziéme conseil de physique Solvay (Bruxelles, 1958), pp. 124-146; terminology
       «crushing points », pp. 134-136.
       J. R. Gorr III, J. E. Gunn, D. N. Scuramm and B. M. TrvstEy: Will the
       Universe expand forever, Sci. Amevr., 234, 62-79 (March 1976); terminology « big
       crunch », p. 69.
[33]   J.    A.    WHEELER:             Our    universe:       the    known       and    the    unknown,                    address        before     the
       American Association for the Advancement of Science, New York, December 29,
       1967; Amer. Scholar, 37, 248-274 (1968); terminology « black hole », pp. 258-262.
[34]   J. A. WHEELER: Superspace and the nature of quantum geometrodynamics, in
       Battelle Rencontres: 1967 Lectures in Mathematics and Physics, edited by C. DEWITT
       and J. A. WHEELER (New York, N. Y., 1968), pp. 242-307; «no before, no after »,
       p. 253.
[35]   W.    SHAKESPEARE:                The     Tempest,          London,         about        1610;            Prospero             in     Act     IV,
       Scene       J,     lines    148-158.
[36]   J.    A. WHEELER:               ref. [3]; no magic particle, no magic field, p. 235.
[37]   C. M. Patron and J. A. WHEELER: Is physics legislated by cosmogony?, in Quantum
       Gravity, edited by C. J. IsHam, R. PENROSE and D. W. Scrama (Oxford, 1975);
       0 nlagic mathematics, pp. 589-591. © Oxford University Press 1975, by per-
       inission of Oxford University Press. Appreciation also expressed! to Charles Patton
       for permission to quote cited passages.
       A. I. Opanrin, editor: Evolutionary Biochemistry, Proceedings of the V Inter-
       national Congress on Biochemistry (Moscow, 1961; London, 1963), pp. 12-51.
       G. W.Lerpyiz: source of quotation not traced.
       J. A. WHEELER: Genesis and Observership, ref. [41], pp. 3-33; see p. 29.
       R. E. Burts and K. J. Hrytixka: Foundational Problems in the Special Sciences
       (Dordrecht, 1977).
       N.    Bour:          ref. [23];     Bohr’s     stick,     p.    99.
       F. J. BELINFANTE: Jeasuremenis and Time Reversal in Objective Quantum Theory
        (Oxford, 1975); terminology «indelible », p. 39.
        E. P. WiGNER: Are we machines?, Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc., 113, 95-101 (1969);
        quotation from p. 97.
        E, P. WiGNER: The philosophical problem, in ref. [46], pp. 1-3; quotation from
       p. 3.
       B. p’Espacnat,                editor:     Foundations           of Quantum              Mechanics                   (New     York,         N. Y.,
       1971).
       Z . Bourn:          ref. [24]; irreversible amplification, p. 88.
       N. Bonr:            ref. [24]; closed by irreversible amplification,                                     p.        73.
       N. Boner:           ref. [25]; plain language, p. 3.
       N.    Bourn:        ref. [25];      unambiguously              communicable,             pp.        5,        6.
                                                1.13 LAW             WITHOUT         LAW                                               213


{4]]    J. Karckar: letter to J. A. WHEELER dated June 10, 1977, Appreciation is expres-
        sed here to Dr. J. Katckar both for the letter and for subsequent permission
        to quote from it. He adds that he cannot guarantee to have correet wording;
        and that Bohr’s reply, as so often, was a joke with a definite « point »—henee
        to be taken seriously, but not quite seriously.
[52]    K. R. Popper and J. C. Eccies: The Self and Iis Brain (Berlin, New York, N. Y.,
        and London, 1977); see espeeially pp. 207-208, 438-440 and 515.
[53]    J. Vox NEUMANN: The Computer and the Brain (New Haven, Conn., 1958);
        see especially pp. 60-61.
[54]    L. N. Cooper: A possible organization of animal memory and learning, in Nobel
         Symposium on the Collective Properties of Physical Systems, edited by B. LuNDevIST
         and 8. Lunpevist (New York, N. Y., 1973), pp. 252-264.
[55]    M. M. Nass and L. N. Cooper: dA theory for the development of feature-detecting
         cells in visual cortex, Biol. Cyber., 19, 1-18 (1975).
[56]     L. N. Cooper: A theory for the acquisition of animal memory, in Lepton and Hadron
         Structure (1974 International School of Subnuclear Physics, Evice, Trapani, Sicily:
         July 14-31, 1974), edited by A. Zicnicnui (New York, N. Y., 1975), pp. 808-839.
[57]    G.    E.   Pueu:      On   the      Origin     of Human             Values       (New      York,       N. Y.,    1976),   chapter
        «Human           values,   free will,         and       the     conscious        mind»;          preprinted      in Zygon,       11,
        9.24 (1976).
[58]    INTERNATIONAL UNION OF PURE AND APPLIED Piysics: Report of the Commission
        on Symbols, Units and Nomenclature (Amnsterdain, 1948).
[59]    J.    A.   WHEELER:           The     «past»         and      the   « delayed-choice » double-slit               experiment,         in
        ref. [60].
[60]    A. R. Martow, editor: Mathematical Foundations of Quantum          Theory (New
        York, N. Y., 1978).
[61]    E. H. GompBricu: Art and Illusion: A Study in the Psychology of Pictorial Repre-
        sentation        (Princeton,        N.J.,          1961),     2nd     edition,        revised,    p.    394.    Appreciation         is
        expressed to Prof. E. H. Gompricn and Prineecton University Press for permis-
        sion to quote cited passages in the text.
 [62]   E. H. Gompricu: ref. [61], p. 273.
 [63]   E. H. Gomsricnu: ref. [61], p. 329.
 [64]   A. Erystrry, B. Popoisky and N. Rosen: Can quantum-mechanical description
        of physical reality be considered complete?, Phys. Rev., 47, 777-780                                               (1935).
 [65]    R.   M.   F.     Houtaprent,          H.     Van       Dam         and    E.    P.    WicNerR:         The     conceptual     basis
        and use of the geometric invariance principles, Rev. Mod. Phys., 37, 595-632 (1965);
        see especially §§ 4.1-4.5 on pp. 610-616.
 [66]   C. N. Yana and R. L. Minis: Conservation of isotopic spin and isotopic gauge
        invariance, Phys. Rev., 96, 191-195 (1954).
 [67]   S. Hosman, K. Kucuar and C. TE1rELBoim: New approach to general relativity,
         Nature         Phys. Sci., 245, 97-98 (1973).
 [68]    S. A. Housman, K. Kucnar and C. TrirELBorm: Geometrodynamics regained,
         Ann, of Phys., 76, 88-135 (1976).
 [69]    C. TrerrELpomm: Surface deformations, space-time structure and gauge invariance,
         in Relativity, Fields, Strings and Gravity: Proceedings of the Second Latin  American
         Symposium on Relativity and Gravitation SILARG JI held in Caracas, Decem-
         ber 1975, Universidad Simon Bolivar, edited by C. ARaGoNE (Caracas, 1976).
 [70]    J. E. Nevson and C. Trrrersom:             Hamiltonian for the Einstein-Dirac field,
         Phys. Lett., 69 B, 81-84 (1977).
 [71]    J. A. WHEELER: ref. [3]; machinery hidden, pp. 236-240.
 [72]    J.   A.   WHEELER:           Beyond          the    end      of time,      Marchon        lecture,      University       of   New-
         eastle    Upon       Tyne,      May         18,     1971,      and       Nuffield lecture,            Cambridge     University,
