

===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 1 = RMP 17 page 157 =====

REVIEWS OF MODERN PHYSICS

VOLUME 17, NUMBERS 2 AND 3

APRIL-JULY, 1945

Interaction with the Absorber as the Mechanism
of Radiation ‘*

JoHN ARCHIBALD WHEELER** AND RICHARD PHILLIPS FEYNMAN***
Palmer Physical Laboratory, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey

“We must, therefore, be prepared to find that further advance into this region will require
a still more extensive renunciation of features which we are accustomed to demand of the

space time mode of description.’’—Niels Bohr!

PAST FAILURE OF ACTION AT A DISTANCE TO
ACCOUNT FOR THE MECHANISM OF RADIATION

T was the 19th of March in 1845 when Gauss
described the cqnception of an action at a
distance propagated with a finite velocity, the
natural generalization to electrodynamics of the
view of force so fruitfully applied by Newton and
his followers. In the century between then and
now what obstacle has discouraged the general
use of this conception in the study of nature?
The difficulty has not been that of giving to
the idea of propagated action at a distance a

*A preliminary account of the considerations which
appear in this paper was presented by us ‘at the Cambridge
meeting of the American Physical Society, February 21,
1941, Phys. Rev. 59, 683 (1941).

** On leave of absence from Princeton University.

*** Now a member of the faculty of Cornell University,
but on leave of absence from that institution.

{ Introductory Note-—In commemoration of the sixtieth
birthday of Niels Bohr it had been hoped to present a
critique of classical field theory which has been in prepara-
tion since before the war by the writer and his former
student, R. P. Feynman. The accompanying joint article,
representing the third part of the survey, is however the
only section now finished. The war has postponed comple-
tion of the other parts. As reference to them is made in
the present section, it may be useful to outline the plan of
the survey.

The motive of the analysis is to clear the present
quantum theory of interacting particles of those of its
difficulties which have a purely classical origin. The
method. of approach is to define as closely as one can
within the bounds of classical theory the proper use of the
field concept in the description of nature. Division I is
intended first to recall the possibility of idealizing to the
case of arbitrarily small quantum effects, a possibility
which is offered by the freedom of choice in the present
quantum theory for the dimensionless ratio (quantum of
angular momentum) (velocity of light)/(electronic charge)? ;
then however to recognize the possible limitations placed
on this analysis by the relatively large value, 137, of the
ratio in question in nature; and finally to present a general
summary of the conclusions drawn from the more technical
parts of the survey. The plan of the second article is a
derivation and resumé of the theory of action at a distance
of Schwarzschild and Fokker, to prepare this theory as a
tool to analyze the field concept. From the correlation of
the two points of view, one comes to Frenkel’s solution of
the problem of self-energy in the classical field theory and

suitable embodiment of electromagnetic equa-
tions. This problem, to be true, remained un-
solved to Gauss and his successors for three
quarters of the century. But the formulation
then developed by Schwarzschild and Fokker,
described and amplified in another article,?
demonstrated that the conception of Gauss is at
the same time mathematically self consistent,
in agreement with experience on static and
current electricity, and in complete harmony
with Maxwell’s equations.

To find the real obstacle to acceptance of the
tool of Newton and Gauss for the analysis of
forces, we have to go beyond the bounds of
steady-state electromagnetism to the phenomena
of emission and propagation of energy. No
branch of science has done more than radiation
physics to favor the evolution of present concepts °
of field or more to pose difficulties for the idea of
action at a distance. The difficulties have been
twofold—to obtain a satisfactory account of the
field generated by an accelerated charge at a

to new expressions for the energy of electromagnetic
interaction in the theory of action at a distance. The third
division, which is published herewith, is an analysis of the
mechanism of radiation believed to complete the last tie
between action at a distance and field theory and to
remove the obstacle which has so far prevented the use of
both points of view as complementary tools in the de-
scription of nature. It is the plan of a subsequent division
to discuss the problems which arise when the fields are
regarded as subordinate entities with no degrees of freedom
of their own. An infinite number of degrees of freedom are
found to be attributed to the particles themselves by the
theory of propagated action at a distance. However, it
appears that the additional modes of motion are divergent
and have on this account to be excluded by a general
principle of selection. Acceptance of this principle leads
to the conclusion that the union of action at a distance
and field theory constitutes the natural and self-consistent
generalization of Newtonian mechanics to the _four-
dimensional space of Lorentz and Einstein.—J. A. W.

1 Niels Bohr, Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature
(Cambridge University Press, Teddington, England, 1934).

2 Unpublished, see Introductory Note.

157


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 2 = RMP 17 page 158 =====

158 J.

remote point and to understand the source of
the force experienced by the charge itself as a
result of its motion:

(a) An accelerated charge generates a field given, ac-
cording to the formulation of Schwarzschild and Fokker,
by half the usual retarded solution of Maxwell’s equations,
plus half the advanced solution. From the presence of the
advanced field in the expression for the electric vector, it
follows that a distant test body will experience a premoni-
tory force well before the source itself has commenced to
move. To avoid a conclusion so opposéd to experience
Ritz? and Tetrode* proposed to abandon the symmetry in
time of the elementary law of force. However, it was then
necessary to give up the possibility to derive the equations
of motion and all the electromagnetic forces consistently
from a single unified principle of least action like that of
Fokker. More important, the sacrifice made to alleviate
one difficulty of the theory of action at a distance did not
help to solve the other, the problem of the origin of the
force of radiative reaction.

(b) Experience indicates that an accelerated charge
suffers a force of damping which is simultaneous with the
moment of acceleration. However, the theory of action at
a distance predicts that an accelerated charge in otherwise
charge-free space will experience no electric force. Tu
exclude the acceleration and thus to avoid the issue does
not appear reasonable. Uncharged particles can be present
and can accelerate the charge via gravitational forces. It
seems just as difficult to explain the reactive force when
other charged particles are present. They will indeed be
set into motion and will act back on the source. However,
if these elementary interactions have the purely retarded
character assumed by Ritz, and also by Frenkel,® the
reaction will arrive at the accelerated particle too late and
will have the wrong magnitude® to produce the damping
phenomenon. On the other hand, interactions symmetrical
between past and future—the half-retarded, half-advanced
fields of the unified theory of action at a distance—have so
far appeared to be equally incapable of accounting for the
observed force of radiative reaction, with its definitely
irreversible character.

It is clear why the viewpoint of Newton and
Gauss has not been generally applied in recent
times; it has so far failed to give a,satisfactory
account of the mechanism of radiation.

The failure of action at a distance cannot pass
unnoticed by field theory. The two points of
view, according to the thesis of the present
critique, are not independent, but mutually
complementary. Consequently field theory, too,
faces in the radiation problem a significant issue:

3W. Ritz, Ann. d. Chem. et d. Physique 13, 145 (1908).
4H. Tetrode, Zeits. f. Physik 10, 317 (1922).
5 J. Frenkel, Zeits. f. Physik 32, 518 (1925).
6 J. L. Synge, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A177, 118 (1940).

A. WHEELER AND R. P.

FEYNMAN

does this theory give an explanation for the

observed force of radiative reaction which can .
be translated into the particle mechanics of

Schwarzschild and Fokker, or does it likewise

fail to provide a complete picture of the mecha-

nism of radiation?

In attacking the radiation problem our first
move, following the above reasoning, is to review
the status of the reaction force in existing classi-
cal field theory. No more intelligible clue is found
to the physical origin of the force in this theory
than in the theory of action at a distance.
Stopped on this approach, we take up a sug-
gestion made long ago by Tetrode that the act
of radiation should have some connection with
the presence of an absorber. We develop this
idea into the thesis that the force of radiative
reaction arises from the action on the source
owing to the half-advanced fields of the particles
of the absorber; or, more briefly, that radiation
is a matter as much of statistical mechanics as
of pure electrodynamics. We find that this thesis
leads to a quantitative solution of the radiation
problem. Finally we examine some of the impli-
cations of this thesis for the conception of
causality.

THE STATUS OF RADIATIVE REACTION IN
FIELD THEORY

A charged particle on being accelerated sends
out electromagnetic energy and itself loses
energy. This loss is interpreted as caused by a
force acting on the particle given in magnitude
and direction by the expression

2 (charge)? (time rate of change of acceleration),
3 (velocity of light)*

when the particle is moving slowly, and by a
more complicated expression when its speed is
appreciable relative to the velocity of light. The
existence of this force of radiative reaction is
well attested: (a) by the electrical potential
required to drive a wireless antenna; (b) by the
loss of energy experienced by a charged particle
which has been deflected, and therefore acceler-
ated, in its passage near an atomic nucleus; and
(c) by the cooling suffered by a glowing body.

The origin of the force of radiative reaction
has not been nearly so clear as its existence.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 3 = RMP 17 page 159 =====

ABSORBER THEORY -.OF RADIATION

Lorentz’ considers the charged particle to have
a finite size and attributes the force in question
to the retarded action of one part of the particle
on another. His expression for the force appears
as a series in powers of the radius of the particle.
The first term in the series gives the expression
already mentioned. Otherwise, the derivation
leads to difficulties:

(a) All higher terms depend explicitly upon the structure
assumed for the entity. These dubious terms enter in a
more and more important way into the calculated law of
radiative reaction as the frequency of oscillation of the
particle is raised, and the period approaches the time
required for light to cross the system.

(b) Non-electric forces are required to hold together the
charge distribution, according to Poincaré,* for to neglect
such forces is to violate the relativistic relation between
mass and energy. A composite system of this kind would
possess an infinite number of internal degrees of freedom
of oscillation. No consistent model has been found for the
Lorentz electron in either classical or quantum mechanics.

Briefly, Lorentz attempts to propose a physical
mechanism behind the radiative reaction, but
arrives at a mathematically incomplete expres-
sion for this force.

Dirac,® in contrast, advances no explanation
for the origin of the radiative damping, but
supplies a well-defined and relativistically in-
variant prescription to calculate its magnitude:

Let the motion of the particle be given. Calculate the
field produced by the particle from Maxwell’s equations,
with the boundary condition that at large distances from
the particle this field shall contain only outgoing waves.
In addition to the so-defined retarded field of the particle,
calculate its advanced field, the sole change being the
existence of only convergent waves at large distances.
Define half the difference between retarded and advanced
fields as the radiation field (half the quantity denoted as
radiation field by Dirac). This field is:everywhere finite.
Evaluate it at the position of the particle and multiply by
the magnitude of the charge to obtain the force of radiative
reaction.

Dirac’s prescription is appealing. (a) It is well-defined.
(b) The calculated force reduces for slowly moving particles
to the simple expression which was given above and which
has been well-tested at non-relativistic velocities. (c) The
calculation treats the elementary charge as being localized
at a mathematical point, a picture which is not only
physically reasonable but also translatable into quantum

7H. A. Lorentz (1892), republished in his Collected
Papers, Vol. Il, pp. 281 and 343. See also his treatise
The Theory of Electrons (Leipzig, 1909), pp. 49 and 253.
8H. Poincaré, Rend. Palermo 21, 165 (1906).
(1938). M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. London ‘A167, 148

159

mechanics. (d) The elements of the prescription involve no
more than standard electromagnetic theory plus the as-
sumption that the radiation field, as above defined, is the
source of the force.

The physical origin of Dirac’s radiation field is never-
theless not clear. (a) This field is defined for times before
as well as after the moment of acceleration of the particle.
(b) The field has no singularity at the position of the
particle and by Maxwell’s equations must, therefore, be
attributed either to sources. other than the charge itself
or to radiation coming in from an infinite distance.

We accept as reasonable Dirac’s results. His
concept of radiation field, however, we cannot
adopt as an assumption subject to no further
analysis. To do so would be to add to field theory
a principle incapable of translation into the
language of action at a distance.

To carry the analysis further requires us to
find a new idea. We go back to a suggestion once
made by Tetrode.!® He proposed to abandon the
conception of electromagnetic radiation as an
elementary process and to interpret it as a con-
sequence of an interaction between a source and
an absorber. In his words,

“The sun would not radiate if it were alone in space and
no other bodies could absorb its radiation... . If for
example I observed through my telescope yesterday eve-
ning that star which let us say is 100 light years away, then
not only did I know that the light which it allowed to
reach my eye was emitted 100 years ago, but also the star
or individual atoms of it knew already 100 years ago that I,
who then did not even exist, would view it yesterday
evening at such and such a time. ... One might ac-
cordingly adopt the opinion that the amount of material
in the universe determines the rate of emission. Still this
is not necessarily so, for two competing absorption centers

10H. Tetrode, Zeits. f. Physik 10, 317 (1922). When we
gave a preliminary account of the considerations which
appear in this paper (Cambridge meeting of the American
Physical Society, February 21, 1941, Phys. Rev. 59, 683
(1941)) we had not seen Tetrode’s paper. We are indebted
to Professor Einstein for bringing to our attention the
ideas of Tetrode and also of Ritz, who is cited in this
article. An idea similar to that of Tetrode was subsequently
proposed by G. N. Lewis, Nat. Acad. Sci. Proc. 12, 22
(1926): “I am going to make the . . . assumption that
an atom never emits light except to another atom, and to
claim that it is as absurd to think of light emitted by one
atom regardless of the existence of a receiving atom as it
would be to think of an atom absorbing light without the
existence of light to be absorbed. I propose to eliminate
the idea of mere emission of light and substitute the idea of
transmission, or a process of exchange of energy between
two definite atoms or molecules.”’ Lewis went nearly as far
as it is possible to go without explicitly recognizing the
importance of other absorbing matter in the system, a
point touched upon by Tetrode, and shown below to be
essential for the existence of the normal radiative mech-
anism.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 4 = RMP 17 page 160 =====

160 J. A. WHEELER

will not collaborate but will presumably interfere with
each other. If only the amount of matter is great enough
and is distributed to some extent in all directions, further
additions to it may well be without influence.”

Tetrode’s idea that the absorber may be an essential
element in the mechanism of radiation has been neglected,
perhaps partly because it appears to conflict with custom-
ary notions of causality, and partly also because of his
mistaken belief that the new point of view could by itself
explain quantum phenomena. In this connection he as-
sumed that the interaction between charged particles
should be described by forces more complicated than those
given by electromagnetic theory. Finally, as Tetrode
remarks, ‘‘on the last pages we have let our conjectures
go rather far beyond what has mathematically been
proven.”

ABSORBER RESPONSE AS THE MECHANISM OF
RADIATIVE REACTION

We take up the proposal of Tetrode that
the absorber may be an essential element in the
mechanism of radiation. Using the language of
the theory of action at a distance, we give the
idea the following definite formulation:

(1) An accelerated point charge in otherwise charge-free
space does not radiate electromagnetic energy.

(2) The fields which act on a given particle arise only
from other ‘particles.

(3) These fields are represented by one-half the retarded
plus one-half the advanced Liénard-Wiechert solutions of
Maxwell’s equations. This law of force is symmetric with
respect to past and future. In connection with this assump-
tion we may recall an inconclusive but illuminating dis-
cussion carried on by Ritz and Einstein in 1909, in which
“Ritz treats the limitation to retarded potentials as one of
the foundations of the second law of thermodynamics,
while Einstein believes that the irreversibility of radiation
depends exclusively on considerations of probability.”"
Tetrode, himself, like Ritz, was willing to assume ele-
mentary interactions which were not symmetric in time.
However, complete reversibility is assumed here because
it is an essential element in a unified theory of action at a
distance. In proceeding on the basis of this symmetrical
law of interaction, we shall be testing not only Tetrode’s
idea of absorber reaction, but also Einstein’s view that the
one-sidedness of the force of radiative reaction is a
purely statistical phenomenon. This point leads to our
final assumption:

(4) Sufficiently many particles are present to absorb
completely the radiation given off by the source.

On the basis of these assumptions we shall
consider as the source of radiation an accelerated
charge located in the absorbing system. A dis-
turbance travels outward from the source. By it

uu W. Ritz and A. Einstein, Physik. Zeits. 10, 323 (1909);

see also W. Ritz, Ann. d. Chemie et d. Physique 13, 145
(1908). ;

AND R. P.

FEYNMAN

each particle of the absorber is set in motion and
caused to generate a field, half-advanced and
half-retarded. The sum of the advanced effects
of all particles of the absorber, evaluated in the
neighborhood of the source, gives a field which
we find to have the following properties:

(1) It is independent of the properties of the absorbing
medium.

(2) It is completely determined by the motion of the
source.

(3) It exerts on the source a force which is finite, is
simultaneous with the moment of acceleration, and is just
sufficient in magnitude and direction to take away from
the source the energy which later shows up in the sur-
rounding particles.

(4) It is equal in magnitude to one-half the retarded
field minus one-half the advanced field generated by the
accelerated charge. In other words, the absorber is the
physical origin of Dirac’s radiation field.

(5) This field combines with the half-retarded, half-
advanced field of the source to give for the total disturbance
the full retarded field which accords with experience.

It will be sufficient to establish these results in
order to have both in, field theory and in the
theory of action at a distance a solution of the
problem of radiation, including an explanation
of the force of radiative damping.

We shall present four derivations of the reac-
tion of radiation on the source of successively
increasing generality. In the first we consider an
absorber in which the particles are far from one
another. We assume without proof that the
disturbance which passes through the medium
is the full retarded field of experience. In the
second derivation we examine the field of the
absorber in the neighborhood of the source and
find it just such as to compensate the advanced
field of the accelerated charge and to give a
retarded field of the previously assumed magni-
tude. In this case we have allowed the medium
to have arbitrary density. The third derivation
—in contrast to the first two, where the source
was taken to be at rest or moving only slowly—
considers the case of motion with arbitrary
velocity and leads to the same relativistic ex-
pression which Dirac has given for the force of

‘radiative reaction. All three treatments proceed

by adding up the fields owing to the individual
particles of the absorber. A fourth derivation
uses a much more general approach, assuming
only that the medium is a complete absorber.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 5 = RMP 17 page 161 =====

ABSORBER THEORY OF RADIATION

THE RADIATIVE REACTION: DERIVATION I

For a first analysis of the mechanism of
radiative reaction, we shall simplify as much as
possible the properties of the absorber:

(a) it is taken to be composed of free-charged particles;

(b) these corpuscles are at rest or are moving only
slowly with respect to the particle which we treat as the
source;

(c) the charged entities are well separated from one
another;

(d) the particles occupy space to distances sufficiently
great to bring about essentially complete absorption of
radiation from the source.

We begin by considering the reaction set up
between the source and a typical charge in the
absorber when the particle of the source receives
an acceleration %, by collision with a third
particle or otherwise. The source has a charge
-+e and, therefore, sends out an electromagnetic
disturbance. This effect traverses the distance
r, to the particle of the absorber, reaching it at
a time (r;,/c) seconds later than the instant of
acceleration. For the electric field acting on the
absorber at this place and time, we adopt the
usual retarded solution of Maxwell’s equation,
in conformity with experience, but without any
attempt in this first derivation of the force of
radiative reaction to reconcile such an assump-
tion with the half-retarded, half-advanced field
of the theory of action at a distance. At the
distances in which we are interested, the retarded
field of the source reduces to the well-known
expression,

together with a term of electrostatic origin. This
second term falls off inversely as the square of
the distance and may, therefore, be neglected.
The electric vector lies in the plane defined by
the directions of 9{ and 7;, is perpendicular to 7.,
and is considered positive when its component
along the direction of 9 is positive.

The typical particle of the absorber has a
charge e, and mass m,. It will experience in the
electric field of the disturbance an acceleration,
Wx, equal to (e,/m,) times expression (1). Its
motion will generate a field which will be half-
advanced and half-retarded. The advanced part
of this field will exert on the source a force
simultaneous with the original acceleration. The
component of this reactive force along the

161

direction of the acceleration will be

— e(e,2;,/27r,c2) sin (Ql, 72)
= (We?/2c*) (e,2/myr.2) sin? (ML, 72). (2)

From expression (2) for the reactive force due
to one particle of the absorber, we can evaluate
the total effect due to many particles, present to
the number JW per unit of volume. The number
of particles in a spherical shell of thickness dr,
will be 47Nr,2dr;. For the particles in this shell
the average value of the geometrical factor
sin? (9, 7.) will be (2/3). Consequently we obtain
for total force of reaction the integral of the
expression

(2M e?/3c) (24 Ne? /mic) drs. (3)

The force (3) gives an account of the phe-
nomenon of radiative reaction which is not in
accord with experience:

(1) The force acts on the source in phase with its
acceleration; or in other words, it is proportional to the
acceleration itself rather than to the time rate of change
of acceleration. :

(2) The reaction depends upon the nature of the ab-
sorbing particles.

(3) The force appears at first sight to grow without
limit as the number of particles or the thickness of the
absorber is indefinitely increased.

Nevertheless, proper addition of the effects due

to all the particles of a complete absorber, with
due allowance for their phase relations, does
lead, as we shall see, to a reasonable expression
for the reaction on the source. |

There ‘exists a phase lag between outgoing
disturbance and returning reaction which we
have not taken into account. The advanced force
acting on the source due to the motion of a
typical particle of the absorber is an elementary
interaction between two charges, propagated
with the speed of light in vacuum. On the other
hand, the disturbance which travels outward
from the source and determines the motion of
the particle in question is made up not only of
the proper field of the originally accelerated
charge, but also of the secondary fields generated
in the material of the absorber. The elementary
interactions are of course propagated with the
speed of light; but the combined disturbance
travels, as is well known from the theory of the
refractive index, at a different speed,

c/ (refractive index) =c/n.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 6 = RMP 17 page 162 =====

162 J.A.

In order to speak of the change in velocity of
the disturbance, or to treat the refractive index
of the absorber in a well-defined way, it will be
necessary to consider a single Fourier component
of the acceleration. The connection between
acceleration and reactive force being a linear
one, it will be legitimate to decompose the
acceleration into parts of this kind, and later
to recompose the corresponding Fourier compo-
nents of the radiative reaction. We shall, there-
fore, suppose for the moment that the primary
acceleration varies with time according to the
formula

A= Ay exp (—dwt), (4)

where w represents the circular frequency of the
motion. A disturbance of this frequency will
experience in a medium of low density a refrac-
tive index given by the familiar formula,

Thus the radiative reaction which reaches the
source from a depth r; in the absorber will lag
in phase behind the acceleration by the angle

w(r./¢—nrz/c) = (24 Ne? /mpcw). (6)

We apply this phase correction to thé contribu-
tion (3) of absorber particles in the range r;, to
r+drz, and sum over all depths in the medium
. to obtain the total reactive force,

ao
(262/38) f (2nNex2/myc)drs
: (7)
This integral will converge at the upper limit
when we allow for the existence of a small but
finite coefficient of absorption in the medium.
Or in the language of physical optics, so familiar
from the writings of R. W. Wood, we can say
that we have to determine the combined effect
of a number of wave zones, alternately in and
out of phase with the acceleration. The resultant
force is 90° out of phase with the acceleration
and is equal in magnitude to the arithmetic
sum of the contributions from depths up to a
point where the phase lag is one radian:

(total reaction) = (2e?/3c*) (— iw)
= (262/3c*) (dX /dt). (8)
This result, derived by considering only a single
Fourier component of the acceleration, no longer

Xexp (—ir,2arNee/mycw).

WHEELER AND R. P.

FEYNMAN

contains explicit reference to the frequency of
that component. Consequently expression (8)
applies whatever is the dependence of acceler-
ation upon time, so long as the velocities of all
particles remain non-relativistic. In this respect
we have a quite general derivation of the law of
radiative reaction generally accepted as correct
for a slowly moving particle subjected to an
arbitrary acceleration.

We conclude that the force of radiative reac-
tion arises, not from the direct action of a
particle upon itself, but from the advanced
action upon this charge caused by the future
motion of the particles of the absorber.

RADIATIVE REACTION: DERIVATION II

In the above treatment we considered first the
retarded electromagnetic disturbance traveling
outward in the absorbing medium; second, the
motion of the particles of the medium due to this
disturbance; third, the advanced part of the
elementary fields produced by these motions;
fourth, the sum of these fields at the position of
the source. The same chain of reasoning will
allow us to sum the elementary advanced fields
of the particles of the absorbing medium at points
in the neighborhood of the source. We shall find
that this field is just sufficient, when added to
the half-advanced, half-retarded field of the
source itself, to give the usual full strength
purely retarded field which one is accustomed to
attribute to a radiating source. Thus we shall
justify the assumption made in the first deriva-
tion as to the strength of the outgoing disturb-
ance. In order to make it clear that our reasoning
is not circular, we shall represent the magnitude
of the disturbance by a multiple, (?), of the
usual full retarded field, and shall actually deduce
the value unity for this at present undetermined
factor.

We shall now evaluate the contribution of
particles in the absorber to the electric field
acting in the region roundabout the source. In
order to simplify the geometrical considerations
as much as possible, we shall visualize the source
as located at the center of a spherical cavity of
radius R in the medium. We shall take the
distance, 7, from the source to the point of
evaluation of the field to be small in comparison
with this radius. We shall however give up the


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 7 = RMP 17 page 163 =====

ABSORBER THEORY OF RADIATION...

assumption that the particles of the absorber are
necessarily free, or that they are far from one
another. To make this generalization in our
previous derivation, we shall express the acceler-
ation of the typical particle of the absorber for
a disturbance of circular frequency w in the form

(electric field of disturbance) - (e,/mx)- p(w). (9)

Here p(w) is in general a complex function of w
which approaches unity only in the case of weak
binding or high frequencies. The factor p(w),
according to the theory of dispersion, determines
the complex refractive index, n—~—ik, of the
medium:

1—(n—tk)?= (4rNe?/mw?) p(w). (10)

The advanced field produced by the absorber
at the distance from the source will be given in
amplitude and phase by the product of the
following factors:

AX=%o exp (—iwt),
the acceleration of the source, here assumed for
simplicity to be periodic, although this periodicity
will drop out of the final result.

— (e/ric?) sin (WU, rx),
the factor by which the acceleration must be multiplied
to obtain the strength of the full retarded electric field
in vacuum at a great distance, 7%, from an accelerated
particle of charge e.

(?),
factor as yet undetermined, which allows for the
possibility that the disturbance which. is propagated
outward from the particle, and which is in general
due only partly to the source itself, may differ in
strength from the usual full retarded field: For an
isolated charge in otherwise charge-free space this fac-
tor is equal to (4). In the present case of a complete
absorber we shall however later find for this factor the
value unity. The product of the factors so far gives
the strength of the electric field which would act on
an isolated particle at the distance rx.

exp (iwr;/c), .

the phase of the disturbance which would act on such .

an isolated particle.

W1+n—ik),
factor by which the strength of the electric field of
the disturbance inside the medium is reduced by
reflection at the wall of the cavity, a factor taken
over from electromagnetic theory.

exp (iw(n—tk—1)(r,—R)/c),
factor allowing for the change in phase and amplitude
of the disturbance produced by propagation to the
depth (7,—R) in the medium.

(ex/mz) p(w)
factor relating acceleration of absorber particle to
electric field experienced by it.

163

— (ex/2rzc*) sin (A, rx);
factor to be multiplied by acceleration of absorber
particle to give the magnitude of the component. of
the advanced electric field produced by the absorber
in the neighborhood of, and parallel to the acceleration
of, the source.

exp (—iwr;/c),
factor allowing for the difference in phase between
(a) the advanced field of the absorber as evaluated
at the source itself and (b) the acceleration of the
typical absorber particle.

exp (iwr cos (7, x)/c),
correction to be applied to phase of absorber field at
the source itself in order to evaluate this field at the
distance, 7, from the source. The product of the factors
so far gives in magnitude and phase the advanced
field at this point owing to a single particle of the
absorber.

Nri2dr dQ,
number of absorber particles in the element of solid
angle dQ and in the interval of distance dr,.

We evaluate the product of the listed factors
and sum over all particles of the absorber to
evaluate the total advanced field of the absorber

in the neighborhood of the source:

(?)(e/¢8) My exp (—iwt) f exp (i(w/c)r cos (1, rx)
; Xsin? , rn) (dQ/47)

[ Gnnvest/me)p(e) (1-++-n—ik)—dr;,
: Xexp (tw(n—ik—1)(r72—R)/c). (11)

The last integral is simplified by the relationship
(10) between refractive index and _ physical
properties of the medium to an expression

[oa—n-+indn
”  Svexp (io(n—ik—1)(re—R)/c)= —iw, (12)

completely independent of the properties of the
absorber. Having thus summed over all particles
lying in a given direction, we sum over different
directions, using the relations

(dQ/41) = (1/2)d cos (7, rz) (de/2m), (13)

where ¢ is the dihedral angle between the (r, 2)
and (7, 7x) planes; and

f sin? (QL, 72) (dy/2m)

(2/3) f Ct —P2(cos (A, 7x)) |de/2a
= (2/3)[1—Pe2(cos (2, r))P2(cos (re, 7))]- (14)


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 8 = RMP 17 page 164 =====

164 J.

Also we note the integrals

1

(1/2) | exp (zu cos 0)d(cos 0) = Fo(u)

1 for small u

=u-1 sin um| ; ; :
(e—e-) /2iu for all u, (15)

and
1

(1/2) | exp (tu cos 0)P2(cos 6)d(cos 6) = F2(u)

“= (wu — 3u-) sin u+3u- cos u
| —u?/15 for small u

16
(e —e-™) /2iu for large u. (16)

By use of these mathematical results, we find
that the advanced field of the absorber has in
the cavity an electric component parallel to the
acceleration of the source which is given in
magnitude and phase by the expression

(?) (2e/3c8) (—tw%o) exp (— tt)
[Fo(wr/c)—P2(cos (Ql, r)) Fe(wr/c)]. (17)

The radiation field so obtained reduces at the
source itself to. the form

(?) (2e/3c3) (d2l/dt),

and at distances a number of wave-lengths from
the source goes over into the expression

— (?) (e%o/2rc?) exp (twr/c—iwt)
+(?)(eMo/2rc) exp (—iwr/c—iwt). (19)

In words, formula (19) states that the advanced
field of the absorber is equal in the neighborhood
of the accelerated particle to the still undeter-
mined factor (?), multiplied by the difference

(18)

total disturbance proper retarded
(siverzn from ) = ( field of source ) +

source itself

We are now in a position to evaluate the unde-
termined factor, (?), in the expression we have
used in the above analysis for the force acting
on the typical particle of the absorber. We have
only to express all three terms of Eq. (20) in
units of the usual retarded solution of Maxwell’s
equations, a solution which asymptotically for
large distances from the source gives for the
electric field parallel to the acceleration the
expression

—(e/rc) sin? (WL, 7). (21)

(see apparently diverging from source, )

A. WHEELER AND R. P. FEYNMAN

between half the retarded field (first term) and
half the advanced field (second term) which one
calculates for the source itself.

It is instructive to see how superposition of the
advanced fields of a large number of particles
can give the appearance of both retarded and
advanced fields due to the source itself. The
advanced field of a single charge of the absorber
can be symbolized as a sphere which is converging
towards the particle and which will collapse upon
it at just the moment when it is disturbed by
the source. But at the moment when the source
particle itself was accelerated, the sphere in
question had a substantial radius. One point on
it touched, or nearly touched, the source. The
shrinking sphere therefore appears to the source
as a nearly plane wave which passes over it
headed towards one of the particles of the
absorber. When we consider the effect of all the
absorbing charges, we have to visualize an array
of approximately plane waves, all marching to-
wards the source and passing over it in step.
The resultant of these individual effects is a
spherical wave, the envelope of the many nearly
plane waves. The sphere converges, collapses on
the source, and then pours out again as a
divergent sphere. An observer in the neighbor-
hood will gain the impression that this divergent
wave originated from the source.

A test particle will be unable to make a
separation between the two retarded fields, one
properly owing to the source, the other really
owing to the advanced field of the absorber.
Thus we have for the disturbance diverging
from the source the relation

(20)

actually composed of parts converging
on individual absorber particles

To evaluate the third term in (20), we refer back
to Eq. (19). Thus we find the algebraic equation

(?) = (1/2) +(?/2), (22)
of which the solution is
(1) = (1/2) + (1/2). (23)

From our derivation we find for the disturbance
diverging from an accelerated charge the full
retarded field required by experience.

Along the same lines we can find the strength


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 9 = RMP 17 page 165 =====

ABSORBER THEORY OF RADIATION

165

of the advanced field converging upon the source before the moment of acceleration:

field of source
itself

converging on
source

At distances of several wave-lengths from the
source, the two terms on the right possess simple
mathematical expressions. Measured in terms of
(21) as a unit of field strength, the right-hand
side of (24) has the value (1/2)—(1/2)=0. We
conclude that there is no net disturbance con-
verging upon the source prior to the time of
acceleration. The advanced field of the source is
completely compensated by the advanced field
of the absorber.

Our picture of the mechanism of radiation is
seen to be self-consistent. Any particle on being
accelerated generates a field which is _half-
advanced and half-retarded. From the source a
disturbance travels outward into the surrounding
absorbing medium and sets into motion all the
constituent particles. They generate a field which
is equal to half the retarded minus half the
advanced field of the source. In this field we have
the explanation of the radiation field assumed by

Dirac. The radiation field combines with the field .

of the.source itself to produce the usual retarded
effects which we expect from observation, and
such retarded effects only. The radiation field
also acts on the source itself to produce the force
of radiative reaction. What we have said of one
particle holds for every particle in a completely
absorbing medium. All advanced fields are con-
cealed by interference. Their effects show up
directly only in the force of radiative reaction.
Otherwise we appear to have a system of particles
acting on each other via purely retarded forces.

RADIATIVE REACTION: DERIVATION III

So far the source has been assumed to be at

d
(cons ssingon (fats wouree) + (sex apparently convergent on source, ).

(24)

actually composed of parts convergent
on individual absorber particles

rest, or in slow motion, at.the time of accelera-
tion. The expression derived above for the force
of radiative reaction is therefore limited in its
applicability. To obtain the corresponding law
of damping for a swift particle three possibilities
suggest themselves, each calling for a mathe-
matical technique quite different from that of
the other two. The first and simplest procedure
is to look at the particle from a frame of reference
moving with nearly its own speed, apply in this
frame the expression which we already have,
and then transform back to the laboratory frame
of reference. This application of the transforma-
tion of Lorentz is perfectly legitimate but not
especially instructive.

A second method to calculate the force of
reaction for a fast particle comes from Dirac.
He makes the assumption that the damping
arises from the action on the particle of a field
equal to half the difference between the particle’s
own retarded and advanced fields, a conception
which we have now interpreted in terms of the
radiative reaction of the absorber. As each of the
two fields is individually singular at the location
of the charge, evaluation of the difference re-
quires one to apply .a limiting process which
presents a certain mathematical difficulty, though
in principle perfectly straightforward.

In connection with the limiting process of
Dirac, it is interesting to refer back to the
calculation of radiative reaction made by Lorentz
on the model of an extended charge, every part
of which exerted a retarded effect upon every
other part. The elementary retarded field can be
written in the form

retarded |_| , { retarded 43 advanced retarded advanced
field J | °\ field 7 field “| field field

Here the first term is singular and is related to
what Lorentz called the electromagnetic mass of
the particle. The second part, on the other hand,
is the only one asymmetrical in time and capable
of contributing to the force of radiative reaction.
In present terms, the procedure of Lorentz

amounts to an ingenious means to determine the
limiting value of Dirac’s radiation field at the
position of the source. Unfortunately the pro-
cedure is not convenient to apply to a rapidly
moving extended charge because of the relativ-_
istic contraction of its spherical form. ¢


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 10 = RMP 17 page 166 =====

166 “oy.

The third procedure to evaluate the law of
radiative damping for a swift particle is to calcu-
late directly the reaction of the absorber on the
source, along the lines of derivations I and II.
This approach uses the expression for the field
of a radiating charge, not at small distances,
where it is singular, but at large distances, where
it has a simple asymptotic form. We shall explore
this type of derivation because of its direct
relation to the absorber theory of radiation.

We idealize the absorber as before as a sphere
of very large radius, r, centered on the point
reached by the given particle ata chosen instant.
At the surface of the absorber, those constituents
of the field which drop away as 1/r? will have
become negligible in comparison with those which
fall off as 1/r. The typical particle on this surface
experiences an electric field perpendicular to the
direction of 7. The magnitude of this field was
represented in the case of a slowly moving source
by an expression of the form, — (e/rc?)(compo-
nent of acceleration perpendicular to 7), and is
similarly representable in the present case by an
expression of the type, —(e/r)(function of mo-
tion)e.'Here the function in parenthesis, while
more complicated than before, still depends only
on the motion of the particle and the direction
to the point of action. The influence of this
disturbance causes the particles of the absorber
to generate a field, the advanced part of which
at the position of the source claims our attention.
We consider the portion of this returned field
arising from particles of the absorber which
lie within an element of solid angle dQ. The elec-
tric component of this field is perpendicular to 7
and had for a slowly moving source the magni-
tude (e/c?)(—iw/c)(component of acceleration
perpendicular to r)(dQ/47) when the acceleration
was a periodic function of time, and more gener-
ally was given by the derivative (e/c*)(d/cdt)
X (component of acceleration perpendicular to r)
xX (dQ/4r).

The relationship between returned field and
original disturbance is a property only of the
absorber and is independent of the state of
motion of the source. Consequently, for the case
of a particle moving at arbitrary velocity the
returned electric field is perpendicular to r and
equal in magnitude to

e(d/cdt) (function of motion) 9(dQ/4r).

A. WHEELER AND R. P. FEYNMAN

What we have said of the electric field applies
also to the magnetic field, because at great
distances from an accelerated particle the two
vectors have equal magnitudes and perpendicular
directions. Thus we conclude that the reaction
of the absorber on the source is described by a
field, Finn, which is directly related to the retarded
field, Rn, of the source at great distances, 7, by
the equation”

Prn= =r f (@Rn/8x*)(d2/4n). (25)

The retarded field of the source particles, Rin;
in Eq. (25) is derived from the retarded po-
tentials

An= 2e f an(a) 5(xa,xa")da,

through the equation
Run = (0A n/ Ox) — (0A m/ Ox").

Here the integration over the proper cotime, a,
goes only over that portion of the world line of
particle a from which a retarded disturbance can
reach the point of action, x”. The significant
value of a is connected with the coordinates x”

1 Here and below we use the following notation:

a . . .
emit. the three space coordinates of a typical point

2

ea of evaluation of the field.

x'=—x.4, a quantity also having the dimensions of a
length, and given by the product of the
velocity of light and the time elapsed between
a certain zero hour and the moment of
observation.

“a™, similar space-time coordinates of a typical point

on the world line of the ath particle.

Successive points along the world line are designated by
the values of a parameter, a, the proper cotime, which has
the dimensions of a length and is equal to the product of
the velocity of light and the proper time. The difference,
da, in proper cotime between two neighboring points has
the same sign as the difference da‘, and is given in magni-
tude by the equation

(da)? =¢?(time interval )?— (space interval)? = —da,da”.

Derivatives with respect to @ are denoted by dots. In
comparing formulae given in this notation with those given
elsewhere in the literature, it will be noted that some
authors go from contravariant to covariant representation
of a vector by reversing the sign of its space components
and leaving its time component unaltered; also that dots
are often used to indicate differentiation with respect to
proper time, rather than proper cotime. In our notation
the derivatives a” are dimensionless quantities which
satisfy the relation d,44=—1. We use xa” as an abbrevia-
tion for the vector, x"—a™. The usual scalar potential of
the electromagnetic field is represented by the component
A? of a four-vector, of which the other three parts, A}, A?,
A’, constitute the space components of the customary
vector potential. The typical component of the field is
given in the equation Finn =(dA1/dx”)— (0Am/dx"), where
we have for the electric field E,= Fis= — Fu, etc., and for
the magnetic field H, = Fo;= — Fy, etc.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 11 = RMP 17 page 167 =====

ABSORBER THEORY OF RADIATION

by the equation

xa,xa" =0. (26)

The integration yields
Am= — ebm / (G,xa").

In differentiating this expression with respect
to the coordinates of the point of observation,
we have to allow for the associated change in
the value of the proper cotime, given by the
differential of (26),

(dx, —d,da) (x* —a") =0,
or

da = (xa,dx") /(dyxa"). (27)

Thus the retarded field of a is found to be given
by the expression

Rinn = €(dyXO")* (GimXOn — GnXQm)
+e(14+ d,xa") (d,xa") 3 (— dinXAn+GnXOm).

All terms in this expression fall off at large
distances inversely as the first power of the
separations xa, except for the terms arising from
the unity in the factor (1+4,xa"), which we may
henceforth omit. For the same reason in differ-
entiating the field with respect to x*, we may
treat all differences xa” as constant. Thus we
find in the limit of large distances

_ rf (ORmn/Ox*) (dQ/42)
=r f (—xa4/ dca") (d/de) Ryn(d/4m)

=e f {3(Gysxa") (dyxa")—4(XOnlin — XOndim)

— (Gyxa")—3 (XA min — XA niin)
+ (G,xa") (ayxa")~4 (xOmOn — XAndm)
— 3(d,xa")?(G,xa")—5(xd mln —XOndm) }

X(dQ/4r). (28)

As variables of integration it is convenient to
use a colatitude 6 and azimuthal angle 9, taking
for polar axis the direction of the space compo-
nent, (ad, a, a’), of the four-vector, a”. With
this choice of variables the denominator of the
typical term in the preceding expression is a
power of the factor (d,xa“) =7r(d4+4 cos 0), where
ae—d?=1. The absence of the azimuthal angle
from the denominator and the relatively simple
form of the numerator makes it easy to carry out

167

the integration over g. The numerator of the
typical term then reduces to a polynomial in
cos 6. The integration over 6 therefore leads only
to algebraic functions of cos 6 to be evaluated at
the two limits cos @= +1. The reduction of the
resulting expressions to simple form requires
rather long calculation. The final result for the
field of radiative reaction at the location of the
source is

Finn = =r { (@Ran/de" (dQ/4r)

= (26/3) init iti). oa
This expression for the field of the absorbing
particles agrees with that given by Dirac for
half the difference of retarded and advanced
fields due to the source itself, provided account
is taken of the difference between the present
notation and his.

If we define the force of radiative reaction
through its contribution to the product of the
mass of the particle by its acceleration, mcd”,
then we have for this force the expression

CF ny = (2€7/3) (Gnd, — Cindy) a. (30)

In the case of a slowly moving particle the first
space component of this force is readily evaluated
by noting that (1) Gd, is of the order of the ratio
of the velocity of the corpuscle to the speed of
light and is therefore negligible; (2) the quantity
— d,G" has the value unity; and (3) the derivative
Gm represents (1/c’) times the time rate of
change of the given component of the accelera-
tion, 2%. Consequently, the expression (30) re-
duces in the non-relativistic limit to the usual
formula, (2e?/3c*) (d%&/dt), for the damping force.

From the properties of the retarded field at
large distances from an accelerated particle in
motion at an arbitrary velocity, we have obtained
an expression for the force of radiative reaction
previously derived by Dirac on the assumption
that this force arises from half the difference of
the advanced and retarded fields of the particle
itself. It-is, therefore, of interest to see that
this equivalence can be demonstrated without
going through the rather long calculations which
are required on either method of derivation
to obtain explicit expressions for the force of
radiative reaction. To bring out the relationship
between the two derivations, we go back to that
expression for the retarded field of the source


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 12 = RMP 17 page 168 =====

168 J.

which contains a delta function, and arrange the
evaluation of Eq. (25) in such a way as always
to keep a delta function in evidence. Thus we
write the retarded field in the form

Ron=2e f [~dn( 0/84) + n(0/ 02") J0Caca?) daw

In order to postpone the differentiation of the
delta function, we adopt an expedient to trans-
form the variable of differentiation. We consider
in addition to the actual world line of the source,
a”(a), a displaced world line, a particle moving
along which reaches at the proper cotime, a, the
point &@"(a)=a”(a)+D”, where the D” are four
numbers independent of a. We note that the
derivative with respect to x” of any function of
the differences x*—d* is equal to the negative of
the derivative of the same function with respect
to D”. Consequently we may write the expres-
sion for the retarded field in the form

Ran =2e f [an (3/8D") —G,(8/D") ]

X 6(xatxd,)da, (31)

where the result is to be evaluated in the limit
when the displacements D” go to zero.

We now insert expression (31) for the retarded
field into the integral for the field returned by
the absorber,

Fan=? f (@Rn/OD*)(d0/4n),
and encounter the integral

Fan =2er(0/0D") [f [ain(0/@D*)—4q(0/0D")]
X 6 (xd, xG")da(dQ/4r).

To bring out the meaning of this integral, we
note that we want the radiative reaction on the
source at a definite point, a”=a™(a*), along its
world line; that this point is at the center of a
sphere of radius 7; and that advanced disturb-
ances from the particles on the inner surface of
this sphere contribute to the force at this point
only if they start at a cotime, x‘, equal to
7++a‘(a*). Consequently, x* has this fixed value
as the integration over the surface of the sphere
is carried out. Also during this integration we
keep fixed the variable a and consequently hold
constant @=G(a). Under these circumstances it
is convenient to adopt for variable of integration

A. WHEELER AND R. P.

FEYNMAN

the angle @ between the space directions ad@ and
ax:
(Gx)? = (ad)?+ (ax)? — 2 (ad) (ax) cos 6.

Then we have

f saya (dQ/4m) = (1/2) "a doryaex*)d (cos 6)

(Gx) =(ax)+(az)
= 6(dx,ax")
(

Gx) =(ax) —(aé@)

Xd[ (ax)? — (aa)? — (ax)? ]/4(aa) (ax)
= f 5 (Gx,ax")d (Gx,ax") /4(ad)r.

In this last expression the range of integration
includes the point, dx,dx", for which the delta
function gives a contribution, only if there are
some points on the surface of the sphere which
can be reached simultaneously by two retarded
waves which start out with a"(a*) and a@"(a) as
centers. This condition will be satisfied if and
only if d(@) lies between the forward and back-
ward light cones drawn with a(a*) as origin.
Thus we have

Frn= e(0/dD4) f dol Gm(d/8D") —a,(0/aD”) |

| 1/2(aé) when da,da">0
0 when da,da" <0}

The differentiation with respect to D‘ of the
discontinuous function in the last pair of brackets
gives a function which has the character of a
delta function except for a change in sign at one
of the singularities. Specifically, writing

5(da,dia") = 64.+6_,

where 6, is different from zero only when a
retarded disturbance from d(a) can reach the
point a(a*), and 6_ is different from zero only
when an advanced disturbance from d(a) can
reach the point a(a*), we have

1/2(aé) when da,da">0

when da,da* <0
Then the field due to the absorber takes the form

Fan=e f [im (8/8D*) —dy(8/AD™) (8, —8_)dew

ae f [in(3/9a") — Gin (3/da")(8.—6_)da. (32)


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 13 = RMP 17 page 169 =====

ABSORBER THEORY OF RADIATION

In other words, the reactive field at the point
a” =a™(a*) of the actual path is equal to half the
retarded minus half the advanced field due to an
equal charge moving on a world line of identical
shape, all points of which are displaced by the
amount D”, this field evaluated in the limit
D0. This result establishes the connection
between two different methods of evaluating the
force of radiative reaction, one based on the
properties of the retarded field of the source at
great distances, the other containing half the
difference of retarded and advanced fields at the
location of the source itself.

THE RADIATIVE REACTION: DERIVATION IV

From the preceding applications of the ab-
sorber theory of radiation, it has become clear
that such properties of the absorber as refractive
index and density have no bearing on thé magni-
tude of the force of radiative reaction. The only
essential point is that the medium should be a
complete absorber. We therefore expect: that
there should somehow be a means to take this
point into account in a very general way.

In physical terms, complete absorption implies
that a test charge placed anywhere outside the
absorbing medium will experience no disturbance.

: : (h) k
In mathematical terms, using Fret and Foay to
denote the retarded and advanced fields due to
the kth particle, we have

(h) () ;

Yi(4F ret +43 Faav) =0 (outside the absorber). (33)
From the fact that this sum vanishes outside the
absorber everywhere and at all times, it follows
that each of the two sums also vanishes outside
the absorber:

De Fer=0 (outside) (34)

and
D2 Fuav=0 (outside). (35)

Thus, the one sum, if it does not vanish, repre-
sents at large distances an outgoing wave, and

the other represents a converging wave; but |

complete destructive interference between two
such waves is impossible. Hence, if their sum
vanishes, so does each field individually. From
this conclusion it follows that the difference of
the fields vanishes outside the absorber at all
times:

DilSh me —3F a) =0 (outside).

(36)

169

The field (36), in contrast to the fields (33)-
(35), has no singularities within the absorber;
it is a solution of Maxwell’s equations for free
space. Vanishing outside the absorber at all
times, it must therefore forever be zero inside.
The special property of a completely absorbing
medium is expressed by the equation

Ti Fem vty) =0 (everywhere). (37)

The consequences of Eq. (37) for the force on
a typical particle are easily deduced. On the ath
charge the entire field acting is given, according
to the theory of action at a distance, by the sum

(k) (k)
> (4 Fret +3 Faav)-

ka

(38)

This expression can be broken down into three
parts:

(k) (a) (a) (3) (k)
> Prep t (Fret — 4 adv) ml > 4Fret— 4 adv). (39)
k¥a all k
Of these terms the third has just been shown to
vanish for a complete absorber. The second gives
rise to the phenomenon of radiative damping.
In the case of non-relativistic velocities we have
the result

(a) (a)

€a(FE ret — SL aav) = (2€a2/3c3) (dYa/dt); (40)
and in the case of swift particles we have for the
force on the ath charge

(a) (a) ;
eal $ Fre ret — Pra adv) G*.

This expression reduces, according to Dirac, to
the form

(2€22/3) (Gna — Unda) G%, (41)

in agreement with the reaction of the absorber
as calculated in the preceding derivation. With
this reactive term and the first term of (39), we
arrive at the equation of motion of the typical
particle in a completely absorbing medium

7 (k) :
MaGn = Ca > Prue retQ™
ka .

+ (2e,2/3) (Gnitiy—Gntia G2. (42)
In arriving at this equation we have shown that
the half-advanced, half-retarded fields of the

theory of action at a distance lead to a satis-
factory account of the mechanism of radiative


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 14 = RMP 17 page 170 =====

170 J.

reaction and to a description of the action of one
particle on another in which no evidence of the
advanced fields is apparent. We find in the. case
of an absorbing universe a complete equivalence
between the theory of Schwarzschild and Fokker
on the one hand and the usual formalism of
electrodynamics on the other. This is what was
to be proved.

THE IRREVERSIBILITY OF RADIATION

An oscillating charge surrounded by an ab-
sorbing medium loses energy. Why does radiation
have this irreversible character even in a formu-
lation of electrodynamics which is from the
beginning symmetrical with respect to the inter-
change of past and future?

It might at first sight appear that the irre-
' versibility is connected with the property of
complete absorption. This is not the case. The
expression (37) of the condition of absorption is
perfectly symmetrical between advanced and
retarded fields. We have only to reverse the roles
of these two fields in the derivation following
(37) in order to arrive at an equation of motion
for the typical particle just as legitimate as
(42), and in complete harmony with that
equation:

. (k) :
MaAn = Ca > Fra adya*
ky¥a

— (2€2?/3) (Gnitia—Gnda)d*. (43)

In this equation, however, the force of radiative
reaction appears with a sign just opposite to its
usual one. Evidently the explanation of the one-
sidedness of radiation is not purely a matter of
electrodynamics.

We have to conclude with Einstein" that the
irreversibility of the emission process is a phenom-
enon of statistical mechanics connected with the
asymmetry of the initial conditions with respect
to time. In our example the particles of. the
absorber were either at rest or in random motion
before the time at which the impulse was given
to the source. It follows that in the equation of

k
motion (42) the sum, >> Fre ret, of the retarded

fields of the adsorber particles had no particular
effect on the acceleration of the source. Con-
sequently the normal term of radiative damping
dominates the picture. In the reverse formulation
(43) .of the equation of motion, the sum of the

A. WHEELER AND R.

P. FEYNMAN

advanced fields of the absorber particles is not
at all negligible, for they are put into motion by

‘the source at just the right time to contribute to

(k) ; oe gs
the sum 3) Fraaav- This contribution, apart

from the natural random effects of the changes
of the absorber, has twice the magnitude of the
usual damping term. The negative reactive force
of (43) is therefore cancelled out, and a force of
the expected sign and magnitude remains.

_ That it is solely the nature of the initial
conditions which governs the direction of the
radiation process can be seen by imagining a
reversal of the direction of time in the preceding
example. We have then a solution of the equa-
tions of motion just as consistent as the original
solution. However, our interpretation of the
solution is different. As the result of -chaotic
motion going on in the absorber, we see each
one of the particles receiving at the proper
moment just the right impulse to generate a
disturbance which converges upon the source at
the precise instant when it is accelerated. The
source receives energy and the particles of the
absorber are left with diminished velocity. No
electrodynamic objection can be raised against
this solution of the equations of motion. Small
a priort probability of the given initial conditions
provides our only basis on which to exclude such
phenomena.

A comparison of radiation with heat conduc-
tion is illuminating. Both processes convert
ordered into disordered motion although every
elementary interaction involved is microscopi-
cally reversible.

Consider for the moment the question of the
irreversibility of heat conduction, later to be put
into relation with the problem of the one-sided-
ness of radiation. A portion of matter observed
at the present moment to be warmer than its
surroundings will cool off in the future with a
probability overwhelmingly greater than the
chance for it to grow hotter. About the past of
the same portion of matter Boltzmann’s H-
theorem however also predicts an enormously
greater likelihood that the body warmed up to
its present state rather than cooled down to it.
In other words, we are asked to understand the
present temperature of the body as the result of
a simple statistical fluctuation in the distribution
of energy through the entire system. This de-


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 15 = RMP 17 page 171 =====

ABSORBER THEORY OF RADIATION

TaBLE I. Decomposition of the symmetric fields of the
theory of action at a distance into the fields of the retarded
field theory.

Total field acting on ath particle

in theory of action at a distance; = (k) (k)
here decomposed into: kab Fret +iP aqy)
(1) Retarded fields of usual (k)
formulation of electrody- 2D Fret
namics. haa

(2) A field completely deter-
mined by the- motion of the
particle itself; denoted as the
“radiation field” by Dirac;
accounts for the normal force
of radiative reaction.

(3) A residual field, with (h) (k)
singularities at none of the 2D (4 Faav— 4F ret)
particles, but completely de- #1! particles = Fine
termined by the motion of
the particles; identified by
us with Dirac’s “incident
field.”

() (a)
[3 Fret— 2F aay Inn
= (2€0/3)(Gmiin — Undn)

duction is based on the premise that the system
was isolated before observation. However, com-
mon experience tells us that the given portion of
matter probably acquired its abnormal tempera-
ture, not via an internal statistical fluctuation,
but because it had earlier not been isolated from
the outside.

For the radiative analogy of this example of
heat conduction, conceive a charged particle
bound to a position of equilibrium by a quasi-
elastic force. Furthermore suppose its energy at
the moment of observation is large in comparison
with the agitation of the surrounding absorber
particles. There is then an overwhelming proba-
bility that.the oscillator will lose energy to the
absorber at a rate in close accord with the law of
radiative damping. What can be said of the
particle prior to the moment of acceleration? In
an ideal absorbing system completely free of
special disturbances, there is an equally over-
whelming chance that the energy of the charge
was then increasing at a rate given approximately
by the inverse of the law of radiative damping.
In this case as in heat conduction the abnormally
high energy of the object is to be interpreted as
the result of a statistical fluctuation. However,
that the sun at some past age acquired its energy
by such a fluctuation no one now would seriously
propose. Obviously the universe is a special
system with respect to the origin of which
probability considerations cannot freely be
applied.

171

We conclude that radiation and radiative
damping come under the head, not of pure
electrodynamics, but of statistical mechanics.
The conventional expression for the force of
radiative reaction, like those for frictional re-

sistance and viscous drag, represents a statistical

average only. Application of this concept is not
required in such an instance as the case of
complete thermodynamical equilibrium, where ’
the relative fluctuations of the actual forces
about the conventional values are substantial.
The concept of radiative damping is of real
value only when we deal with the conversion of
organized into disorganized energy, as in wireless
transmission or light production.

COMPLETE AND INCOMPLETE ABSORPTION

In the picture of radiation which we have
built on the foundation of Tetrode’s suggestion,
the absorber plays a role of hitherto unsuspected
importance. On this account we should investi-
gate not only how much the mechanism depends
upon the completeness of the interception, but
also the question what should be said of the
absorption in the case of the actual universe.

In discussing the case of incomplete intercep-
tion, we require a convenient means to take into
account the initial conditions which so clearly
control the irreversibility of the force of radiative
reaction. For this reason we shall break down
the half-retarded, half-advanced fields of the
theory of action at a distance into three parts as
shown in Table I. With this decomposition of
the field, we arrive at a description of the
behavior of a system of particles which is entirely
equivalent to the theory of action at a distance
but which in the equation of motion,

Mam = Ca > Fo ret? (2e,?/3)

ka

X (Gmiia—GinGa)G*+ CaF ina incd®, (44)

conceals from view the existence of the advanced
part of the fields of Schwarzschild and Fokker.
We shall find it convenient to use for the field
decomposition of Table I and the dynamical
Eq. (44) the term “retarded field formulation of
electrodynamics.”

The field which enters the third term in the
equation of motion (44) vanished in the case of
a completely absorbing system. Its appearance


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 16 = RMP 17 page 172 =====

172 J.

in the present case has led us to give it the name
of “incident field,” which Dirac applied to a
quantity having an identical role in the equation
of motion. However, on the origin of this field
we go beyond Dirac’s treatment in giving a
prescription for its unique determination in terms
of the movements of all the particles of the
system. This prescription reveals that the field
in question contains the advanced effects of the
theory of action at a distance.

Some properties of the incident field may be
noted before use is made of this concept in the
analysis of special problems. The quantity Fine
has a singularity at the site of none of the charged
particles, Consequently it satisfies Maxwell’s
equations for free space. Although completely
determined by the motion of the charges, it thus
has the character of a disturbance produced by
sources at infinity. Now we already have in

the retarded field, } au partietésy Fest a quantity
whose behavior at all distances is likewise
uniquely fixed by the motions of all the charges.
Consequently we can expect to be able to deduce
the incident field everywhere from a knowledge
of the retarded field at large distances from the
system of particles. Thus, in the determination
of the incident fields we can, if we wish, avoid
explicit reference to the movements of the
charges, and base our considerations on the
asymptotic behavior of their retarded fields
alone. This point will be clearer after a considera-
tion of a few examples, and can then be formu-
lated in a general mathematical form as a by-
product of an investigation primarily aimed at
examining the problem of complete and incom-
plete absorption.

The simplest example will be the idealized
case of a single-charged particle, alone in other-
wise charge-free space, which is accelerated either
by the gravitational attraction of a passing mass
or by some other non-electromagnetic force. For
the three electromagnetic forces of the equation
of motion (44) we then have the following
accounting: (1) There are no other particles, so
the retarded field of the first term vanishes.
(2) The second term is different from zero and
represents the conventional force of radiative
reaction. (3) The incident field of the third term
is in the present case equal to half the advanced
field minus half the advanced field owing to the

A. WHEELER AND R. P. FEYNMAN

particle itself. If we imagine the acceleration of
the charge to be limited to a short stretch of
time, then the incident field represents. a dis-
turbance which, long before the moment in
question, was converging upon the particle from
great distances. It focuses upon the particle at
the period of acceleration and subsequently ap-
pears as a wave diverging from the charge. This
disturbance, apparently produced by sources at
infinity, exerts on the particle a force which is
just sufficient in magnitude and in sign to cancel
the normal force of radiative reaction. The de-
scription just given is the rather involved trans-
lation into the language of the retarded field
theory of the conclusion immediately apparent
from the theory of action at a distance with its
half-advanced, half-retarded fields; an isolated
charge neither experiences a force of radiative
reaction nor radiates away electromagnetic
energy.

The incident field of the preceding problem
could have been determined equally well without
knowledge of the motion of the particle itself, by
reference to the retarded field, Fyt, of the charge
at large distances. The latter quantity represents
an electromagnetic disturbance which was negli-
gible before the moment of acceleration, and
which considerably later than that instant had
the character of a diverging spherical wave. We
can find a solution, S, of Maxwell’s equations
for free space, the diverging wave in the asymp-
totic expansion for which has exactly the same
behavior as the field —3Fiet. By this condition
the solution in question is furthermore uniquely
determined. On this account it must be identical
with another field which also satisfies Maxwell’s
equations for free space and has for its diverging
wave at large distances the same form as — 4 Fret;
namely, the incident field, Fine=4Faav— $F ret.
Consequently we may write Fine=S, where S is
the solution of Maxwell’s equations defined as
above. From this means of arriving at the value
of the incident field we conclude that the incident
field is that solution of the wave equation for
free space which, when added to the known
retarded field, Fret, will reduce by one-half the
strength of the diverging wave in the asymptotic
representation of Fret.

As next idealized example of incomplete ab-
sorption we consider a source at the center of a
blackbody with two opposed openings out into


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 17 = RMP 17 page 173 =====

ABSORBER THEORY OF RADIATION

T
ABSORBING
— sounce -_ ad +
4 Ss i Hee Th
=t sare

WAVES INCIDENT —— THESE INCIDENT
BEFORE ACCELERATION WAVES ARE
OF SOURCE. ABSORBED. 4

Oe
7,

SOURCE ACTED ON
(a) BY IMPACTING PARTICLE
FORCE,

(b) BY INCIDENT WAVE.

2x | @
<7ae

SOURCE EMITS WAVES.

OTHER INCIDENT
WAVES WILL ACT ON
SOURCE AT MOMENT
OF ACCELERATION,

SOME EMITTED WAVES
ARE

; ABSORBED. -
oa ce U1! G ill
~ _ >

‘THE OUTGOING WAVES EXCEPT FOR A
CHANGE OF SICN,LOOK JUST AS IF THEY
| WERE THE INCIDENT WAVES CONTINUING,
UNMOLESTED THROUGH EMPTY SPACE,

THE REMAINING
OUTGOING WAVES
| LEAVE FoR EVER,

Fic. 1. Advanced effects in two examples of an
: incompletely absorbing system.

charge-free space (Fig. 1). In those directions
not shielded by the absorber an incident field—
to use the language of the retarded field theory
—will enter, converge’ on the radiating particle;
diverge and go out to infinity, as in the preceding
example. This time, however, the wave incident
from one side covers but the amount Q of the
whole solid angle of 47. Consequently at the
instant: when it is focused upon the source, it
reduces the force of radiative reaction only
fractionally below the conventional value of this
force. The fraction in question is equal in the
case of a pair of small opposed openings and a
slowly moving source to the product of the
following factors:
Q/4z,

the fraction of the whole solid angle spanned by one

hole.
2,

factor allowing for the existence of the two openings.
3 sin? (2, 7),

factor allowing for the orientation of the holes relative

173

to the direction of acceleration. Here (%,7) is the
angle between the vectorial acceleration of the source
and the vector from this particle to one opening. The
given expression for the polarization factor assumes
that the quantities d&{/dt and % are parallel, and has
to be replaced by a more complicated term when this
parallelism does not exist.

When the source is moving at the time of acceler-
ation with a speed comparable to that of light,
then the angular distribution of the radiation is
represented by an expression more complicated
than sin? (Ql, 7) but the general principle is the
same.

In the present case of an absorber complete
except for two inversion-symmetric openings to

_charge-free space we conclude that there is a

continuous transition, as the size of the apertures
is increased, from the full conventional force of
radiative reaction on a central source, to the
case of no radiative reaction at all. Furthermore,
we note that a test charge placed in one of the
two openings will receive a disturbance some |
time before as well as some time after the
moment when the source itself is given its
acceleration. Generally we may say that the
explicit appearance of advanced effects is un-
avoidable in the case of a system which is an
incomplete absorber. However, in neither of the
examples so far examined do advanced fields of
the source produce explicit advanced effects on
any other particle than a test charge: in the first
example, because there is no other charged
particle; and in the second case, because the
incident field is restricted to a region of space
where there are no particles to be disturbed,
except a possible test particle.

._ ADVANCED EFFECTS ASSOCIATED WITH
INCOMPLETE ABSORPTION

Recognizable advanced effects appear for the
first time in a third example, a source at the
center of a cavity completely absorbing except
for a single passage to charge-free space. (See
Fig. 1.) For simplicity we consider the source to
be a slowly moving particle. Also we shall denote
as ‘“‘antipassage’’ that portion of the absorber
which is marked out by the inversion, with
respect to the source, of the passage itself. Apart
from the fields which come from and go to the
passage and antipassage, we have the usual
solution of the problem of a completely absorbing
system. In the language of the retarded formu-


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 18 = RMP 17 page 174 =====

174

lation of field theory, we can say that there is in
all other directions no incident field, and that
in those directions the absorber experiences only
a normal full strength retarded field as a result
of the acceleration of the source. In the language
of the theory of action at a distance the result
is the same. The source gives out a half-advanced,
half-retarded field, the advanced part of which
in the direction of the normal portions of the
absorber is cancelled by a portion of the advanced
fields generated in the absorber itself. The re-
maining portion of this advanced field combines
with the half-strength retarded field of the source
to give the full retarded disturbance demanded
by experience. The advanced field of the absorber
at the location of the source itself. produces a
force of radiative reaction which is below the
conventional amount in proportion only to the
small solid angle which we have so far left out
of consideration. So far the results are quite as
expected.

We have now to consider the effect on the
antipassage of what, in the theory of action at a
distance, is the half-advanced field of the source.
If the passage itself were filled with absorbent,
this material would have generated a field, the
advanced part of which would have compensated
the effect we are now considering. As it is, we
visualize two possible solutions of the problem
of motion. In the first, the uncompensated half-
advanced field of the source sets into motion
ahead of time the particles on the inner face of
the antipassage. In the second solution, this
advanced field is compensated by a mechanism
yet to be explained, and the particles in question
are not disturbed before the moment of accelera-
tion of the source.

In the first solution, not illustrated in Fig. 1,
the particles on the inner face of the antipassage
spontaneously accelerate at a moment sufficiently
early so that their retarded fields reach the source
at just the moment when it is radiating. The
retarded field of the charges of the antipassage,
evaluated in the cavity, has in the present
solution the following properties: (1) It vanishes
except in the directions of the passage and anti-
passage. (2) In those directions it has a value
completely determined by the movement of the
source. (3) It combines with the Schwarzschild-
Fokker field of the source to cancel its outgoing
component travelling in the direction of the

J. A. WHEELER AND R. P. FEYNMAN

passage and to build up its advanced component
on the side of the antipassage to a full strength
advanced wave. The combined advanced wave
has a magnitude exactly sufficient to account for
the disturbance of particles of the antipassage
ahead of time. (4) The field of these particles at
the location of the source acts in the opposite
sense from the conventional force of radiative
reaction. The magnitude of that force is reduced
by a fraction which, apart from a polarization
factor, is equal to twice the solid angle subtended
by the passage, divided by 47.

The particles of the antipassage, in addition
to the anticipatory movements already discussed, |
undergo, after the moment of acceleration of the
source, a disturbance similar to that experienced
by the charges which neighbor them on the inner
face of the cavity. In this way they are caused
to generate fields, the advanced part of which
(1) combines with the half-retarded field of the
source in the given direction to produce a full
retarded disturbance that accounts for the mo-
tions in question and (2) cancels the advanced
field of the source in the direction of the passage.
Thus neither advanced nor retarded disturbance
emerges from this passage to be detected by an
external test charge.

The self-consistent solution which we have
just described in terms of the symmetrical theory
of action at a distance is easily. summarized in
the language of the retarded field theory. The
sources of radiation are the central particle and.
the charges on the inner face of the antipassage.
Each is considered to experience the conventional
force of radiative reaction and to produce only
retarded fields. The fields from the disturbed
charges on the inner face of the cavity focus on
the central charge at the moment of its accelera-
tion, thus (1) partially compensating the con-
ventional force of radiative reaction and (2)
cancelling that part of its retarded field which
is travelling in the direction of the passage. No
retarded field gets outside the system. The inci-
dent field, determinable as we have seen before
from the asymptotic behavior of the retarded
field, consequently vanishes. Thus in the given
illustration the equation of motion of. each
particle contains only the retarded fields of all
the other particles, plus the full conventional
force of radiative damping, a conclusion con-
sistent with the solution which we have just


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 19 = RMP 17 page 175 =====

ABSORBER THEORY OF RADIATION

given. To complete the picture, we have to
express in terms of these equations of motion,
the explanation of the early motion of the
particles on the inner face of the antipassage.
This movement we attribute to the influence of
the retarded fields coming from other portions
of the wall of the cavity, and reinforcing at just
this particular region of the surface. The same

type of reasoning can be followed back step by —

step in the past, along a course which is very
like the reversal in time of the mechanism by
which a burst of radiative energy dissipates
itself. Granted that the existence of incomplete
absorption requires, in our example, the explicit
occurrence of advanced effects, we have in the
given solution one reasonable picture how these
advanced effects may build up until the time of
disturbance of the source and may then be
followed by a succession of retarded effects of
magnitudes diminishing as absorption and re-
flection at the inner walls of the cavity have
their effects.

In this third example an equally consistent
solution of the problem of advanced effects may
be briefly outlined (Fig. 1). The fields are in this
case such that a test charge placed within the
cavity experiences only the full retarded field of
experience. The particles on the wall of the
cavity are set into motion only after the time
when the source was struck and caused to
radiate. These particles, by the now familiar
mechanism of absorber response, generate fields,
the advanced parts of which in the cavity
cancel the advanced field of the source and bring
its retarded field up to full strength. In particular,
the advanced field of the source in the direction
of the passage is compensated, so that an external
test charge on that side of the absorber will
experience no advanced disturbance. It will,
however, on our picture undergo a full strength
retarded disturbance. How the _half-retarded
disturbance of the source in this direction is built
up to full strength, and how the half-advanced
field in the direction of the antipassage is can-
celled, is a question still to be cleared up. For
explanation we cannot (1) call upon the advanced

fields of the absorber in the direction of the .

passage, for there is no matter in this direction.
Nor can we (2) call upon retarded fields of
particles on the inner face of the antipassage for
our purpose—although they lie in just the right

175

direction thus to produce the field in question—
because they have been assumed not to have
been set in motion prior to the time of accelera-
tion of the source. To account for the directional
field of so far unknown origin in the cavity, we
are by (1) restricted to an explanation in terms
of a retarded wave from some source yet to be
found, lying in the direction of the antipassage
and by (2) this source cannot consist of the
particles on the inner face of that portion of the
absorber. Consequently we must interpret the
field in question as owing to particles set in
motion ahead of time on the outer face of the
antipassage. This conclusion, like many of the
considerations to which we are led in the study
of incompletely absorbing systems, appears para-
doxical. Nevertheless it leads to a self-consistent
solution of our problem. In the first place, the
half-retarded field of the surface particles com-
pensates within the antipassage as well as within
the cavity the half-advanced field of the source.
There is, therefore, no question of the propaga-
tion of any disturbance through the thickness of
the absorber. Secondly, the half-advanced field
of the surface particles appears from the point
of view of an external test particle to be a wave
front of limited cross section which comes from
outer space and which would converge upon the
source if the antipassage did not block its path.
This half-advanced field in the region exterior to
the absorber adds to the half-advanced field
from the central source to give a full strength
disturbance convergent upon the surface particles
in question. Thus an account is given for the
force and for the acceleration which they experi-
ence ahead of the time of acceleration of the
source within the cavity. The energy which is.
absorbed at the outer surface is later paid out by-
the source. That accelerated particle experiences
the full conventional force of radiative reaction.

The solution just given is readily translated
into the language of the retarded formulation of
field theory, where the force on. each particle is
attributed to three sources: the. conventional
force of damping, the retarded fields of ‘all other
particles and an incident field. The incident field:
has the appearance of a disturbance convergent
from outer space upon the external face of the
antipassage. By it the particles are accelerated
and caused to generate a full strength retarded’
field which at greater depths within the medium


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 20 = RMP 17 page 176 =====

176 J.

cancels the incident field, a phenomenon which
is the normal mechanism of absorption. Thus
there is within the cavity no disturbance con-
vergent upon the source, and consequently only
the usual retarded effects are observed, part of
which also is propagated out through the passage
into charge-free space.

In the retarded formulation of field theory,
there is no apparent reason for a correlation
between the surface absorption and the radiation
process within the cavity. The requirement for
a connection between the two comes into evi-
dence only in the condition which must be
satisfied by the incident field, and which has been
discussed above. That there must be such a field
follows from the existence of a full strength
retarded field, R, diverging outward from the
source through the passage in the absorber.
Therefore, denote the strength of the incident
field in this region of space and at this instant of
time by 2R, where x is a factor now to be found.
Being also divergent from the source, but free of
singularities there, the incident field must in this
neighborhood and in the given cone of directions
be a multiple of the radiation field of the source.
On being followed backwards in time to moments
previous to the acceleration of the particle, it
must, therefore, have in the direction of the
antipassage the magnitude —nA, where A de-
notes the advanced solution of Maxwell’s equa-
tion for the accelerated source. Thus the field
incident from great distances upon the particles
on the outer surface of the antipassage must have
the magnitude —7A. These particles generate a
retarded field which within the absorber compen-
sates the incident field and therefore has the
magnitude +A. This field, followed onward in
the direction of the original source, where it
naturally has no singularity, at first converges
and then diverges to give the appearance of a
retarded wave from the source itself. In this
neighborhood the retarded field of the surface
particles behaves much as does the radiation
field of the source. Consequently the strength of
the field in question, evaluated in the direction
of the passage, is —zR. Thus the sum of the
retarded fields of all the particles of the system,
evaluated outside the passage way, is R (from
the source) —#R (from the surface particles).
To determine the strength of the incident field,

A. WHEELER AND R. P. FEYNMAN

we now apply the condition that the divergent
term, 7, in its asymptotic representation must
have a strength equal to —4 times that of the
divergent wave owing. to the retarded fields of
all the particles of the medium:

nR=—%4(R—nR). (45)

The solution of this implicit equation gives for
the magnitude of the incident wave in the direc-
tion of the passage »R=—R, and consequently
for the strength of the incident wave converging
upon the other side of the system +A. Thus we
check the properties of this second solution of
our problem as obtained previously by using
the language of half-advanced, half-retarded
fields, with no reference to the concept of
incident field.

Between the two self-consistent solutions of
this third example of an incomplete absorber we
make no attempt to choose. We have to accept
the fact that the dynamical system in question
possesses a number of degrees of freedom which
is in direct proportion to the number of particles
present. Once it is granted that advanced effects
of some kind must be connected with the acceler-
ation of the source, it does not follow uniquely
upon which particles these advanced effects must
act. The selection is a matter of initial conditions,
not of equations of motion. The two solutions so
far. described are only two relatively simple
samples from an- infinite number of possible
solutions, distinguished from one another by the
requirements put upon the initial state of the
particles of the absorber. It is only in the case
of a completely absorbing system that there is
the possibility to find a set of initial conditions
which is relatively well determined by statistical
considerations.

Self-consistency being the only requirement
which has to be met by a solution of the problem
of an incomplete absorber, and this requirement
in the retarded field formulation being largely
contained in a condition to be satisfied by the
incident field, it may be of interest to have our
so far informal statement of this relation put
into mathematical terms. The condition in ques-
tion furnishes a connection between the incident
field, here abbreviated as J, and the sum, R, of
the retarded fields of all the particles.


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 21 = RMP 17 page 177 =====

ABSORBER THEORY OF RADIATION

To derive the desired relation, we note that
the present formulation of electromagnetic
theory expresses the incident field as half the
difference between the advanced and retarded
fields owing to all the particles. Thus the ad-
vanced field of the system is given by the
expression R+2/. From (1) a knowledge of this

S(e) = (RO) +210) +n} J ff eeaeraeeas/oe'—sas/ae"

In Eq. (46) the symbol 6 stands for the delta
function, 6(x"— &-x,—&). The integral is to be
taken only over the immediate neighborhood of
those points on the surface from which an ad-
vanced wave can reach the point x!, x?, x? at the
time «x*. In the first integrand we have the dif-
ference between the values of a certain quantity
calculated for the largest and smallest values of
€! consistent with given values of #, &, &4; and
similarly for the other three integrals. We shall
write Eq. (46) symbolically in the form

S=(R+22)+Adv. [S]. (47)

We now apply this general relation to the
special half-advanced, half-retarded solution of
Maxwell’s equations for the system of charges,
S=R-+TI. In this way we arrive at an implicit
equation by means of which to derive the inci-
dent field from the retarded field:

0=I+ Ady. [R+I]. (48)

This relation is the generalization of Eq. (45)
from which we determined the strength of the
incident field in the third example above. With
this generalization we end our study of the

behavior of idealized systems with incomplete .

absorption and come to the wider question what
we should say about the absorbing properties of
the system with which we have to deal in nature.

There would be no problem in interpreting

18 The analogue of Eq. (46), for determination of the
arbitrary solution from a knowledge of the retarded
solution, has been given in a rather different form by W.
R. Morgans, Phil. Mag. 9, 148 (1930). The’ present form
is most easily derived by use of the relation
(8/88) (8/8Es)5(x” — & +x, — &)

= 48 (xt B)8(08— 2)8(x8— 8) a(x! E),
and application of Green’s theorem in four dimensions.

177

advanced field everywhere in space and (2) a
knowledge of the values taken on the points, &,
of a surface surrounding the system by an arbi-
trary solution, S, of Maxwell’s equations for the
same charge distribution, we can derive the
values of this arbitrary solution at. all other
points in space, x, from the relation

&41
gt

= f f f did Pd£*(59S/dE4—S08/d£*)

£4) 8
oe (46)

the universe as a completely absorbing system
if it were an indefinitely extended Euclidean
space. The existence of the electron-positron
field gives an mechanism by which, even in a
vacuum, radiation of some frequencies can
undergo absorption processes, and light of all
wave-lengths can be scattered. These processes
are sufficient ultimately to degrade all the
radiation given out by an accelerated charge.

The universe is however now generally re-
garded as a closed space, in harmony with the
illuminating theory put forward by Einstein. In
this space present observations suggest that the
absorption of radiation is far from complete even
at the greatest depths so far plumbed, of the
order of one-tenth the calculated radius of the
universe. If this conclusion is correct, then a
complete electrodynamic description of the
mechanism of radiation would require us to take
into account not only the curvature of space but
also the phenomena summarized under the term
“expanding universe.” At the present time we
know too little about these matters to carry out
such a complete description. Moreover, there is
yet no compelling reason to attempt this de-
scription. We know of course that electro-
dynamics remains, in other respects as well, to
be tied to gravitational phenomena. But we
recognize that in this sense our present theory
of electrodynamics, like the theories in all other
parts of science, is an idealization.

So long as we limit ourselves to the idealization
based on the concept of a Euclidean space, we
have to consider the question of complete and
incomplete absorption on a purely empirical
basis. In this connection we will obtain a satis-


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 22 = RMP 17 page 178 =====

178 J.

factory account of experience, as we have seen,
on the assumption that the universe behaves as
a completely absorbing system.

PRE-ACCELERATION

Is there in the case of a completely absorbing
universe any consequence of the act of radiation
which is so apparently paradoxical as the obvi-
ously advanced effects encountered in the in-
stance of an incompletely absorbing system? If
so, what words can we reasonably use to assimi-
late such a phenomenon into our experience?

Any advanced effects to appear in the case of
a completely absorbing system must be deducible
from the conventional force of radiative reaction,
for the only other electrodynamical effects ap-
pearing in this case in the equation of motion
(42) of the typical particle are the retarded fields
of all other particles. That the damping term
does lead to an advanced effect follows from an
interesting example already considered by Dirac.®
A source sends a sharp pulse of radiation towards
a particle of charge e and mass m. At the instant
of arrival the speed of the particle would be
expected abruptly to increase if the force of
damping were proportional to the first derivative
of the displacement. Actually the radiative re-
sistance is proportional to the third derivative
of the displacement, and the nature of the solu-
tion of the equation of motion is changed. The
particle commences to move before the time of
arrival of the pulse; and e?/mc? seconds ahead of
time it attains a velocity comparable with its
final speed.

As a suitable way to speak of this most inter-
esting phenomenon of pre-acceleration brought
to light by him, Dirac suggests saying that “‘it is
possible for a signal to be transmitted faster
than light through the interior of an electron.
The finite size of the electron now reappears in
a new sense, the interior of the electron being a
region of failure, not of the field equations of
electromagnetic theory, but of some of the ele-
mentary properties of space-time.’”’ This choice
of language is perhaps suitable in certain respects
to describe the pre-acceleration of the single
charge in the example considered by Dirac. It
may also be of value in other special instances.
However, the given mode of speaking suggests
in the case of a medium of closely packed charges

A. WHEELER AND R.

P. FEYNMAN

the possibility of transmission of signals with a
speed greater than that of light over microscopic
distances, a conclusion which appears to: be
denied by a direct investigation of the point.
Also the idea that the properties of space time
fail in a region of the order of e?/mc? around a
charge appear to have possibilities of suggesting
misleading conclusions sufficiently great to call
for a later search for a more suitable means of
expression.

We shall now attempt to test the idea sug-
gested by the term “speed greater than that of
light”’ that the phenomenon of pre-acceleration
might be cumulative when charges are spaced at
a distance from one another comparable to the
quantity e?/mc?. The method of analysis will be
very nearly that followed by Sommerfeld™ and
Brillouin™ in their classic resolution of the ques-
tion how it can be that the speed of propagation
of a disturbance in a dispersive medium never
exceeds the velocity of light even when the phase
velocity for certain frequencies is far above this
upper limit. The only significant mathematical
difference between the two cases is the change of
the damping force from proportionality to the
first power of the frequency to proportionality
to the third power.

The first step in the procedure of Sommerfeld
and Brillouin is to determine the refractive index
of the medium, 2, as a function of frequency.
The charges of the material are assumed normally
to be at rest. Consequently the magnetic per-
meability is unity. According to the standard
result of electromagnetic theory the square of
the refractive index is in this case equal to the
dielectric constant:

(electric field in a thin slot

, cut normal to the field)

i: (electric field in a thin cavity
cut parallel to the field)

=(E+4nP)/E=1+(40P/E).

(49)

Here P represents the polarization of the
medium:
P=(number of charges per unit volume) -
(charge of each) -
(displacement from equilibrium). (50)

14 A, Sommerfeld, Ann. d. Physik 44, 177 (1914).
1% L, Brillouin, Ann. d. Physik 44, 203 (1914).


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 23 = RMP 17 page 179 =====

ABSORBER THEORY OF RADIATION

For the force which determines the displacement
of the charges in a homogeneous isotropic
medium it is reasonable, according to Lorentz
and Lorenz, to take the result valid for a cavity
of spherical form,

(force) = (charge per particle)(Z+ (4aP/3)). (51)

The displacement itself is related to the force by
the equation of motion,

(force) = m(displacement)
+ (a constant) - (displacement)

— (2e?/3c*) (displacément). (52)

Here we have visualized in the second term of
the right side the possibility that the particles
are bound to equilibrium positions by elastic
forces. Without such forces we should be led by
Earnshaw’s theorem to expect that the medium
would form a dynamically unstable system. We
now follow Lorentz and Lorenz in selecting a
function of refractive index which is easy to
evaluate as a function of frequency:

3(n? —1)/(n?+2) =40P/LE+ (40P/3)]
7 4r(particle density) (charge)?(displacement)

m/(disp) + (const) (disp) —(2e?/3c?) (disp) 653)
We consider a monochromatic disturbance of
circular frequency (3mc*/2e?)w, and express the
elapsed time as (2e?/3mc*)r, where both 7 and w
are dimensionless quantities. We assume that
the displacement of the typical particle varies
with time as exp (—#wr). Also we express the
number of particles per unit volume in the form
(N/32) (3mc?/2e?)*, where N is also a magnitude
without dimensions. Then from (53) we obtain
the refractive index as a function of frequency in
the form:

n(w) = [1 +2N/ (wo? — w? — iw) P}. (54)
Here we have introduced the abbreviation _
wo? = (2e?/3mc*)?(constant/m) —(2N/3), (55)

where wo is a measure of the extent to which the
assumed quasi-elastic force over-compensates the
otherwise inherent electrical instability of the
system.

The propagation through a vacuum of an
electrical disturbance of circular frequency
(3mc?/2e?)w is conveniently described by an elec-

179

trical field of the form
(56)

when we use the quantity (2e?/3mc?)£ as a meas-
ure of distance in the direction of propagation.
We suppose this disturbance to be incident on a
medium occupying the infinite half-space from
—€=0 to &=+o. Then the transverse electric
field of the monochromatic wave will be repre-
sented in the medium by the expression

2(n+1)— exp (iwnE—iwr). (57)

As a measure of the disturbance in the medium
we shall take the displacement of the typical
particle or, what is up to a constant the same
thing, the polarization:

P=(W—1)E/4r,
= (29) (n—1) exp (wnt —twr).

exp (tw&—iwr),

(58)

We are interested in following the progress
through the medium, not of a monochromatic
wave, but of an initially well defined pulse. We
shall idealize the incoming electric field as a
delta function, 6(¢—7), with the property 6(u) =0
when

+00
ux0, f 5(u)du=1.

We recall the representation of the delta function
as a superposition of monochromatic waves:
: mene
exp (iw —twr)dw.

5(E— 7) = (20)

0

(59)

This expression will represent the electric field
in the vacuum. In the medium the electric
polarization will accordingly be given as a func-
tion of position and time by the integral

PO) =n) (nw) -1)

Xexp (twnt—iwr)dw, (60)

where the refractive index is obtained as a
function of frequency from (54).

Of the mathematical details of evaluating the
polarization of the medium from Eq. (60) it is
enough to say that it is convenient to displace
the path of integration in the complex plane, and
to apply the familiar saddle point method of
approximation. This procedure is sufficiently
accurate for our purpose when we accept the
following reasonable conditions:


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 24 = RMP 17 page 180 =====

fe

180

(1) We consider a medium of macroscopic dimensions.
With the quantity (2e2/3mc*) equal to 1.88107 cm, it
follows that the values of the quantities £ and 7 are of the
order of magnitude of 107,

(2) The number, N, of particles per volume element
3m (2e?/3mc*)® is of the order of, or greater than, unity.

(3) At the depth, &(2e2/3mc*), in the medium, the dis-
turbance, if propagated with the speed of light in vacuum,
would arrive at that time, 7(2e?/3mc?), for which r=€; or
more briefly, we shall say that the value of the “‘light-
instant,” 7, at the depth é is given by the equation r=&.
We limit our interest to the disturbance at times ahead of
the light-instant by an amount which, expressed in the
dimensionless measure, £—7, is small in comparison with
£~10%8, although this difference may otherwise range all
the way from a value very small in comparison with unity
to a value as great as several orders of magnitude of 10.

(4) The dimensionless measure of natural frequency of
oscillation of the system, we, in order of magnitude is not
large in comparison with unity.

Under these conditions we obtain an approximate
representation of the polarization of the medium
‘in the form

4n°P= (nN/8) (1/2) —(E—7) ++]

for values of (§—7) in a range of order 1/(N£)?
on either side of the light-instant; and

4n?P= (4g N/3E(E—7)/2NEP
exp [ — (3/4) (2NE/E—1)*(E—7) J
cos [ (a/3) + (3?/4) (2NE/E—7)*(E—7) ],

for values of —7 between the rough limits
1/(NE)* on the little side and some small fraction
of the quantity Né on the big side.

' We obtain from expressions (61) and (62) the
following picture of the displacement of the
charges of the medium at the depth &(2e?/3mc’)
before and at the light-instant:

(61)

(62)

(1) The typical particle receives a displacement before
the light-instant, thus justifying the use of the descriptive
term ‘‘pre-acceleration’’ even in the case of a medium
containing many particles.

(2) The displacement of the typical particle, instead of
increasing with time according to the simple exponential
law, exp (r—£), derived by Dirac for an isolated particle,
is here before the light-instant an oscillatory function of
time of much more rapidly increasing amplitude.

(3) The last full oscillation before the light-instant is in
the negative sense, that is, opposite to the direction of the
field in the original pulse. This oscillation is completed
only slightly before the light-instant, so at that time the
displacement of the typical particle is positive but small
in comparison with its magnitude in the last few preceding
vibrations. However, the velocity of the particle at a time

about equal to the light-instant has reached the maximum -

J. A. WHEELER AND R. P. FEYNMAN

value so far experienced. The condition of approximately
zero displacement and high velocity has a certain corre-
spondence with the result which would be expected at the
time of arrival of the distiirbance in the absence of the
phenomenon of pre-acceleration. ,

(4) The characteristic time of pre-acceleration may
reasonably be taken to be measured by the interval
between the last two nodes of the oscillation, a quantity
which has the order of magnitude (NVE)~?(2e?/3mc*), a very
small fraction of the so-called classical radius of the
charged particle. Another estimate for the time of pri-
acceleration of the same order of magnitude is obtained
by studying the exponentially increasing envelope of the
oscillatory motion described by Eq. (60).

From the tentative conception that the classical
radius of a charged particle defines a region
within which disturbances are propagated with
a speed faster than the velocity of light, it would
have appeared reasonable to expect in a very
dense medium a macroscopic velocity of propa-
gation significantly greater than the normal
limiting value. If this were the case, the interval
of pre-acceleration, £—7, would have increased in |
proportion to the depth, &, and would have been
appreciable in comparison with é In contrast,
we have now found that the characteristic time
of pre-acceleration not only decreases slowly with
depth in a dense medium, but also is an exceed-
ingly small fraction of the value obtained by
Dirac for the case of a single particle. We con-
clude that it is misleading to attribute the phe-
nomenon of pre-acceleration to an abnormal
velocity of light or to a failure of the usual
conceptions of space-time in the immediate
neighborhood of a charged particle. We are
therefore obliged to look to other terms for a
suitable way to describe the phenomenon.

PRE-ACCELERATION AS WITNESS TO THE
INTERACTION OF PAST AND FUTURE

Pre-acceleration and the force of radiative re-
action which calls it forth are both departures
from that view of nature for which one once
hoped, in which the movement of a particle at a
given instant would be completely determined
by the motions of all other particles at earlier
moments. All thought was excluded of a de-
pendence of the force experienced by the particle
upon the future behavior of either that charge
itself or any other charges. The past was con-
sidered to be completely independent of the
future. This idealization is no longer valid when


===== [OCR tesseract] PDF page 25 = RMP 17 page 181 =====

ABSORBER THEORY OF RADIATION

we have a particle commencing to move in
anticipation of the retarded fields which have yet
to reach it from surrounding charges. Still less is
it a good approximation to the truth in the case
of an incompletely absorbing system, where we
have in addition to the normal damping force an
incident field seen above to depend explicitly
upon the advanced fields of the individual
particles, and where we encounter advanced
effects even more striking than preacceleration.

The mechanism by which the future affects
the past is illuminated by considering a system of
three or more charges in the light of the half-
advanced, half-retarded fields of the theory of
action at a distance. The retarded field produced
by the acceleration of a affects b; the advanced
field of 6 sets c in motion; and ¢ generates a
field, the advanced part of which affects a before
the moment of its acceleration. By an extension
of this line of reasoning it is apparent that the
past and future of all particles are tied together
by a maze of interconnections. The happenings
in neither division of time can be considered to
be independent of those in the other. Neverthe-
less, in a system containing particles sufficient
in number to provide effective absorption, an
interference takes place between these forces.
All the advanced effects are cancelled out except
those which are comprised in the conventional
force of radiative reaction; and these are limited
in their influence to a time of the order of
magnitudeé of the quantity (e?/mc?). Therefore,
to the extent that the force of radiative reaction
can be neglected, we have in the case of a
completely absorbing system the possibility to
make a cut between past and future; but the
cleanness of this cut is limited to times of the
order of e?/mc? or greater. Those phenomena
which take place in times shorter than this figure
require us to recognize the complete interde-
pendence of past and future in nature, an inter-
dependence due to an elementary law of inter-
action between particles which is perfectly
symmetrical between advanced and retarded
fields.

SUMMARY

Use of action at a distance with field theory as
equivalent and complementary tools for the

181

description of nature has so far been prevented
by inability of the first point of view fully to
account for the mechanism of radiation. Eluci-
dation of this process in both theories comes
from a 23-year old suggestion of Tetrode, that
the absorber may be an essential element of the
act of emission. A quantitative formulation of
this idea is given here on the basis of the following
postulates: (1) An accelerated charge in other-
wise charge-free space does not radiate energy.
(2) The fields which act on a given particle arise
only from other particles. (3) These fields are
represented by one-half the retarded plus one-
half the advanced Lienard-Wiechert solutions
of Maxwell’s equations.

In a system containing particles sufficient in
number ultimately to absorb all radiation, the
absorber reacts upon an accelerated charge with
a field, the advanced part of which, evaluated
in the neighborhood of the source on the basis of
these postulates, is found to have the following
properties: (1) It is independent of the properties
of the absorbing medium. (2) It is completely
determined by the motion of the source. (3) It
exerts on the source a force which is finite, is
simultaneous with the moment of acceleration,
and is just sufficient in magnitude and direction
to take away from the source the energy which
the act of radiation imparts to the surrounding
particles. (4) It is equal in magnitude to one-half
the retarded field minus one-half the advanced
field of the accelerated charge itself, just the
field postulated by Dirac as the source of the
force of radiative reaction. (5) This field compen-
sates the half-advanced field of the source and
combines with its half-retarded field to produce
the full retarded disturbance which is required by
experience. Radiation is concluded to be a phe-
nomenon as much of statistical mechanics as of
pure electrodynamics. A complete correspondence
is established between action at a distance and
the usual formulation of field theory in the case
of a completely absorbing system. In such a
system the phenomenon of pre-acceleration ap-
pears as the sole evidence of the advanced effects
of the theory of action at a distance. Other
advanced effects appear in the case of an incom-
pletely absorbing system and are also discussed.
