111

i

Y

(0

O q;
Z UJ
a:

h

I- Q£

OQ-

U UI

t

I

M

Mossbauer
(J
y^ r^ HANS FRAUENFELDER

k

BENJAMIN, INC., PUB L

I

S H E R|»

L

UNIVERSITY
OF FLORIDA

LIBRARIES

ENGINEERING AND PHYSICS
LI

BRARY

The Mbssbauer Effect

Frontiers in Physics
A Lecture Note and Reprint Series
DAVID PINES, Editor

NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RELAXATION: A Re-

N. Bloembergen
print Volume

Chew S-MATRIX THEORY OF STRONG INTERACTIONS: A Lecture Note and Reprint Volume

Geoffrey F.

Feynman

R. P.

QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS: A Lecture

Note and Reprint Volume
R. P.

Feynman

THE THEORY OF FUNDAMENTAL PROC-

ESSES: A Lecture Note Volume

Hans Frauenfelder

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT: A Collection

of Reprints with an Introduction

David Pines

THE MANY-BODY PROBLEM: A Lecture Note

and Reprint Volume
L. Van Hove, N. M. Hugenholtz, and L. P. Howland

PROB-

LEMS IN THE QUANTUM THEORY OF MANY-PARTICLE
SYSTEMS

The
Mossbauer
Effect
A Review— with a Collection of Reprints

HANS FRAUENFELDER
University of Illinois

W. A. BENJAMIN, INC.

New York

1962

& PHYSICS

the mosssba«:r effect
A Review— with a Collection of Reprints
Copyright

© 1962 by W. A. Benjamin, Inc.

All rights reserved

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 61-18181
Manufactured in the United States of America

W. A. BENJAMIN, INC.
2465 Broadway, New York 25, New York

EDITOR'S FOREWORD
The problem of communicating in a coherent fashion the recent
developments in the most exciting and active fields of physics
seems particularly pressing today. The enormous growth in the
number of physicists has tended to make the familiar channels of
communication considerably less effective. It has become increasingly difficult for experts in a given field to keep up with the current literature; the novice can only be confused. What is needed is
both a consistent account of a field and the presentation of a definite
"point of view" concerning it. Formal monographs cannot meet
such a need in a rapidly developing field, and, perhaps more important, the review article seems to have fallen into disfavor. Indeed, it would seem that the people most actively engaged in developing a given field are the people least likely to write at length
about it.
..

I

"Frontiers in Physics" has been conceived in an effort to improve the situation in several ways. First, to take advantage of the
fact that the leading physicists today frequently give a series of
lectures, a graduate seminar, or a graduate course in their special
fields of interest. Such lectures serve to summarize the present
status of a rapidly developing field and may well constitute the only
coherent account available at the time. Often, notes on lectures exist (prepared by the lecturer himself, by graduate students, or by
postdoctoral fellows) and have been distributed in mimeographed
form on a limited basis. One of the principal purposes of the
"Frontiers in Physics" series is to make such notes available to
a wider audience of physicists.

vi

EDITOR'S FOREWORD

It should be emphasized that lecture notes are necessarily rough
and informal, both in style and content, and those in the series will
prove no exception. This is as it should be. The point of the series
is to offer new, rapid, more informal, and, it is hoped, more effective ways for physicists to teach one another. The point is lost if

only elegant notes qualify.

A second way to improve communication in very active fields of
physics is by the publication of collections of reprints of recent articles. Such collections are themselves useful to people working in
the field. The value of the reprints would, however, seem much enhanced if the collection would be accompanied by an introduction of
moderate length, which would serve to tie the collection together
and, necessarily, constitute a brief survey of the present status of
the field. Again, it is appropriate that such an introduction be informal, in keeping with the active character of the field.
A third possibility for the series might be called an informal
monograph, to connote the fact that it represents an intermediate
step between lecture notes and formal monographs. It would offer
the author an opportunity to present his views of a field that has
developed to the point at which a summation might prove extraordinarily fruitful, but for which a formal monograph might not be
feasible or desirable.
Fourth, there are the contemporary classics— papers or lectures
which constitute a particularly valuable approach to the teaching
and learning of physics today. Here one thinks of fields that lie at
the heart of much of present-day research, but whose essentials

are by now well understood, such as quantum electrodynamics or
magnetic resonance. In such fields some of the best pedagogical
material is not readily available, either because it consists of papers long out of print or lectures that have never been published.
"Frontiers in Physics" is designed to be flexible in editorial
format. Authors are encouraged to use as many of the foregoing
approaches as seem desirable for the project at hand. The publishing format for the series is in keeping with its intentions. Photooffset printing is used throughout, and the books are paperbound, in
order to speed publication and reduce costs. It is hoped that the
books will thereby be within the financial reach of graduate students
in this country and abroad.
Finally, because the series represents something of an experiment on the part of the editor and the publisher, suggestions from
interested readers as to format, contributors, and contributions
will be most welcome.

DAVID PINES
Urbana, Illinois
August 1961

PREFACE
Only four years ago, Rudolf Mossbauer discovered what is now
known as the Mossbauer effect: Nuclei that are embedded in solids

can emit and absorb low- energy gamma rays which display the natural line width and possess the full transition energy. No recoil energy is transferred to lattice vibrations. Mossbauer' s experiment

seemed at first to pass unnoticed, but within two years it was repeated and extended. Physicists soon realized that they had at hand
a new and beautiful tool— simple in its basic ideas, requiring only a
minimum of equipment, and allowing ingenious applications not only
in nuclear physics, but also in relativity and in solid-state physics.
The early trickle of publications became a stream. The rapidly
growing body of knowledge was discussed and information exchanged
in two international conferences in 1960 and 1961. In 1961, Rudolf
Mossbauer received the Nobel prize.
In the present volume, a number of reprints on the Mossbauer effect are collected. I have tried to select those publications which are
either essential to the understanding of the development of this field
or which are useful as references for further work. As an introduction to these reprints, the first six chapters contain a review of the
Mossbauer effect.
During the preparation of the introductory notes I have enjoyed

many discussions with friends and colleagues. I should like to thank
particularly K. Bleuler, J. D. Jackson, W. E. Lamb, Jr., R. L. Mossbauer, D. E. Nagle, D. G. Ravenhall, J. R. Schrieffer, and A. H. Taub
for stimulating remarks. P. Debrunner, D. W. Hafemeister, S. Margulies, R. J. Morrison, and D. N. Pipkorn have read through many
versions of the manuscript and I am grateful to them for forcing me

vn

make it more readable than it might otherwise have been. Finally,
should like to thank Mrs. M. Runkel for her unfailing help in the
preparation of the manuscript.
to
I

HANS FRAUENFELDER
Urbana, Illinois

December 1961

ACKNOWLE DGMENTS
The publisher wishes to acknowledge the assistance of the following organizations in the preparation of this volume:

The American Institute of Physics, for permission to reprint the
articles from the Physical Review, Physical Review Letters, Soviet
Physics JETP, The Review of Scientific Instruments, and the Journal
of Applied

Physics.

Academic Press, Inc., for permission to reprint the articles from
the Annals of Physics.

Gauthier-Villars Imprimeur- Libra ire, for permission to reprint
the articles from Comptes rendus hebdomadaires des seances de

l'academie des sciences.

The Physical Society, for permission to reprint the articles from
their Proceedings.

The Italian Physical Society, for permission to reprint the article
from II Nuovo cimento.
Springer Verlag, for permission to reprint the article from
Zeitschrift fur Physik.

Verlag der Zeitschrift fur Naturforschung, for permission to
reprint the article from Zeitschrift fur Naturforschung.
North-Holland Publishing Co., for permission to reprint the arand Methods.

ticle from Nuclear Instruments

Macmillan & Co., Ltd., for permission to reprint the article from
Nature.

Vlll

CONTENTS
Editor's Foreword

v

Preface
1.

2.

3.

vii

Introduction
1-1

Resonance fluorescence

1

1-2

Cross section for resonance processes

7

1-3

Mossbauer's discovery

11

1-4

Literature and reprints

13

2-1

Preliminary remarks

14

2-2

Lattice vibrations

15

2-3

The classical theory

17

2-4 The physical picture

20

2-5

26

Theory

Sketch of the theory

Experimental Apparatus and Problems
3-1

Survey

33

3-2

Isotopes

36

3-3

Sources and absorbers

39

3-4 Apparatus

40

ix

CONTENTS

x

4.

5.

3-5 Corrections

44

3-6

47

Useful information

Nuclear Properties
4-1

Introduction

50

4-2

Lifetime and conversion coefficient

51

4-3

Nuclear moments

51

4-4 Isomeric shifts

53

4-5 Parity experiments

57

General Physics
5-1

Survey

58

5-2

Gravitational red shift

58

5-3

Accelerated systems

62

5-4 Second-order Doppler shift

63

5-5

Frequency and phase modulation

65

5-6

The uncertainty relation between energy and time

66

5-7 Recoilless Rayleigh scattering

69

5-8

Coherence and interference

71

5-9

Polarization

73

6. Solid-State Physics

6-1

Survey

76

6-2

Lattice properties

78

6-3

Internal fields

82

6-4 Impurities and imperfections
6-5

7.

Low temperatures

83

84

Bibliography on the Mossbauer Effect

Review articles

86

7-2 Research papers

87

7-3

96

7-1

Conference reports

CONTENTS

xi

Reprints and Translations

Section 1
The Effect of Collisions upon the Doppler Width of Spectral
Lines, by R. H. Dicke • Phys. Rev., 89, 472 (1953)

99

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz von Gammastrahlung in Ir 191
by R. L. Mossbauer • Z. Physik, 151, 124 (1958)

101

,

Theoretical part of the preceding paper in English translation

121

191

Kernresonanzabsorption von y-Strahlung in Ir
by R. L.
Mossbauer • Naturwissenschaften, 45, 538 (1958)
,

(English translation)

127
191

Kernresonanzabsorption von y-Strahlung in Ir
by R. L.
Mossbauer • Z. Naturforsch., 14a, 211 (1959)

130

Capture of Neutrons by Atoms in a Crystal, by W. E. Lamb, Jr.
• Phys. Rev., 55, 190 (1939)

136

,

Section 2
Study of Lattice Vibrations by Resonance Absorption of

Nuclear Gamma Rays, by W. M. Visscher •
144

Ann. Phys., 9, 194 (1960)

Some Simple Features of the Mossbauer Effect, by
H. J. Lipkin • Ann. Phys., 9, 332 (1960)

161

Resonance Radiation of Nuclei Bound in a Lattice,
by D. R. Inglis (original paper)

169

Resonance Absorption of Nuclear Gamma Rays and the
Dynamics of Atomic Motions, by K. S. Singwi and
A. Sjolander • Phys. Rev., 120, 1093 (1960)

194

Diffusion des photons sur les atomes et les noyaux dans
les cristaux, by C. Tzara • J. phys. radium, 22,
303 (1961)

204

Section 3
Diffusion resonante du rayonnement y de 23.8 kev de Sn 119
6mis sans recul, by R. Barloutaud, J. L. Picou, and
C. Tzara • Compt. rend., 250, 2705 (1960)

2Q9

Zeeman Effect in the Recoilless y-Ray Resonance of Zn 67

,

by P. P. Craig, D. E. Nagle, and D.R. F. Cochran •
Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 561 (1960)

212

Mossbauer Effect in Ferrocyanide, by S. L. Ruby, L. M.
Epstein, andK.H.Sun • Rev.Sci. Instr., 31,580(1960)

216

CONTENTS

xii

Transmission and Line Broadening of Resonance Radiation
Incident on a Resonance Absorber, by S. Margulies
and J. R. Ehrman • Nuclear Instr. and Methods, 12,
131 (1961)

218

Section 4

Polarized Spectra and Hyperfine Structure in Fe 57 by
5. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J. Perlow,
R. S. Preston, and D. H. Vincent • Phys. Rev.
,

Letters, 4, 177 (1960)

225

Evidence for Quadrupole Interaction of Fe 57m and Influence
of Chemical Binding on Nuclear Gamma-Ray Energy,
by O. C. Kistner and A. W. Sunyar • Phys. Rev.

Letters, 4, 412 (1960)

229

Electric Quadrupole Splitting and the Nuclear Volume
Effect in the Ions of Fe 57 by S. DeBenedetti,
G. Lang, and R. Ingalls • Phys. Rev. Letters,
6, 60 (1961)

233

Interpretation of the Fe 57 Isomer Shift, by L. R. Walker,
G. K. Wertheim, and V. Jaccarino • Phys. Rev.
Letters, 6, 98 (1961)

236

,

Section 5

Apparent Weight of Photons, by R. V. Pound and G. A.
Rebka, Jr. • Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 337 (1960)

240

Measurement of the Red Shift in an Accelerated System
Using the Mossbauer Effect in Fe 57 by H. J. Hay,
,

J. P. Schiffer, T. E. Cranshaw,

and P. A.Egelstaff

• Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 165 (1960)

245

Absence of Doppler Shift for Gamma Ray Source and
Detector on Same Circular Orbit, by D. C. Champeney
and P. B. Moon • Proc. Phys. Soc. (London), 77, 350
247

(1961)

Variation with Temperature of the Energy of Recoil-free
Gamma Rays from Solids, by R. V. Pound and G. A.
Rebka, Jr. • Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 274 (1960)

250

Temperature -Dependent Shift of y Rays Emitted by a
Solid, by B. D. Josephson • Phys. Rev. Letters, 4,
252

341 (1960)

Acoustically Modulated y Rays from Fe 57 by S. L. Ruby and
D.I. Bolef • Phys. Rev. Letters, 5, 5 (1960)
,

253

CONTENTS

xiii

Measurement of the Refractive Index of Lucite by
Recoilless Resonance Absorption, by L. Grodzins
and E. A. Phillips • Phys. Rev., 124, 774 (1961)

256

Time Dependence of Resonantly Filtered Gamma Rays
from Fe 57 by F. J. Lynch, R. E. Holland, and
M. Hamermesh • Phys. Rev., 120, 513 (1960)

259

Effect of Radiofrequency Resonance on the Natural Line
Form, by M. N. Hack and M. Hamermesh • Nuovo
cimento, 19, 546 (1961)

267

Recoilless Rayleigh Scattering in Solids, by C. Tzara and
R. Barloutaud • Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 405 (1960)

279

,

Sur la possibilite de mettre en evidence la coherence de
phase dans la diffusion de resonance des rayons y
par des noyaux atomiques, by A. Kastler • Compt.
rend., 250, 509 (1960)

Resonant Scattering of the 14-kev Iron- 57 y-Ray and Its
Interference with Rayleigh Scattering, by P. J.
Black and P. B. Moon • Nature, 188, 481 (1960)

281

284

Section 6

The Mossbauer Effect in Tin from 120°K to the Melting
Point, by A.J. F. Boyle, D. St. P. Bunbury,
C„ Edwards, and H. E. Hall • Proc. Phys. Soc.
(London), 77, 129 (1961)

288

Mossbauer Effect: Applications to Magnetism, by G.K.

Wertheim« J. Appl.Phys., Suppl., 32, No. 3, 110S (1961)
Direction of the Effective Magnetic Field at the Nucleus
in Ferromagnetic Iron, by S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle,
G. J. Perlow, R. S. Preston, and D. H. Vincent •
Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 513 (1960)

295

303

Temperature Dependence of the Internal Field in Ferromagnets, by D. E. Nagle, H. Frauenfelder, R. D.
Taylor, D. R. F. Cochran, and B. T. Matthias •
Phys. Rev. Letters, 5, 364 (1960)

306

Polarization of the Conduction Electrons in the Ferromagnetic Metals, by A. J. F. Boyle, D.St. P. Bunbury,
and C. Edwards • Phys. Rev. Letters, 5, 553 (1960)

308

Hyperfine Field and Atomic Moment of Iron in Ferromagnetic Alloys, by C.E.Johnson, M.S.Ridout, T.E.
Cranshaw, and P.E. Madsen • Phys. Rev. Letters,
6, 450 (1961)

312

CONTENTS

xiv

Internal Magnetic Fields in Manganese -Tin Alloys, by
L. Meyer -Schtitzmeister, R. S. Preston, and
S. S. Hanna • Phys. Rev., 122, 1717 (1961)

314

Study of the Internal Fields Acting on Iron Nuclei in Iron
Garnets, Using the Recoil-free Absorption in Fe 57
of the 14.4-kev Gamma Radiation from Fe 57m by
,

R. Bauminger, S. G. Cohen, A. Marinov, and
S. Ofer • Phys. Rev., 122, 743 (1961)

318

On the Use of the Mossbauer Effect for Studying Localized
Oscillations of Atoms in Solids, by S. V. Maleev •
JETP, 39, 891 (1960) (in Russian); Soviet Physics
JETP, 12, 617 (1961) (in English). English translation reprinted here

324

57

Polarization of Co in Fe Metal, by J. G. Dash,
R. D. Taylor, D. E. Nagle, P. P. Craig, and
W. M. Visscher • Phys. Rev., 122, 1116 (1961)

325

Comments and Corrections

335

THE MOSSBAUER
EFFECT

L

INTRODUCTION
1-1

RESONANCE FLUORESCENCE

The beauty and fascination of physics rarely becomes more apparent than when one follows a particular topic through the various
stages of its development. The history of the neutrino, the most
elusive of all particles, is an example. Another is the story of resonance fluorescence, the subject of the present volume. In this chapter, we outline briefly some phases in the history of atomic and nuclear resonance fluorescence and the Mossbauer effect, which begin
with the mechanical interpretation of matter and end, hopefully only
temporarily, with the Mossbauer effect.
The story of resonance fluorescence starts at the end of the last
century with Lord Rayleigh, who suggested that resonance scattering
should occur in atomic systems. Considerable time elapsed after
this prediction before R. W. Wood discovered resonance radiation in
1904. The explanation of resonance scattering was then based entirely on mechanical analogies. The scattering resonators were assumed to be exactly in tune with the frequency of the incoming radiation. Wood's discovery led to other experiments, the techniques
4
were rapidly improved, and a wealth of data was accumulated. 1 1
t References not directly connected with the Mossbauer effect are
designated by superscripts and listed at the bottom of each page.
References dealing specifically with the Mossbauer effect will be
found listed in Chapter 7; they are indicated in the text by the name
of the first author and the year of publication. Papers reprinted
are denoted by "Reprint" and the name of the first author.
X
R. W. Wood, "Physical Optics," Macmillan, New York, 1934,
3rd ed., Chap. XVIII.
2
A. C. G. Mitchell and M. W. Zemansky, "Resonance Radiation

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

2

interesting to note that, in the mechanical picture underlying
these early experiments, incoming and outgoing radiation maintain
a fixed phase relation.
Resonance fluorescence fitted well into the Bohr theory, which
superseded the earlier pictures: An atom, decaying from an excited
state B to its ground state A, emits a photon of well-defined frequency <j) Y When such a photon passes through a gas consisting of
the same element as the emitter, it can be absorbed and excite a
target atom into the state B. After a short time, this excited target
atom will in turn decay and emit a photon of frequency a> r Primary
and secondary radiation thus have the same frequency, but the processes of absorption and reemission are independent and no fixed
phase relation exists between them.
Many of the aspects of resonance radiation were correctly described by the Bohr theory and by the early quantum mechanics.
However, problems connected with line width, radiation damping,
and coherence were not easily explained. The Dirac theory of radiation, in the hands of Weisskopf and Wigner, finally provided a complete description of the processes of emission, absorption, and res5 8
All the fundamental aspects of resonance
onance fluorescence.
radiation seemed to be solved, interest in basic investigations of
atomic resonance fluorescence decreased, and research moved on to
3 4
more complicated problems of fluorescence and phosphorescence.
(incidentally it may be noted that atomic resonance has recently
played an important role once more in the optical orientation of nuIt is

.

.

'

'

clei.)

Since atomic resonance radiation depends essentially on the existence of quantized levels and since quantized levels also occur in
nuclei, the possibility of observing nuclear resonance fluorescence
was obvious, and the search was started in 1929 by Kuhn. 7 However,
even though problems in atomic and nuclear resonance seem very
similar, there exist marked differences which render nuclear experiments much more difficult. In order to outline these difficulties,
the process of resonance fluorescence must be discussed in more

and Excited Atoms," Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1934.
3
P. Pringsheim, "Fluorescence and Phosphorescence,' Interscience, New York, 1949.
4
J. G. Winans and E.J. Seldin, Fluorescence and Phosphorescence, in E. U. Condon and H. Odishaw (eds.), "Handbook of Physics,'
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1958.
'

5

V. Weisskopf, Ann. Physik, 9, 23 (1931). V. Weisskopf and
E. Wigner, Z. Physik, 63, 54 (1930); 65, 18 (1930).
8

W. Heitler, "Quantum Theory of Radiation," Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1949.
7
W. Kuhn, Phil. Mag., 8, 625 (1929).

'

INTRODUCTION

3

detail. Consider a free atomic or nuclear system, of mass

levels A and B, separated by an energy E
r
B to A by emission of a photon of energy E

-

If
,

M, with two

the system decays from

momentum conservation

demands that the momentum p of the photon and the momentum P of
the recoiling system be equal and opposite. The recoiling system
hence receives an energy R, given by
2

P2

p

2M

2M

Ey
2Mc

(1)

2

it is assumed that the recoiling system can be
treated nonrelativistically— an assumption that is extremely well
satisfied in atomic and nuclear spectroscopy. Actually, all gamma
rays involved in atomic and nuclear resonance fluorescence have en2
ergies that are small compared to the rest energy Mc of the emitting atomic or nuclear system. The recoil energy is thus very small
compared to the gamma- ray energy.
and R:
Energy conservation connects E E

In this derivation,

r

,

y

,

Er = Ey + R

(2)

Since R is very small compared to Ey, and since, as will be obvious
later, one needs to know R only to moderate accuracy, Ey can be replaced by the transition energy E r in (l):

R = E 2 /2Mc 2

(10

The recoil energy R is plotted in Fig. 1-1 as a function of the transition energy E r for a quantum system of mass number 100.
One more feature now enters the discussion, namely, the width of

Assume that the mean life against decay of the
According to the Heisenberg uncertainty relation, the

the excited state B.
state B is r.

energy in state B then cannot be measured sharply, but only within
an uncertainty given by

r-r=R

(3)

where 27rn" is Planck's constant. A detailed examination employing
perturbation theory shows indeed that the decaying state B cannot
be characterized by one well-defined energy E r only, but that the energy E of the state is distributed about the center energy E r as shown
6
in Fig. l-2a.
The energy of the stable ground state, according to (3),
is sharp. Photons emitted in the transition from B to A thus show a
distribution in energy Ey, centered around E r - R, and displaying a
" natural line shape" of width T (Fig. l-2b). To give an order
8
of magnitude, the line width T corresponding to a mean life r = 10~

—
THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

10"

1

-E,
1

ev

1

kev

1

— atomic X rays —

f-

Y
optical transitions

Fig. 1-1

[•

Mev

-|

nuclear gamma rays

*-

Recoil energy R and Doppler broadening D
(for a gas at 300 °K) as a function of the
transition energy E r for a nucleus of mass
number 100. For comparison, the natural
line width T corresponding to a lifetime of
"
10 8 sec is shown also.

sec is shown in Fig. 1-1. Such a mean life is typical for atomic
states and net -unreasonable for low- lying nuclear levels.
Returning to resonance fluorescence again, when a photon of energy Ey and momentum p strikes a target of mass M, which is initially at rest, the entire momentum p is transferred to the target.
The target thus recoils and the energy of recoil R is again given by
(l) or (!'). This energy must be supplied by the gamma ray. Thus

INTRODUCTION

Er - R

Fig. 1-2

Energy distributions involved in resonance
fluorescence, (a) Energy distribution of excited state B. (b) Energy distribution of
photons emitted in a transition B
A.
(c) Energy spectrum required to excite
state B in target and provide center-ofmass energy R. (d) Overlap of and (T.

—

M

only an energy E r - R is available for the excitation of internal degrees of freedom (Fig. l-2b). In order to excite a level of energy E r
the incoming gamma ray must have an energy E r + R, as shown in
Fig. l-2c. Resonance fluorescence can occur only if some of the
incoming photons possess enough energy to "reach" the state B and
at the same time provide the energy R to recoiling system. Thus,

,

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

6

only the overlapping part of the spectra 2b and 2c is responsible for
resonance fluorescence (Fig. l-2d). The condition for overlap is

2R < T

(4)

A glance at Fig. 1-1 shows that optical transitions fulfill condition (4),
but that nuclear transitions are far from it.
In the discussion so far, the emitting and the absorbing system
were assumed to be at rest. Actually, however, source and target
atoms are in thermal motion, and this motion introduces an additional
widening of the emission and absorption lines, called Doppler broadening. In order to see this effect qualitatively, consider a source
with initial momentum P i? which emits a photon of momentum p. The
momentum of the source after the emission is given by P^ - p. The
energy gained by the source and hence lost by the gamma ray is, in

good approximation, t

2M

2M

2M

M

vo;

The first term on the right-hand side of (5) is the recoil energy R
[Eq. (l)] of the initially stationary system; the second term represents the Doppler broadening.

Introducing the kinetic energy
= P|/2M of the quantum system before the photon emission and
a "Doppler energy"
e

D = 2(8R)
this

1/2

(6)

second term can be written

D cos <p
where <p denotes the angle between p and P^ The photon energy then
becomes

E

= E r - R' = E

where E r = Eg - E»

r

- R + D cos (p

is the total energy

(7)

released in the transition

B — A. Generally the angle <p will vary from

to 277 and the Doppler

term in (7) causes a spread in the photon energy E^ of the order of D.
tin (5)

it is

assumed that the mass of the quantum system does

Actually, there is a very small
change in mass, because the photon carries away energy. This effect
has been observed experimentally (Sec. 5-4) but is unimportant in
the present context.

not change during the emission.

INTRODUCTION

7

In a source in which the velocities of the individual emitters are

isotropic in direction and Maxwellian in magnitude, this additional
broadening is of the order

D a 2(cR)

1/2

(8)

where e is the average value of the kinetic energy of the emitters. In
Fig. 1-1 curve D represents such a Doppler broadening, corresponding roughly to that of a gaseous source at room temperature. Comparison of Fig. 1-2 and the three curves in Fig. 1-1 shows that the
natural line width T is not always the dominant feature in resonance
fluorescence; the Doppler broadening also plays an important role.
For optical radiation, the recoil energy R is small compared to the
Doppler broadening, emission and absorption lines overlap, and resonance conditions are obtained. For nuclear gamma rays, however,
the recoil energy is comparable to, or greater than, the Doppler
broadening, and the discussion of when to expect a measurable resonance fluorescence effect requires an investigation of the cross
section for resonance fluorescence under various conditions.

1-2

CROSS SECTION FOR RESONANCE PROCESSES

Resonance experiments with gamma rays are usually performed
by either measuring the scattered intensity (resonance fluorescence
or resonance scattering) or by determining the attenuation of a beam
due to resonance absorption. The cross sections for these two proc2
esses, for an incident gamma ray of energy E and wavelength 27T*
8 8
and, for thin absorbers,
can be calculated in a straightforward way
can be written
'

*scatt

r2
2
° 4(E - E
+ r2
r

(E) " a

(9)

)

riy
"abs

(E) = ao

4(E - E r ) 2 + r 2

(10)

T is the total width of the absorption line, T y
gamma- ray width, and cr the maximum resonance cross section

In these expressions,
its

given by
2I B + 1
2I

A +1

27T*

2

(11)

In (11) I A is the spin of the ground state A and Ig the spin of the ex-

cited state B.
J. D. Jackson,

Can. J. Phys., 33, 575 (1955).

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

8

Scattering and absorption cross sections as given by (9) and (10)

show a characteristic energy dependence of the form
I(E) =

(12)

(E-E r 2 + [(l/2)rp

2i

)

which is normalized to
oo

/ 1(E) dE = 1

(12')

o

Corresponding curves are sketched in Fig. 1-2. These distributions
are said to show a Breit-Wigner or Lorentz shape. The parameter

T gives the full width of the distribution at half maximum.
Since expressions (9) and (10) are fundamental for the Mossbauer
it is important to know that they are derived under the following assumptions:
a. Only one absorbing or scattering level exists. If more than
one state appears at, or close to, the energy E
or if the state at E r
is split into sublevels, for instance by a strong magnetic field, then
(9) and (10) must be modified (Margulies, 1962).
b. The width of the level is given entirely by decay processes. In
nuclei, in all interesting cases, the two competing modes are gammaray emission and internal conversion. Total width and gamma-ray
width are then related by the equation
effect,

,

rr =

lh r

(13)

where a is the coefficient of internal conversion.

level is

If the

broadened by other influences, the line shape need not be Lorentz ian.
c. The incoming photon is monoenergetic. An actual source, however, will possess an energy spectrum l(E), where l(E) dE denotes
the number of gamma rays emitted with energies between E and
E + dE. The observed cross sections for scattering and absorption
then become integrals of the form
oo

/a(E)l(E) dE
/

J

X

(14)

55

1(E)

dE

o

Here in the introduction only two special cases of (14) will be treated.
Further cases appear in the various reprints.
its width is
1. The incoming gamma ray possesses an energy E
r
small compared to the width T, and the conversion coefficient a is
zero. I(E) in this case is essentially a delta function 6(E r ), and from
(9), (10), (13), and (14) one finds
;

INTRODUCTION
°scatt

abs

r

r

°

This result explains the designation "maximum resonance cross
section" for a
2. The incoming gamma ray has an energy spectrum l(E) described by a Lorentz shape [Eq. (12)], with a width r identical to the
width of the absorbing state, and with its energy centered at E r In
a resonance fluorescence experiment these assumptions mean that
the recoil energy R is either negligible or has been compensated
for, and that emitting and absorbing state are identical and are not
broadened by external influences. With these assumptions, one finds
from (10), (12), and (14) for the maximum cross section for the resonance absorption of a gamma ray with width r by a level with iden.

.

tical width,

r
a

eff abs

= a

°

2T

a

=

(l5)

2(1+ a)

One trivial remark must be added here. The actual width of the incoming gamma ray and of the absorbing level are both given by r and
TV is not a width that can be traced experimentally, but
not by T
y
rather a quantity F which characterizes the fraction of decays pro.

ceeding by photon emission.
Equation (15) leads back to resonance fluorescence. In fact, it
describes resonance absorption under the most ideal conditions,
namely, (i) emission and absorption line possess the natural line
width, and (il) emission and absorption line are centered at the same
energy. If these two conditions are satisfied, the cross section for
resonance absorption, given by (15), is very large provided the conversion coefficient is reasonably small. The effective maximum
resonance cross section is plotted against photon energy in Fig. 1-3.
It is obvious from the values in Fig. 1-3 that resonance experiments
should yield large effects provided the two conditions I and n can be
satisfied. Another glance at Fig. 1-1 shows that for optical resonance fluorescence, the second assumption is valid, but the first is
not because Doppler broadening considerably widens the lines. The
correct cross section for resonance scattering in the presence of
Doppler broadening can be calculated easily. Even without calculation, one can make a good guess. Assume the target to be at rest
and the incoming photons to have an energy spectrum characterized
by a Doppler width D. Only a small part of the widened incoming
spectrum overlaps with the resonance level. The fraction of incoming photons capable of undergoing resonance absorption is approximately equal to r/D. This fraction, however, is centered at the resonance energy E r and hence enjoys approximately the maximum resonance cross section (J Ty/r given by (10) for E = E r The effective
absorption cross section thus becomes
.

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

10

d

r>

rr r

(16)

This estimate, which is borne out quite well by the exact calculashows that the maximum cross section is reduced by a factor

tion,

7i*

2
,

cm 2

ev

Fig. 1-3

Effective maximum resonance absorption
2
cross section n-k as a function of photon energy. The curve is valid for vanishing conversion coefficient and for identical spins in
the two states involved. To find the cross
section for a decay with spins 1^, Ig, and
with conversion coefficient a, multiply the
value obtained from the curve by
2I

B + 1

2I

A+ 1 1 +a

1

INTRODUCTION

11

IV /D. For optical transitions, internal conversation is impossible,
and T y = T. From Fig. 1-1 one can see that the maximum cross section is reduced only by one or two orders of magnitude and that experiments with optical transitions should be feasible— as indeed they
are.
In nuclear experiments, both conditions are violated, but the second can be restored by several means. In 1950, Moon performed the
198
onto the tips
first successful experiment by plating a source of Au
9
of a steel rotor and spinning the rotor up to tip speeds of 800 m/sec.
Gamma rays emitted tangentially thus gained additional energy sufficient to compensate for the recoil loss. Other possibilities of compensating for the recoil energy loss, for instance the use of the recoil
from a transition preceding the gamma ray to be investigated, or the
heating of source and absorber to increase the average kinetic energy, have also been used with positive results.
Despite these ingenious experiments, classical nuclear resonance
fluorescence experiments are never easy, since condition (I) is not
fulfilled. The ratio Ty/D in (18) is much smaller for nuclear than
for optical transitions. Figure 1-1 indicates that the maximum cross
section is decreased by many orders of magnitude. Despite these
difficulties many good experiments have been performed since 1950.
These experiments and the underlying theory are discussed in a num10 " 12
ber of review articles.

MOSSBAUER'S DISCOVERY

1-3

Comparing (15) and (16) one is struck by the price one must pay
for the effects of thermal motion. The question arises of whether

there is a way to avoid the large decrease in cross section which is
caused entirely by nonnuclear processes.
Dicke in 1952 theoretically studied the reduction of Doppler
broadening by collisions in a dense gas 13 (Reprint Dicke). As a
simple model he used a radiating atom enclosed in a one-dimensional well oscillating back and forth between the walls. Actually,
such a model is more appropriate to the description of a solid. In
any case, he found a normal Doppler distribution plus a sharp, nonDoppler broadened and unshifted line. Today, such a line would be
9

P. B. Moon, Proc. Phys. Soc, 63, 1189 (1950).
K. G. Malmfors in K. Siegbahn (ed.), "Beta- and Gamma-Ray

10

Spectroscopy/' North- Holland, Amsterdam, 1955, Chap. XVIIl(ll).
11
F. R. Metzger in O. R. Frisch (ed.), "Progress in Nuclear
Physics," Pergamon, New York, 1959, Vol. 7.
12
S. Devons in Fay Ajzenberg-Selove (ed.), "Nuclear Spectroscopy," Part A, Academic, New York, 1960, Chap. IV(B).
13
R. H. Dicke, Phys. Rev., 89, 472 (1953).

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

12

No successful experiments were carried
however, before 1957 and Dicke's calculation had no influence on
the later development.
R. L. Mossbauer, in 1957, started the dramatic next step from a
completely different side, by an accidental discovery. (Reprint Mossbauer 1958, 1959) He investigated the nuclear resonance scattering
191
For this transition, the free
of the 129-kev gamma ray from Ir
recoil energy R is 0.05 ev, the Doppler broadening at room temperature about 0.1 ev. At room temperature emission and absorption
spectrum thus overlap considerably, and resonance scattering can be
observed. In order to reduce this residual scattering, Mossbauer
cooled both source and absorber and expected a decrease in effect.
Instead, the resonance scattering increased! After carefully ascertaining that this increase was not spurious, Mossbauer set out to
investigate the nature of this surprising effect. Following a sug14
gestion by Jensen, he found a paper by Lamb (Reprint Lamb) in
which the effect of lattice binding on the capture cross section of
slow neutrons is discussed. The figures 2 and 3 in Lamb's paper
already show peaks that could be called "Lamb- Mossbauer peaks."
(Compare also reference 15.) By adapting Lamb's calculation to
gamma rays, Mossbauer was able to explain his own experimental
results. In one beautiful experiment, he had thus found the solution
to both problems outlined in Sec. 1-2: A fraction of the 129-kev
gamma rays, emitted by the cooled source, did not show a measurable recoil energy loss, and these same gamma rays also did not
display a Doppler broadening. Their line width corresponded to the
called a Mossbauer line.

out,

.

natural line width.
After Mossbauer' s first publication (Reprint Mossbauer 1958),
about a year elapsed before other laboratories, particularly Los
Alamos and Argonne, began to repeat and extend his experiments.
(As an amusing side remark, it may be told that the research at Los
Alamos was started by a bet. Two physicists were discussing Mossbauer' s discovery and one of the two did not believe it. The other
bet a nickel that the effect was real and that he could repeat the experiment. He won.) All these early experiments, performed with
191
Ir
were complicated by low- temperature requirements and by the
,

smallness of the effect.
The next major advance came through the discovery of the Moss57
bauer effect in Fe
made independently at Harvard, Harwell, the
University of Illinois, and Argonne. The ease with which the effect
57
can be demonstrated with Fe
its very large size, its persistence
up to temperatures of over 1000 °C, and the very narrow natural line
width, immediately changed this field of physics from one accessible
,

,

14

W. E. Lamb, Jr., Phys. Rev., 55, 190 (1939)

15

H. Ott, Ann. Physik, 23, 169 (1935).

INTRODUCTION

13

to only a few laboratories to one in which even modestly equipped

groups could compete. Moreover, the extremely narrow line width
57
and the fantastically large value of E r /r opened possibilities,
such as the measurement of the red shift of photons in a terrestrial
laboratory, which were thought to be impossible a short time earlier.
After these advances, more nuclei showing recoilless resonance
absorption were found and many new and exciting experiments were
performed. The various phases in the still young history of the
Mossbauer effect are summarized in Table 1-1, due to H. J. Lipkin.
of Fe

Table 1-1

History of the Mossbauer Effect

3,

Date

Remarks

Before 1958

Might have been discovered,
but wasn't

Early iridium age

1958

Discovered, but not noticed

Middle iridium age

1958-1959

Late iridium age

1959

Period
Prehistoric

Iron age

Noticed, but not believed

Believed, but not interesting

Wow!!

1959-1960

H. J. Lipkin, private communication.

1-4

LITERATURE AND REPRINTS

The description of resonance fluorescence in this chapter should

some of the background which is usually hard to find in research papers. Chapters 2 to 6 are more condensed, since they
are intended mainly as guides to the collected reprints and to the
literature. Only aspects that seem most important to the understanding of the physics of Mossbauer effect are given. Further details and
summaries can be found in the review papers on recoilless emission
of gamma rays, listed in Chapter 7.
The reprints collected in the back have been selected either because they have been essential in the development of the field or because they illustrate important aspects and are useful for contemplating new experiments or extensions of the theory. Any such
selection is arbitrary and subject to Dyson's law: "If a book is to
be published at a time T, and if it is supposed to be up-to-date to a
16
time T - t, then it will inevitably be out-of-date at the time T + t."
However, it is hoped that within the limits of this law the selection
and the introductory chapters will prove to be useful.
give

16

F. J. Dyson,

Physics Today, 8

(6),

27 (1955)

THEORY
PRELIMINARY REMARKS

2-1

Mossbauer, after his experimental discovery of recoilless gammaray emission and absorption, successfully explained these phenomena.
He did so by adapting to gamma rays Lamb's theory of neutron capture by atoms bound in a crystal (Reprint Lamb, Reprint and Translation Mossbauer). Since then a number of theoretical papers have extended and elaborated the basic aspects. Despite the number of publications, however, some unsolved and unclear questions remain, as
illustrated for instance by two quotes from recent papers: "It turns
out that the existence of the Mossbauer line is a purely classical effect,'' and "The Mossbauer effect can only be understood quantum
mechanically. The classical picture fails completely if one wants to
understand the behavior of the emitter." Obviously, these two statements are not in complete agreement. However, they can be reconciled by showing that the classical treatment indeed yields some of
the essential features, particularly the existence of an unshifted line,
but that the complete treatment of the Mossbauer effect, including recoil phenomena, requires quantum mechanics.
Indeed, a complete treatment of the Mossbauer effect requires
nearly all of quantum mechanics and it is then not surprising to observe that the apparent paradoxes of quantum theory, such as the
famous double-slit experiment, appear again, in a somewhat changed
form. In discussing the formulas describing recoilless emission and
absorption, one must watch out not to quarrel about aspects that cannot be measured in principle. No better warning can be given than
Pauli's: 17 "It is essential to observe that a statement, according to
17

W. Pauli, Die allgemeinen Prinzipien der Wellenmechanik,
"Encylopedia of Physics," Springer, Berlin, 1958, Vol. V, Part 1,
p. 69 (note also page 136).
14

THEORY

15

which a system, independent of a determination by a measurement,
contains a well-defined internal energy E n or equivalently is in a
,

well-defined stationary state, easily leads to contradictions. This is
true particularly where the older quantum theory talks of 'transition
processes' among the various stationary states of the system."
In this chapter a short outline of the main features of lattice vibrations (Sec. 2-2) is followed by a discussion of the classical theory
(Sec. 2-3). A primitive picture underlying the quantum mechanical
treatment is sketched in Sec. 2-4. Some aspects of the theory usually
assumed to be known are presented in Sec. 2-5. Finally, some remarks about the De bye- Waller factor are added.
In all sections, the emphasis is placed on outlining the physical
features and providing some elementary discussions which are omitted in the published papers. The complete treatment can be found in
the reprints on theory.

2-2

LATTICE VIBRATIONS

Some knowledge of the theory of lattice vibrations is essential for
an understanding of the mechanism of recoilless gamma-ray emission. The very simplest aspects are presented here as a reminder.
Detailed treatments are contained, for instance, in Refs. 18-21.
One of the puzzles of classical physics was the decrease of the
specific heat of solids below a certain critical temperature. Einstein,
in 1907, first explained this decrease by assuming that a solid consisted of a large number of independent linear oscillators, each vibrating with a frequency u^. Tne corresponding spectrum of lattice
vibrations is shown in Fig. 2- la.
Einstein's theory explained the decrease of specific heats qualitatively, but the exponential behavior at very low temperatures pre3
dicted by his theory differed from the experimentally observed T de3
pendence. Debye, in 1912, derived the T dependence and thus improved the agreement between theory and experiment by introducing
a continuum of oscillator frequencies, ranging from zero to a maximum frequency oo^ and obeying a distribution function.
c(u>) =

18

const,

2
u>

(17)

M. Blackman in "Encyclopedia of Physics," Springer, Berlin

1955, Vol. VII, Part 1.
19
J. DeLauney in F. Seitz and D. Turnbull (eds.), "Solid State
Physics," Academic, New York, 1956, Vol. 2, p. 219.
20
C. Kittel, "Introduction to Solid State Physics," Wiley, New

York, 1956, Chaps. 5 and 6.
21
E. W. Montroll in E. U. Condon and H. Odishaw (eds.), "Hand
book of Physics," McGraw-Hill, New York, 1958, Sec. 5-150.

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

16

»c(w)

c(w)

(J0^

(a)

Fig. 2-1

c(w)

w n oo

5x lO^sec- ^
1

Spectrum of lattice vibrations in a solid: (a) Einstein
model, (b) Debye model, (c) Born- von Karman model.
[After G. Leibfried and W. Brenig, Z. Physik, 134, 451
(1953).]

Such a distribution, shown in Fig. 2- lb, can be derived by assuming
the solid to be a homogeneous and isotropic medium, the group velocity of waves of all frequencies to be the same, and the total number of (one-dimensional) linear oscillators to be equal to three times

the number

N of atoms in a solid.

Debye's theory explained the experimental data very well. However it was soon realized that the actual vibrational spectra, while
obeying a go 2 dependence at low frequencies, markedly deviate from
it at higher frequencies and calculations to find more detailed spectra were performed. The way to perform these calculations had already been pointed out in 1913 by Born and von Karman. They determined the spectrum by first finding the normal modes of a lattice
consisting of mass points connected by springs and by deriving the
spring constants from the interatomic force law. A result of a typi-

The deviation from the Debye
model is apparent.
One often assumes for simplicity that the Debye model is correct
and then defines a characteristic temperature, called Debye temperature Or> by the equation
cal calculation is shown in Fig. 2-lc.

E D =1iu> D = ke D

(18)

Here cod is the cut-off frequency shown in Fig. 2- lb, which in the
Debye theory is given by the condition that the total number of all oscillators be equal to 3N. Experimentally, one can determine the Debye
temperature from specific heat measurements, from X-ray reflection,
or from elastic constants. Values range from 88°Kfor Pb to 1000°K
for Be. However, one must be careful not to identify, without detailed
investigations, the Debye temperature measured in a conventional way
with the constant that enters calculations of the Mossbauer effect.

THEORY
2-3

17

THE CLASSICAL THEORY

A classical expression for the intensity of the Mossbauer line has
been given by Shapiro (Shapiro 1961) and Van Kranendonk (Van Kranendonk 1961, and unpublished lecture notes). Since no relevant reprints are reproduced in this volume, the derivation will be sketched
in the present section.

The vector potential of an electromagnetic wave, emitted by a
classical oscillator of constant frequency, can be written as
A(t) = Aq exp(io)

t)

where without loss of generality, Aq is normalized to

2

|A

= 1.

If

the

|

frequency is a function of time, this equation is replaced by
t

A(t) = A

exp

[i

/w(t')dt']

(19)

o

Assume for simplicity that the emitting oscillator moves in the x
direction, with a velocity v(t) which is small compared to the light
velocity c. The Doppler effect changes the frequency of the emitted
wave
w(t/ ) = a) [l+v(t')/c]

(20)

Inserting (20) into (19) and integrating yields

A = Aq exp(iw t) exp[iw x(t)/c]
or

A = Aq exp(iu> t) exp[ix(t)/X]

(21)

The essential features can now be discussed by letting the source of
the electromagnetic wave execute a simple harmonic motion, with

frequency to and amplitude Xq,
x(t) = x

sin

m

(22)

The vector potential becomes

A = Aq exp (iw t) exp (ix

sin fit/*)

(23)

Such expressions are well known from the theory of frequency modulation in radio transmission. The spectrum, which originally just contained the carrier frequency co splits up into lines of frequencies u>
,

,

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

18

a)

±fi,

cu

±2£2 ....

This splitting is derived in the following way. Using

the expansion22
oo

exp (iy sin 0) =

£]

J n (y) exp (in0)

(24)

n=- °°
Eq. (23) becomes
oo

A = Ao

£

J n( x o/*) exp [i(w + nO)t]

(25)

n=-oo
Equation (25) indeed describes an electromagnetic wave which is a
superposition of partial waves with frequencies u> a> ± £2, oo ± 2J2
The amplitude of each wave is given by the Bessel function J n (x /x).
The unshifted line can be identified with the Mossbauer line. Its intensity is given by
,

f= |A(n = 0)| 2 = J 2 (x /X)
Since

A

is

(26)

normalized, f directly yields the probability of emission

of the unshifted component.

So far, it has been assumed that the emitted wave is modulated by
one frequency only. Applied to solids, this assumption corresponds
to the Einstein model (Fig. 2- la). In order to use the previous discussion for real solids, one must generalize (22), (23), and (25) to
correspond to the correct frequency spectrum. The frequency Q, and
the amplitude Xq are replaced by a sum over frequencies £2 m with
amplitudes x m One finds instead of (26)
.

3N
n

m=l

Jj(x

m /*)

(27)

The number 3N of frequencies in a solid is extremely large. Each
J2 in (27) is only very slightly different from unity
since the maximum amplitude x m of each individual frequency component is extremely small. Thus J can be expanded
of the factors

J (y) = l - (l/4)y 2 +--

and (27) can be written
22

H. Jeffreys and B. S. Jeffreys, "Methods of Mathematical Phys-

ics, "

Cambridge University Press, New York, 1956, Sec. 21.10.

THEORY
In f = 2

19

E In J„ - 2 £ In [1 - (l/4)(x m /*
m
m
2

--2 £
m

(1/4)04,/**)

2
)]

(28)

In this expression, In f is a function of the maximum excursions x m
Usually one introduces the mean- square deviation of the vibrating
atom from its equilibrium position by the definition

<x2 > = (1/2)2 x2m

.

(29)

m

and writes instead of (28)
lnf e- -<x2 >/X 2
This equation is exact in the limit

N—

*>

(Van Kranendonk 1961), so

that the final result can be written

i

= exp(-<x2 >/*2 )

(30)

Equation (30) leads to some interesting remarks:
1. It is not surprising that the classical treatment yields an unshifted line. The exact agreement between the classical expression
(30) and the quantum mechanical result, as given in Sec. 2-5,Eq. (56),
is unexpected, however.
2. Equation (30) allows a simple physical interpretation. The continuously emitted electromagnetic wave comes from a region of linear dimensions <x2 >. If this linear dimension increases beyond the
wavelength fr= A/27T, pieces of the wave train emitted from different
points in this region interfere destructively, and the fraction f of
photons emitted without energy loss decreases rapidly.
3. The condition for appreciable emission without energy loss,
namely, that the amplitude of the emitting atom is small compared to
the wavelength of the emitted photon, means that small spatial zeropoint vibrations are essential for a large Mossbauer effect. The uncertainty relation then asserts that large zero-point momenta must
be present.
4. The wave train described by (23) is infinitely long and the corresponding emission line is infinitely narrow. In decays with a mean
life r, the lines possess a width T, Eq. (3), and the spectrum corresponding to (25) then is of the form shown in Fig. 2-2. From this
spectrum it is obvious that the Mossbauer line is clearly recognizable only if the line width T is smaller than the separation tifi from
the first satellite, i.e., if the nuclear lifetime t is larger than the
characteristic lattice time I/O. This latter time is of the order of
10" 13 sec.

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

20

O)

Fig. 2-2

+ 2Q

Spectrum of a classical electromagnetic wave of finite
length emitted by an Einstein solid.

5. Figure 2-2 gives a somewhat misleading impression since it is
based on an Einstein solid without interaction among the various oscillators. In an actual solid, whether described by an Einstein model
with interaction (Van Kranendonk 1961) or by a Debye model, only the
unshifted line shows the natural width T; all the satellites are broadened, overlap each other, and give rise to a continuum (Reprints on

theory).
6. The treatment outlined in this section can also be applied to experiments where the Mossbauer effect is observed with the source
mounted on a crystal that oscillates with a frequency J2. Such an experiment is described in a reprint (Reprint Ruby and Bolef).

2-4

THE PHYSICAL PICTURE

Before sketching the quantum mechanical theory of the Mossbauer
effect, a discussion of the physical picture

may elucidate some of the

aspects which can be lost easily in the formalism. Much of the discussion is based on the unfailing war horse of physicists, the uncertainty principle. Part of the treatment follows lectures by Weisskopf
(Weisskopf 1961).
Three separate questions will be considered; momentum conservation, energy conservation, and the time sequence and duration of
events.

2-41

Momentum Conservation

Assume that the nucleus of an atom which is imbedded in a solid
decays by gamma emission. If free, the nucleus would receive a recoil momentum p and a recoil energy R, given by (1). How does the
binding of the atom in the solid affect recoil momentum and recoil
energy ? The answer to the first question is straightforward: The

THEORY

21

momentum is unchanged, but it is eventually taken up by the solid as
a whole. In order to justify this statement, consider the two other
possibilities, trans lational motion of the nucleus and phonons (lattice
vibrations). The momentum cannot go into translational motion of the
nucleus. The energy required to leave a lattice site is at least of the
order of 10 ev; the energy available, however, never exceeds a few
tenths of an ev. (Even if the recoil were larger, the nucleus would
finally come to rest and transfer its momentum to the solid.) Lattice
vibrations, on the other hand, cannot take up momentum. They can be
represented as standing waves or as the sum of running waves. To
each wave with its momentum pointing in one direction will be a corresponding one with its momentum pointing in the opposite direction.
The expectation value of the momentum for lattice vibrations vanishes. (Even if the recoiling nucleus initially starts a Shockwave that
travels through the lattice, the Shockwave will finally be damped out,
and one is led back to the equilibrium situation discussed here.) The
momentum hence must go into translational motion of the entire crystal. If the crystal is glued to a larger body, for instance the earth,
this larger body takes up the momentum. The momentum conservation
is taken care of and one can now turn his attention to the energy conservation. (Incidentally, the nearly complete separation of the energy
transfer from the momentum transfer which occurs in the Mossbauer
effect appears also in many classical problems, such as when one
shoots a bullet into a very heavy pendulum.)
2-42 Energy Conservation

The discussion of the energy conservation is more complicated,
since the transition energy can be shared among the gamma ray, the
individual atom, lattice vibrations, and the solid as a whole. Two of
these four parts can be dispensed with quickly. The individual atom
does not leave its lattice site (see Sec. 2-41) and hence cannot acquire
translational energy. The energy that goes into motion of the entire
solid is extremely small and will be neglected. The transition energy,
for all practical purposes, is thus shared between the gamma ray and
the phonons. A Mossbauer transition occurs if the state of the lattice
remains unchanged, and the gamma ray gets the entire transition
energy.
The fact that transitions can occur in which the lattice remains in
its initial state and the gamma ray receives the full energy follows
from the quantum mechanical treatment (Sec. 2-5). A naive picture
can be given which makes this result plausible for the Einstein solid,
as well as for a solid with a continuously distributed frequency spectrum. For the Einstein solid, the problem is very simple. The smallest amount of energy that can be given to the solid is equal to
Eg =-ncoE = keg- ^ tne ener SY R U- e »> the recoil energy of zfree
nucleus) is small compared to this excitation energy, the probability

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

22

of emission of a phonon will be small, the lattice will not be excited

and the gamma ray will escape with the full transition energy. The
calculation (Sec. 2-5) shows indeed that the probability f for a transition without energy loss is given by
f

= exp(-R/k0 E )

(31)

For the Debye solid, the situation is more complicated. Assume
first that the decay proceeds in such a way that a lattice vibration of

the shortest possible wavelength, i.e., the maximum energy E^ = "hw D
= k0j), is excited. The wavelength of this shortest lattice wave is
A.«2d, where d is the lattice constant. In a continuum theory, such
as the Debye theory, the corresponding energy is

E D f fiw D = flu/* « 2irftu/2d

(32)

where u is the sound velocity in the solid. If this particular lattice
wave were the only one that could be excited, one would be in the same
case as before and (31) would hold, with E replaced by 0r> However, lattice modes with longer wavelength and hence smaller energy
exist, and one would expect that these vibrations can be excited easily,
thus making a Mossbauer effect impossible. The fact that these modes
with smaller energy cannot be excited too easily can be seen as follows. The highest mode corresponds approximately to a situation
where two adjacent atoms move out of phase. Such a wave can be excited most efficiently if the decaying atom is assumed to be free, re-

ceives its full share R of the recoil energy, and then bumps into a
neighboring atom. A simple mechanical analog is the well-known demonstration experiment in which a number of spheres hang from a frame
and touch each other. Lifting the outermost sphere and letting it bump
into the row excites a wave which travels through the chain and causes
one sphere at the other end to jump off. In order to excite longer
waves in this mechanical model, one lifts N spheres at one end, releases them, and N will bounce off at the other end. Similarly, a
longer wave can be excited most efficiently in the solid if initially N
atoms move together. The wavelength then is approximately 2Nd, and
the energy of this wave is, according to (32), about Erj/N. However,
in order most efficiently to excite this longer wave, N atoms must
move together at the onset, and the recoil energy must be transferred
to these N atoms "simultaneously." The decaying system is no
longer one atom alone but the N atoms together. The mass of this
system is NM, and the recoil energy given to it is R/N. So, even
though this wave requires only Ep/N as excitation energy, only R/N
is available.

The proper calculation (see Reprints on theory) justifies these considerations and shows that the fraction f of transitions without change

THEORY

23

in the lattice states is given by an expression similar to (31), but with

E replaced by (2/3)6d:
f

= exp(- 3R/2k0 D )

(33)

Equations (31) and (33) are valid only at zero absolute temperature,

where all lattice oscillators are in their ground state. At finite temperatures, some of the oscillators are excited and transitions with induced emission of phonons become possible. These transitions contribute an additional term in the exponents of (31) and (33).
The foregoing discussion is obviously oversimplified and, in addition, treats a quantum mechanical problem in a classical way. However the essence is correct. Even though the energies characteristic
for the solid are much smaller than the nuclear transition energy, and
the nuclear decay occurs in one nucleus only, the entire crystal must
be considered as the quantum mechanical system in which the decay
occurs. Any statement according to which one can separate the decay
into a first step, in which the nucleus decays, and a second step, in
which the recoil energy is, or is not, given to the solid, is misleading.
The process is indivisible and if by a measurement one separates
the two steps, the Mossbauer effect is destroyed. These statements
are justified in the next section.
,

2-43

,

Time Considerations

Before discussing the times involved in the Mossbauer effect, a
few words about the uncertainty relation between energy and time are
in order. It has been pointed out quite early, for instance by Pauli, 23
that this uncertainty relation has two different physical contents. The
one of interest here refers to a measurement: If a system has two
states, E n and E m then any measurement to decide whether the system is in state n or in state m requires at least a time T given by
,

T«V(E n -E m

(34)

)

This careful definition avoids some of the difficulties that have led to
many discussions (for instance, see Ref. 24).

Consider, as a special case, the 14.4-kev transition from the first
excited state to the ground state of Fe 57 According to (34), the minimum time necessary to decide whether a Fe 57 nucleus is in its
ground state or its first excited state is 4xl0" 20 sec. The question
then arises as to whether this time is characteristic for this transition so that one can say that the individual decay always occurs faster
than 4 x 10' 20 sec.
.

W. Pauli, Die allgemeinen Prinzipien der Wellenmechanik,
Handbuch der Physik," Springer, Berlin, 1933, Vol. 24:1, p. 146.
24
Y. Aharonov and D. Bohm, Phys. Rev., 122, 1649(1961).
23

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

24

To answer this question, a gedanken experiment can be performed
4x 10" 20 sec, and thus
the moment of decay is determined within this time. Has one then
shown that a transition time of 4 x 10" 20 sec or less exists, or has the
measurement forced the nucleus to decay within this short time ? As
in which the nucleus is observed at intervals of

Pauli's statement in Sec. 2-1 shows, this question had obviously been

discussed very thoroughly when quantum mechanics was new, and
the second alternative was found to be correct.

One of the beautiful

aspects of the Mossbauer effect is that it gives a direct experimental
confirmation of these quantum mechanical ideas. With Fe 57 one can
indeed perform an experiment similar to the 'thought' experiment
described above, if only with intervals considerably longer than 10" 19
sec but still much shorter than 10" 7 sec, the lifetime of the first excited state of Fe 57 (see Reprint Lynch 1960 and Sec. 5-6). The spectrum of gamma rays emitted in such an experiment no longer displays the natural line width but is considerably broadened. To a good
approximation, this broadening is given by (3), with r now standing
for the interval of measurement. This experimental result agrees
with the quantum mechanical calculations (Harris 1961) and also with
6
the classical considerations
If the emitted wave train is shortened
in time, its energy distribution, which is given by the Fourier transform of the time distribution, must be wider. In the thought experiment above, with time intervals of 4 x 10" 20 sec one would find out
whether the nucleus has decayed or not, but the gamma ray would
show a width of about 15 kev instead of the natural line width of about
10" 8 ev. Any Mossbauer effect would clearly be impossible. These
considerations show that it is meaningless to talk about a ''transition
time" or about an "instantaneous transition.' The times that enter
are those characteristic for the measurement.
After these preliminary remarks, the discussion of the Mossbauer
effect is straightforward. If one wants to ascertain whether or not a
transition with energy transfer AE to the lattice has occurred, one
must measure the energy of the photon or of the solid to within the
energy AE. The time required for this measurement is given by (34),
'

'

:

'

T>1\/AE = ^r/u

(35)

2ttX is the wavelength belonging to a phonon with energy AE
and velocity u. During the time T, the disturbance caused by the decay travels a distance L, given by

where

L = Tu > X

(36)

Thus, if one wants to determine whether or not an amount of energy

AE has been transferred to the lattice, one is forced to look at regions of the solid of linear dimensions X or larger. This argument
justifies the statements made in Sec. 2-42.

!

THEORY

25

It is impossible to decide by a measurement whether the original
recoil has been imparted to the decaying nucleus only or has been
shared among two, three, or more atoms within a region of linear di-

mensions X.
If

life

no particular time is selected by an external apparatus, the mean
t of the decaying state will play the role of the measuring inter-

During one mean life, the disturbance from the decay will travel
The question then arises whether a measurement
can decide that a part of the entire solid, of linear dimensions tu,
will begin to move first. It is easy to see, however, that the recoil
energy of such a crystallite cannot be measured, because zero-point
vibrations will completely mask any recoil effect (Weisskopf 1961).
There remains one last question. How do the parts of the solid far
away from the decaying nucleus know how and when to move ? Is it
possible to decide whether or not the signal travels through the crystal as a shock wave with the velocity of sound u ? Again the uncertainty
relation prevents such a detailed investigation. The recoil energy
given to the entire solid is approximately
val.

for a distance tu.

R solid = R Matom/Mso iid) * R(d /D) 3
(

(37)

where R is the recoil energy of the free atom, d is the lattice parameter, and D the linear dimension of the solid. The recoil energy
is of the order of the Debye energy, Eq. (32):
R«liu/d
The time required to measure the recoil energy of the entire solid is,
according to (34), given by

T s * VRsolid « *D3/Rd3 « D3/ud2
The time t for a signal with the sound velocity u to travel the linear
dimension D is t = D/u. The ratio of the two times thus becomes approximately

T/t«(D/d) 2

(38)

The time required for a measurement of the recoil energy of the entire solid is very much larger than the time needed for a signal to

travel through the crystal. By the time the measurement of the recoil
energy is finished, the crystal moves with uniform velocity (if not
glued to some material), and it is impossible to tell how it received
its travel orders

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

26

2-5

SKETCH OF THE THEORY

In nearly every theory there exist steps that are omitted in the
theoretical papers and not treated in the textbooks. These steps are
obviously designed to keep the experimental physicists in their place.
The theory of the Mossbauer effect makes no exception; the equation
from which all later results are derived [(40) below] is usually written down without detailed derivation. It is the purpose of the present
section to supply the steps missing in most papers.
The probability for emission or absorption of a gamma ray from a
nucleus embedded in a solid, with the lattice simultaneously undergoing a transition from one state to another, is usually calculated by
dispersion theory, as for example described in Heitler. 6 The relevant
formula will not be needed in the present section, but it can be found
as Eq. (8) in Lamb's paper (Reprint Lamb 1939). f Here the essential

fact used is that the transition probability for a given transition is

proportional to the square of the matrix element connecting the two
states involved in the transition (golden rule). In particular, the probability for a transition in which the nucleus decays from the excited
state Ni to the ground state Nf while simultaneously the lattice goes
,

from its initial state L^ to its final state Lf

,

is

W(Ni-Nf Li— Lf) = const. |<f |H int |i> 2
,

where |i> and <f

|

(39)

denote the initial and final state of the entire sysis the interaction Hamiltonian responsible for this decay. The energy that can be transferred to the
lattice during this transition is very small compared to the gammaray energy. The dependence of the density of final states p(E) on the
energy transfer to the lattice is hence very small, p(E) is assumed
to be constant, and it is absorbed in the constant in (39).
|

tem, including the lattice, and

H^

For calculations, an explicit form of the transition matrix element

Lamb states that, because of the short range of nuclear
forces and the corresponding independence of the motion of the crystal of the center of momentum (cm.) and the internal degrees of
freedom of the nucleus, it can be factored into a nuclear and a lattice matrix element:
is needed.

<f|H int |i> = <L f |eik-X| Li><N>

(

40 )

Here the nuclear matrix element <N> depends only on nuclear propk = p/h is the wavevector of the emitted gamma ray, and X

erties,
is the

t

coordinate vector of the cm. of the decaying nucleus.

A derivation based on time- dependent perturbation theory is given
A of a paper by Petzold (Petzold 1961). Compare, how-

in Appendix

ever, the physical interpretation of Petzold with the remarks made
here in Sec. 2-4.

.

THEORY

27

<Lf |exp(ik*X)|Li> is the matrix element for transfer of a momentum -hk to the lattice through the atom of the decaying nucleus with
the lattice going from the state L to Lf
i
Lipkin (Reprint Lipkin 1960) shows that the form Eq. (40) of the
matrix element is determined completely by the requirements of
translational and Galilean invar iance.

A more detailed justification

may, however, be desired by many readers since it forms the
basis for all the later calculations and arguments. Such a justification, in a very pedestrian way, will be given here.
The Hamiltonian of a charged particle, moving with a momentum p
in an electromagnetic field given by a vector potential A, contains the
term [p - (e/c)A] 2 This term leads to the nonrelativistic interaction
Hamiltonian Hi n t = const (p A - A-p). After expanding A in plane
waves, one finds the well-known expression 6 25
of (40)

.

•

'

<f|H int |i> = const. <f|exp(ik-x)p A |i>

(41)

where the gradient operator pa must be applied in the direction of
the polarization vector of the electromagnetic wave k, and where x
is the coordinate vector of the decaying nucleon. Equation (41) corresponds to a single-particle description of the nucleus; if the decay occurs through many nucleons in the same nucleus, an appropriate sum
over these nucleons must be introduced in (41). For simplicity, this

sum is omitted.
The short range and the strength of the nuclear forces now permits
the use of the approximation that the nuclear decay is not influenced
by the state of the lattice and that the lattice condition does not depend
on the nuclear state. The state functions |i> and <f can then be writ|

ten as products

|N^>|Li> and <Lf|<Nf| of nuclear- state functions

|Nj> and <Nf| and lattice- state functions |L^> and <Lf|, with

<Lf|Li> = 6fi and <Nf|Ni> = 5fj. In addition, one introduces internal nuclear coordinates p by writing

x=X +p

(42)

where X is the coordinate vector of the cm. of the decaying nucleus
(Fig. 2-3).

The momentum operator also splits up into a sum

PA = PX + Pp

(

43 >

where pp acts on the internal nuclear coordinates and px on the

cm. coordinates of the nucleus. After introducing (42) and (43) into
(41), the

matrix element can be separated into two parts, each con-

sisting of a product of a nuclear and a lattice matrix element:
25

L. I. Schiff, "Quantum Mechanics,''

McGraw-Hill, New York,

1955, Sees. 23 and 35. R.P.Feynman, "Quantum Electrodynamics,'
W. A. Benjamin, Inc., New York, 1961, p. 8.

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

28

radiating nucleon

decaying nucleus

cm.
origin

Coordinates used in the evaluation of the transition matrix
element. The origin is fixed at the cm. of the entire crystal.

Fig. 2-3

<f|H m t|i> = const. <Nf|e
+ <Nf |e

ik

*

ik ' P

pp |N i

><Lf |e ik,X |L >
i

p |Ni><Lf|e lk,X

p x |Li>}

(44)

To reduce (44) to (40) one must show that the first term in (44) is

much larger than the second one. The following arguments are only
qualitative, but they yield the right order of magnitude. Using the

closure 25 26
'

L |n'Xn'| = 1

(45)

n'

where the summation extends over all intermediate states, the ratio
of the lattice matrix elements in the two terms of (44) can be written
<Lf|e

'

pxjLj,

g<L

<Lf [e ik X |L >

tk,X
t

|e

i

|L'XL'|i> x |L 1 >
ik -

'

<Lf|e

X

|Li>

The momentum "hk transferred to the lattice during the nuclear decay
much larger than typical momenta components in the lattice. It is

is

therefore to be expected, even without detailed calculation, that the
terms <Lf |exp(ik*X)|L'> for allowed intermediate states L' are of
the same order of magnitude as the term <Lf|exp(ik«X)|Li>
They
can then be taken out from under the sum sign, leading to
.

rL «

L <L'|px|Li> =<p L >

(46)

26
P. A. M. Dirac, "The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, " Oxford
University Press, New York, 1958, 4th ed., p. 63.

THEORY

29

where <Pl> denotes an average over lattice momentum components.
A similar reasoning is valid for the nuclear matrix elements, where
the momentum transfer 1ik is much smaller than typical nuclear momentum components. The corresponding ratio of the nuclear matrix
elements appearing in (44) becomes

L<N'|Pp|Ni> =<p N >

rN «

(47)

N'

The ratio of the first to the second term in (44) thus is
r N/r L

^<pn>/<p l >

<

48 )

or of the order of 10 5 or larger. A second way of estimating the ratio
(48) can be obtained by first calculating rjg, using a multipole expanOne finds for the first nonvanishing
sion, exp(ik-p) = 1 + ik-p + •••
terms of the relevant matrix elements: <Nf |exp(ik*p)|Ni>
« ik<Nf |p|Ni>, and <Nf |exp(ik-p)pp |Ni> « <Nf |pp |Ni> The last
expression can be evaluated further by assuming aHamiltonian of the
form H = (p 2/2M) + V(p). One then easily calculates a commutator
[H,p] = (m/M)p, or p = (-iM/ti)[H,p]. Hence <N f |p|Ni> = (-iM/n)x
<Nf |Hp - pH|Ni> = (+iM/h)(Ei - Ef)<Nf |p|Ni> = +iMkc<Nf |p|Ni>.
The desired ratio r^ becomes r N = -Mc ^<pjsp> > * n agreement with
the crude arguments leading to (47). To estimate r^ one first remarks that the highest momenta occurring in the lattice are of the order of H/d and that the matrix element <Lf|exp (ik*X)px|Li> thus
cannot be larger than ti/d. The matrix element < Lf|exp (ik*X)|Lj> ,
however, must be larger than a certain minimum value, say 10"2 for
the Mossbauer effect to be observable [compare (49) below]. Thus
rL « lC^-h/d and r^/r^, =* Mcd/102 ti ^10 6 These arguments show
that (40) can safely be used.
Using (40), the calculation of the fraction f of gamma rays emitted
without energy loss to the lattice (Li
Li) is now straightforward:
.

.

,

.

—

f=

_KLi|e

ik

'

X

|Li>|

2

L |<Lf |e ik,X |Li>;
Lf

The denominator is easily shown to be one with the help of (45),

Il<Lf |e
Lf

lk

-

X |L

i

>p=i:<L |e-

X |L ><L |e ik X |L >
-

t

£

Lf

<Li|e

Thus one finds

ik -

i

e

|Li> = 1

i

.

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

30

f=|<L i |e

ik,X

|L i >| 2

(49)

Equation (49) has been the starting point for most calculations of
f of gamma rays emitted or absorbed without energy loss.
A few examples best illustrate its use.
the fraction

The Einstein Solid

2-51

The simplest and most pedestrian application is to the Einstein
The ground- state wave function for a linear harmonic oscillator of mass M and angular frequency u) is given by
solid.

* (x) =

iWS ~^^2n
e

(50)

Inserting this wave function into (49) and using the fact that one is
kX, yields
dealing with a one-dimensional problem, i.e., that k-X
after integration

—

f

= exp (--h2 k2/2Mfta>) = exp (-R/nu) E )

(51)

This result agrees with (31), which was quoted earlier without proof.

2-52 The Debye Solid

For the Debye solid, the procedure is somewhat more complicated,
because the individual atoms do not all have the same frequency. One
introduces normal coordinates and then determines the probability f
This straightforward calculation is performed in a number of papers
(Reprints Mossbauer, Lipkin, Visscher). The result can be written

f

= e'

2w
(52)

where

w

-

R

1

ke D

4

/T_\ 2 e/T

W

/

xdx
e

x

(53)
.

This result agrees for T =
with (33). It must be pointed out that
if the concept of Debye temperature is applicable. In
many instances, even for crystals consisting of only one kind of atom,
the Debye theory cannot be used. 18 When estimating f with the help of
Eqs. (52) and (53), these restrictions should be kept in mind. For
obtaining crude estimates of expected effects, the Debye approximation
is, however, very useful. In Sec. 3-6, data helpful for such estimates
are collected.
it

is only valid

THEORY
2-53

31

The Debye- Waller Factor

At this point it is worth remembering that recoilless processes
have not been invented by nuclear physicists. The scattering of X
rays without loss of energy to the lattice has been used as a standard
tool for many years. In studies of Bragg reflection it was found that
the temperature had a strong influence on the intensity of the lines.
Many authors, particularly Debye and Waller, investigated this effect
and found that the intensity as a function of temperature could be ex"
pressed as 27 31

I=I e

-2W

W = 2<u|> sin <p/%
2

2

(54)

<p is the Bragg angle, 2-nX is the X-ray wavelength, and<u|>
mean- square deviation of the component of displacement of the
atoms along the direction z which is perpendicular to the reflecting
planes. This Debye-Waller factor exp(-2W) has many similarities
with the Lamb-Mdssbauer factor f it is interesting to compare these

where
is the

;

and also note the differences.

The main difference lies in the times involved. X-ray scattering
"fast," the characteristic time involved is much shorter than the
characteristic lattice time. In contrast, the emission and the scattering of gamma rays in the Mossbauer effect is "slow," the relevant
time is comparable to, or longer than, the characteristic lattice time.
These differences are discussed in papers by Tzara (Reprint Tzara
1961) and Trammell (Trammell 1961), and these should be consulted
for further details.
The essential similarity lies in the appearance of the mean-square
deviation of the radiating or scattering atoms from its equilibrium
position. For crystals with harmonic lattice forces, it can be shown
that the expression (49) can be transformed to
is

f

= exp(-<Li|(k.X) 2 |Li»

(55)

or
27

P. P. Ewald, "Handbuch der Physik," Springer, Berlin, 1933,
Vol. 23:2, p. 307.
28
F. C. Blake, Revs. Modern Phys., 5, 169 (1933).
29
A. H. Compton and S. K. Allison, "X-Rays in Theory and Exper
iment," Van Nostrand, Princeton, N. J., 1935, p. 437.
30
M. von Laue, "Ro'ntgenstrahlinterferenzen," Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft, Leipzig, 1948, pp. 204, 242.
31
R. W. James, "Optical Principles of the Diffraction of X-Rays,'
Bell, London, 1948.

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

32

f

= exp(-<L i |Xk|L i >/* 2 )

(56)

Here X^ is the component of the coordinate vector X in the direction
Equation (56) is derived in Petzold's paper
(Petzold 1961) and the steps leading from (49) to (55) can be found in
a paper by Van Hove. 32 33 Incidentally, (56) agrees with the classically
derived Eq. (30) and the remarks made there apply also to (56).

of the emitted photon.

'

2-54 Connection with the Probability Density 34
If one denotes with p(X) the probability of finding the radiating nucleus at a distance X from its equilibrium position, one can write

f= |/e

ik

'

X p(X)d X| 2
3

(57)

Equation (56) is obtained from (49) by integrating the latter matrix
element over all lattice variables except X. It shows that f is the
square of the Fourier transform of the density p(X).

2-55 Further Calculations
In the back of this volume a number of reprints are collected which
further develop the theory of the Mossbauer effect. Mossbauer's paper, in which he adapts Lamb's theory, is reprinted in German and
the section on theory is translated. In Visscher's paper, Mossbauer's
results are derived in a more modern way and applications to a study
of lattice vibrations are indicated. Lipkin's paper deals with simple
sum rules which give a deeper physical understanding of recoilless
processes. Inglis, in a paper not printed elsewhere, discusses the

theory of the Mossbauer effect, first in a very simple one-dimensional
case and then generalizes to three dimensions. Singwi and Sjolander
use the space- time self- correlation function of Van Hove 33 to arrive
at very elegant and general results. This approach is probably the
one that is most useful and versatile for applications. Tzara includes
the interference with other processes in his paper and also shows
the connection with X-ray scattering. For all further details concerning theory, these papers should be consulted.
32

L. van Hove, Phys. Rev., 95, 249 (1954). Contained in Ref. 33.

33

L. van Hove, N. M. Hugenholtz, and L. P. Howland, ''Problems

in the Quantum
Inc.,
34

Theory of Many- Particle Systems," W. A. Benjamin,

New York, 1961.
H. J. Lipkin, unpublished notes, 1961.

EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS
AND PROBLEMS
3-1

SURVEY

In contrast with experiments in high-energy physics, investiga-

tions involving the Mossbauer effect are quite simple, easy to under-

stand, and inexpensive. Still, difficulties exist, only a few of which
have been solved completely. Consider, for instance, the vibration
67
problem in Zn
This isotope displays a very narrow resonance
10
ev. This width corresponds to a Doppler
with a width of about 10"
1
5
or, as the Los Alamos group puts it,
velocity of about 10" cm sec"
a velocity slightly faster than the one with which fingernails grow.
67
If hum exists in a velocity drive used with Zn
an amplitude of a
8
few times 10" cm can be sufficient to destroy the resonance!
A basic setup for a Mossbauer experiment and a typical result
are sketched in Fig. 3-1. The source is moved with a velocity v
with respect to the absorber, (in many experiments, it is more convenient to move the absorber.) The gamma ray then suffers a Dop.

,

,

pler shift AE,

AE = (v/c)E

(58)

where E is the gamma-ray energy. The velocity v is defined as
positive if the source moves toward the absorber. The intensity
in the detector is determined as a function of the velocity v.
I
At large velocities, no resonance absorption occurs. The velocity
at which resonance absorption becomes vanishingly small depends
on the line width and on the line splitting. In each experiment one
usually selects a "safe" velocity and denotes it with v^. (Visitors
to our lab are sometimes startled at seeing signs such as "°° =
- B, where B is the background
1.3 cm/sec") One plots l(v) = I
33

V

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

34

absorber

source and

counter

velocity drive

X\\\\\\\\\\^\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\

A k
emission line

W

absorption line

v)

"\/~
*-

res

spectrum observed as a
function of the
relative velocity v
(thin source and thin absorber)

Fig. 3-1

Basic setup, emission and absorption lines, and
velocity spectrum in a Mossbauer transmission
experiment.

More convenient is the normalized velocity spectrum l(v)/l(°°), or
the deviation from nonresonant absorption,
I(°°)

€(v)

- I(v)

~1R

(59)

Figure 3-1 displays only the simplest case, single line source and
single line absorber, both showing the natural line width. The velocity spectrum can be much more complicated in actual experiments.
The emission and the absorption lines can show different widths, T e
and T a and they can be split into components. The magnitude of the
splitting and the number of components can be different for source
and absorber. There can also be a shift between the centers of
,

emission and absorption lines. From the experimentally determined
velocity spectrum for a given source- absorber combination, one tries
to determine one or more of the following quantities: Lamb- Mossbauer factor, line shape, line splitting, and line shift. These quantities will be discussed in the Sees. 3-11 to 3-14.
3-11

The Lamb- Mossbauer Factor

The Debye-Waller factor exp(-2W) for X-ray scattering is expressed by (54). The analogous quantities in the Mossbauer effect,
sometimes called the Lamb- Mossbauer factors, are f, the fraction

APPARATUS AND PROBLEMS

35

of gamma rays emitted without energy loss, and

ing quantity for absorption.

The factors

f

f the correspondand f give information
,

similar to that contained in exp(-2W). Since exp(-2W) is often difficult to determine accurately by conventional X-ray techniques,

it

desirable to measure f and f as a function of temperature for as
many substances as possible.
The usual methods for determining absorption coefficients are
not applicable for two reasons: (l) The absorption by a resonant absorber of a gamma- ray beam containing a fraction f of gamma rays
emitted without energy loss is not exponential. The deviation is due
to the fact that the absorption cross section varies sharply with energy; the energy spectrum of the gamma rays is thus a function of
the distance in the absorber. (2) The absorption is not only determined by f but also by f. Both f and f must be extracted from
the experiments.
The determination of f and f is simple as long as the self- absorption in the source is small and the emission and absorption lines
are unsplit and have Lorentz shapes of identical widths. This case
was first treated by the Los Alamos group (Craig et al. 1959) and
the relevant equations are given in the paper by Margulies and
Ehrman (Reprint Margulies 1961). More information can be found
in the review by Cotton (Cotton 1960).
If the emission or the absorption line or both are split, but still
display identical line widths, an analysis similar to the one described
is

in the

Los Alamos paper can be performed (see Margulies 1962). An

analysis along the same lines can also be done if the lines show a
Gaussian shape but still have identical widths. In general, however,
the experimentally observed shape will be neither Lorentzian nor
Gaussian and the data evaluation will hence be more difficult. The
evaluation is also considerably more difficult if emission and absorption lines do not have the same widths.
In many cases, the area method is useful. Here one considers
the area under the absorption curve and derives a value of ff'. Often
one may have enough knowledge to separate this product. This

method, which was first used by the Argonne group (Hanna et al. 1960),
is described in detail in a publication by Shirley, Kaplan, and Axel
(Shirley 1961).

3-12

Line Shape

Only in the ideal case do emission and absorption lines display
In actual experiments, the lines are widened
by finite source and absorber thickness and usually also by the finite
velocity resolution of the apparatus (Sees. 3-4 and 3-5). Furthermore, solid-state effects such as internal fields, imperfections, and
impurities broaden the line and change its shape (see Chapter 6).
the natural line shape.

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

36

Experimentally, one wants to find the true shape and width of the
emission and the absorption lines, extrapolated to zero source and
absorber thickness. If the lifetime of the excited nuclear state is
known from independent experiments (electronic delay measurements), one can compare the observed line width with the theoretically expected one.
3-13

Line Splitting

Extranuclear fields can split the emission and the absorption lines
into components. These splittings, caused by magnetic and electric
hyper fine interactions, are extremely important for the investigation
of solid-state properties. Many typical examples are quoted in Chapter 6. One tries experimentally to determine the number of components and their separation from the velocity spectrum. It is clear
that this requires a sufficiently high velocity resolution and a knowledge of the absolute velocity scale.

3-14 Shifts

The emission and the absorption lines are only centered at the

same energy if the corresponding nuclei are in very similar environments. This is very often not the case, and the two spectra are displaced one with respect to the other. This shift is deduced from the
velocity spectrum. Shifts can result from temperature differences
between emitter and absorber (Sec. 5-4) and from isomeric effects
(Sec. 4-4).

One more remark needs to be added about Fig. 3-1. The classical
investigations on optical and conventional nuclear resonance fluorescence were all performed as scattering experiments. In contrast,
nearly all the work on the Mossbauer effect is done in transmission.

The main reasons for this difference are the relatively large effects
(between about 1 and 50 per cent in most cases) and the large intensities and favorable geometry obtainable in transmission. The intensity disadvantage of scattering is increased by the strong conversion
of low- energy gamma rays;

only a fraction l/(l + a) of the absorbed

gamma rays is reemitted [Eqs. (9), (10), and (13)]. Some scattering
experiments have nevertheless been performed, either by observing
the gamma rays directly (Reprint Barloutaud 1960), by measuring
the X rays that follow the internal conversion process (Frauenfelder
1961), or by detecting the conversion electrons (Kankeleit 1961;
Mitrofanov 1961).
3-2

ISOTOPES

Mossbauer discovered the recoilless gamma-ray emission with
191
If this isotope were the only one

the 129-kev gamma ray in Ir

.

displaying such an effect, experiments would indeed be very difficult,

APPARATUS AND PROBLEMS

37

the applications would be limited, and interest would not be very great.

Fortunately, however, there exist at least 15 nuclides in which Mossbauer effect has been observed. There is a good chance that more
will be found, and the number of possible experiments is extremely
large.
In Table 3-1, properties of nuclides that have been used for Mossbauer experiments or which show promise for exhibiting such an ef35
Very likely this table is not complete and it is
fect are collected.
also possible that it contains errors. Before embarking on any experiments based on this table, it is wise to reevaluate all critical

data.

The table was originally compiled by D. Nagle (Los Alamos
Scientific Laboratory) for the first Mossbauer conference held at

the University of Illinois in June 1960. It was modified and checked
by G. DePasquali, R. Morrison, and D. Pipkorn (University of Illinois)
Similar tables can be found in the review by Cotton and that by Belozerskii and Nemilov.
The entries in the table are mostly self-explanatory, but the following notes may be of some assistance:
1.0(-7).
Powers of ten are denoted as follows: 1.0 x 10" 7
a = abundance of stable element, %
Q = ratio of gamma- ray energy Ey to line width r = ft In 2/Ty

—

a = total internal conversion coefficient (K implies aj£,
L implies a^J
R = recoil energy of free nucleus in units of 10" 2 ev
19
cm 2
o' = Mossbauer absorption cross section in units of 10"

,

calculated with the listed values of the conversion coefficient and assuming natural line width. In the case of an
unknown conversion coefficient the cross section has been
calculated by assuming a = 0. Once a is known, the correct cross section can be found by multiplying the value
in the table by l/(l + a)

X = an effect has been observed
Table 3-1
Nuclides of Interest in Mossbauer Experiments

%

Ey,
kev

Stable

nuclide

Fe"

a,

T%,
sec

Q

a, e/y

R, 10

~2

ev

ff'0f

10

~ 19

2.17
1.25

14.4

1.0(-7)

3.2(12)

15

0.19

15

Ni"
Zn 67

71

5.2(-9)

8.1(11)

4.4

6.6

4.11

93

9.4(-6)

1.9(15)

K 0.11
K 0.63

Ge"

7.67

13.5

3.1(-6)

1.4(14)

3600

cm 2

Effect

X
X
X

6.9

1.2

0.13

0.030

(continued)
35

Most of the information contained in Table 3-1 h as been taken
'

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

38

Table 3-1 (continued)
Stable

Ey

T /2

nuclide

kev

sec

ae/y

< K-7)

10

Kr 83

11.55

Ru 99
Ru 101
Ag 107
Ag 109

12.7

89

17.0

127

51.35

93

48.65

9.3

Sn 117
Sn 119

7.57

88
161

8.58

24

123

42.75

161

Te 123
Te 125

0.87

6.99

Sb

127
I

Xe 129
Xe 131
Cs 133
La 139

Nd 14S
Sm 152
Eu lsl
Eu 153

Gd 154
Gd lss

100

l

1.0

0.97

44.3

9.0(21)

16

4.3

0.67

39.2

7.6(21)

14

3.8

0.85

K0.13

12.0

1.7

7.3

0.26

10.0

11.0

0.71

159

1.9(-10)

6.6(10)

11.0

1.7

35

1.6(-9)

1.2(11)

K 0.17
K 12

0.52

3.1

1.9

59

1.1

5.4(11)

10.0

0.56

4.8(12)

K 3.3

1.7

0.63

1.9

0.82

3.7(11)

K3.3
K0.7
L 12

5.3

4.8

0.17

5.2

2.5

4.6

K0.3

3.3

2.0

8.4(10)

6.0(-9)

1.1(12)

99.9

163

1.5(-9)

67

3.3(-8)

< K-9)

26.63

122

1.4(-9)

47.77

22

52.23

84

3.2

30.0

2.7

4.8(-10)

81

72

1.5

0.67

K 1.73
K 1.5
K 0.22

80

2.6

0.70

97

< K-9)

103
123

3.4(-9)

7.7(11)

K 1.2

3.7

0.70

1.2(-9)

3.2(11)

1.5

5.3

3.2

1.2

10.0

K0.4

2.6

2.3

3.8

3.3

60
87

Gd 156
Gd 160

20.47

89

21.9

75

Tb 159

100

58
137

2

(-9)

K 1.0

3.9(11)

3.5(-ll)

4.5(9)

5.4(-ll)

1.6(10)

K6
K 1.5

2.7

7.7

1.9

22.0

1.1

1.5

6.3

2.6

2.294

87

1.8(-9)

3.4(11)

2.6

6.4

18.88

25.7

2.8(-8)

1.6(12)

0.22

37.0

74.5

3

(-9)

4.9(11)

1.8

2.9

81

3.2(-9)

5.7(11)

2.2

19

1.8

5.8

1.7

6.2

Dy 162
Dy 163

25.53

24.97

75

Dy 164
Ho 165

28.18

73

3.5(-9)

5.6(11)

100

95

3.3(-ll)

6.9(9)

1.4(-9)

2.8(11)

1.8(-9)

3.2(11)

1.84(-9)

3.2(11)

Er 164
Er 166

33.4

91
80

Er 168

27.07

79.8

Tm 169

100

Yb 170

21.0

4.3
8.5

21.18

1.56

3.03

Effect

K 0.4

105

Dy 160
Dy 161

10"

3.9(11)

1.4(-9)

100

14.7

0.055

ev

1.0(12)

40

2.15

-2

1.9(-8)

26.44

8.29

R, 10

8.4

4

(-9)

7.4(10)

118

5

(-U)

1.3(10)

84.2

1.57(-9)

2.9(11)

K 2.7
K 1.77
K 1.9
K 1.7
K 2.1

2.9

1.2

2.7

5.1

2.1

7.1

2.0

6.2

0.022

K 0.7
K 1.6

700

4.4

3.1

2.2

6.6

(continued)

from D. Strominger, J. M. Hollander, and G. T. Seaborg, Revs.
Modern Physics, 30, 585 (1958), and C. L. McGinnis (ed.), ''Nuclear
Data Sheets," National Academy of Sciences-National Research
Council, Washington, D.C., 1958-

.

APPARATUS AND PROBLEMS

39

Table 3-1 (continued)

Ey

TV2

nuclide

a,

%

kev

sec

Yb m

14.31

66.7

< 5(-7)

1.4

11.0

21.82

78.7

1.9

20.0

Stable

Yb 172
Yb X73
yb 174
Lu 175
Hf176
Hf 177
Hf176
Hf 180

Ta 181

,

Q

o\, 10~ 19 cm 2

16.13

78.7

1.9

5.2

76.5

1.8

21.0

94.4

113.8

8

(-11)

2.0(10)

K 1.6

4.0

0.90

5.21

88.3

1.35(-9)

2.6(11)

K1.32

2.4

6.7

18.5

113

4.2(-10)

1.0(11)

K 0.75

3.9

1.4

27.1

93.1

2.6

14.0

35.22

93

100

6.25
136.1

0.135 102

1

(-9)

2.0(11)

KL4.0

1.4(-9)

2.9(11)

6.8(-6)

9.4(13)

44

5.7(-ll)

1.7(10)

K 1.5

5.5

0.66

5

3.1

2.0

4.5

2.9

2.2

9

0.63

2.3

W»2

26.4

100

W "

14.4

46.5

W »4

30.6

111

1.3(-9)

3.2(11)

1.0(-9)

2.7(11)

1.3(-9)

2.9(11)

99.1

3.5

W 186

28.4

123

Re 185
Re 187
Os 186
Os 188
Os 190
Os 192

37.07

125

62.93

134

2

(-9)

5.9(11)

1.59

137

5.1(-10)

1.5(11)

Ir

m

2
R, 10~ ev

31.84

W "o
1

a e/y

13.3

155

6.2(-10)

2.1(11)

26.4

3.5(-10)

1.4(11)

41.0

187
206

2.8(-10)

1.3(11)

38.5

82.6

3.9(-9)

7.1(11)

129

1.4(-10)

4.0(10)

73

5.7(-9)

9.1(11)

139

2.6(-10)

7.9(10)

2.6

2.8

0.012

17

2.9

1.7

3.6

9.9
5.6

K.0.45

4.4

K 2.4

4.5

0.61

K2.1
K0.45
K 0.40
K0.2
K0.16

5.2

0.58

5.4

4.5

6.8

3.6

9.9

2.9

12.0

2.5

K2.9

1.9

1.8

4.7

0.56

1.5

2.3

193

61.5

Pt19S

33.8

129

5.8(-10)

1.6(11)

Au 197

100

77

1.9(-9)

3.2(11)

2.5

1.6

0.59

Hg 199
Hg 201

16.84

158

2.4(-9)

8.3(11)

K0.2

6.7

2.4

32.1

0.27

24.0

167.6

7.5

0.44

Ir

3-3

13.22

99

K2.2

5.4

0.59

9.0

2.7

0.50

4.6

4.4

Effect

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

SOURCES AND ABSORBERS

No time-honored and well-proved recipe exists according to which
one can prepare sources and absorbers that yield Mossbauer lines as
strong as possible and as sharp as the natural line width. A procedure leading to the best results has to be found for each isotope,
mainly by trial and error. 36 In some cases, particularly in nuclides
181
73
with extremely narrow lines, such as Ta
and Ge
no resonance
has been found as yet. All these difficulties are due to solid-state
effects and technical problems, and one must learn more about these
,

36

One valuable suggestion was put forward by S.S. Hanna at the
second Mossbauer conference: "Find yourself a good chemist."

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

40

before he can predict with certainty the outcome of any given experiment. Because of these difficulties, there is little sense in writing
down general guidelines; indeed, they would probably mislead experimenters. Indications on source and absorber preparations can
be found in nearly all the experimental papers reprinted in the back
37
and listed in the bibliography.

3-4

APPARATUS

Two basically different ways of obtaining the velocity spectrum
are in use. In one, the source (or the absorber) moves with a constant velocity for a pre-set time and the counts during this period
are recorded. The velocity is then changed to a new value and the
procedure is repeated until the entire spectrum is measured.

Mossbauer's original work was performed in that way (Reprints
Mossbauer 1958, 1959).
In the second method, the source sweeps periodically through a
range of velocities and the counts in predetermined ranges of velocity are stored in different channels of a multichannel analyzer.

These two methods gather information at the same rate, but each
one has advantages for certain types of investigations. With constant velocity drives, small parts of the spectrum can be investigated with high accuracy. With the velocity sweep device, the
entire spectrum is obtained simultaneously and a first impression
can be obtained quickly. In either case, data from positive and negative velocities of equal magnitude should not be lumped together
without ascertaining that the velocity spectrum is symmetric with
respect to velocity zero.
One remark is in order about vibration. For isotopes like Au 197
where Q = E /r ~ 5x 10 11 vibrations are not very serious and any
57
carefully built equipment will work. For nuclides like Fe
where
,

,

,

Q « 5 x 10 12

,

the vibration problem is

much more serious. As a

rule of thumb, the following "scientific" observation can be useful:

one touches the equipment lightly with the fingertips and notices
traces of vibration, the experiment will fail! Bubbling of liquid nitrogen in dewars, for instance, will widen the lines considerably.
67
15
For nuclides like Zn
with Q » 10
every trace of vibration must
be carefully eliminated.
If

,

37

The nuclide Fe 57

,

is probably the one that is of most interest
groups starting research and to instructors designing experiments for students. A very detailed description of the source
57
preparation is contained in Margulies, 1962. Complete Co sources
57
and Fe
absorbers can be purchased from Nuclear Science and
Engineering Co., Pittsburgh, Pa., and the U.S. Nuclear Corp.,
Burbank, California.

to

APPARATUS AND PROBLEMS
3-41

41

Constant- Velocity Drives

During the past three years, a number of constant- velocity drives
have been constructed. None of these is so superior to all the others
that it has replaced them, and physicists are still waiting for a simple, accurate, easily controllable, and vibration-free drive.
Three typical mechanical drives are shown in Fig. 3-2. The rotating disk used, for example, by DePasquali et al. 1960, Shirley et al.
1961, and shown in Fig. 3-2a is probably the simplest system. The

Fig. 3-2

Constant- velocity drives:

cam;

(c)

inclined plane.

(a)

rotating disk;

(b)

three- step

(From Margulies 1962.)

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

42

gamma ray passing through the disk sees in its direction of motion a
velocity component raj sin 6, where r

is the

distance from the axis

of rotation to the point where the gamma ray passes through the ab-

sorber and 6 is the angle between the gamma ray and the axis of rotation. The slit shown in the figure can be designed in such a way
that an increase in velocity due to an increase in r is compensated
for by a decrease in sin 6. The velocity is changed by changing the
angular velocity co. The main disadvantage of this system is the
large area of absorber needed, (if the source is mounted on a wheel,
the activity is used very inefficiently.)
A cam, as shown in Fig. 3-2b, is quite reliable provided the drive
is vibration-free. Usually, one uses photocells to switch the counting
system off shortly before the follower on the cam reaches a maximum or minimum and starts it again after passing these points.
Counts "up" and "down" are stored in different scalers, and two
more scalers count the corresponding times.
The inclined plane (Argonne group), shown in Fig. 3- 2c, provides a uniform motion with a very fine speed control. In this
device a reversible synchronous motor is employed to drive a
carriage by means of an accurately machined lead screw. Mounted
rigidly to the moving carriage is a plane whose angle of inclinaand 45°. A shoe pivtion can be continuously varied between
oted to the foot of an extension rod slides smoothly along the inclined plane, being held quite firmly to the plane by a thin layer
of oil. As the carriage is driven back and forth, the extension
rod moves to- and- fro, carrying the absorber with it. In addition
to the fine speed control afforded by varying the incline angle,
the lead- screw speed can be changed by a system of gears and
pulleys not shown.
These three systems are only examples; more possibilities for
moving an object with constant velocity exists. An improved version
of Fig. 3- 2b uses a heart-shaped cam and two followers. The carriage is guided up and down and never coasts freely. Hydraulic devices can either be actuated by a hydraulic master connected to a
rack- and- pinion drive (Reprint Pound and Rebka 1960) or by a system consisting of an oil pump and valves to control pressure and
direction of the oil flow. Surplus servo cylinders from automatic
pilot servo units, such as Electric Autolite Mark IV, make excellent
38
and inexpensive hydraulic systems.
Piezoelectric crystals and loudspeakers, when driven so that they
execute a saw tooth or a triangular motion, are also versatile velocity drives. Extreme care must be taken, however, to prevent resonances in the system from distorting the wave shape. The best
38

Such units are available, for instance, from Herbach and

Rademan, Inc., Philadelphia, Pa.

APPARATUS AND PROBLEMS

43

method consists in using a feedback mechanism involving a velocity39
measuring device.
3-42 Velocity Sweep Devices
Velocity sweep systems, using a multichannel analyzer, permit
one to investigate the entire velocity spectrum simultaneously (Reprint Ruby et al. 1960). The basic aspects of such an apparatus are

shown in Fig. 3-3.

liliih,
modulated
spectrum

velocity spectrum
Fig. 3-3

Velocity sweep system. The counts from the counter C
are modulated in the modulator
by the velocity spectrum v(t) and are then fed into the multichannel analyzer
MA. The source S is mounted on the driver D; V is a
velocity pick up and A is the resonant absorber.

M

The source is moved in such a way that all desired velocities
are covered during one cycle. Attached to
from
to +v

max

max

the source is a velocity pickup which measures the instantaneous
velocity v(t). This signal is used to route the energy- selected

pulses from the counter into different channels of a multichannel
analyzer. One way of doing it, not shown in Fig. 3-3, is to feed the
signal v(t) directly into the address logic of a multichannel analyzer. In the solution sketched in Fig. 3-3 the amplitude of the
pulses from the counter is modulated by the signal v(t). An unmodified multichannel analyzer then sorts the pulses according to
their velocity v(t). A third possibility is to use a multichannel

The linearity of moving- coil loudspeakers has been investigated
and reported on by J. Baumgardner, Argonne National Laboratory
Report ANL-6169.

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

44

analyzer as a set of scalers and route the counts to the different
channels by means of pulses.
The simplest way of moving the source is to feed a sine wave into
the driver. The velocity v(t) then varies sinusoidally with time. This
choice of v(t) is easy to realize experimentally and one encounters
few or no resonances in the driver. However, the source spends unequal times at different velocities and the velocity spectrum must be
correspondingly corrected. This problem can be avoided by selecting
a linear velocity drive, as shown in Fig. 3-3. The motion x(t) of the
source then must be a double parabola. Such motion must be carefully controlled by feedback in order to prevent distortions.
Velocity pickups can be constructed in different ways. The simplest one is to employ a loud speaker with two voice coils, use one
for driving the speaker cone and the other to measure v(t). A similar solution consists in coupling two speakers either by a mechanical
link or through the air. A pickup coil can also be rigidly attached to
the source and placed in a uniform magnetic field. A condenser or a
40
commercially available velocity-measuring device can also be used.
All these velocity pickups can be used to route the pulses and to
serve as feedback devices in controlling the motion of the driver.
3-43 Special Velocity Drives
In addition to the more conventional systems described in Sees.
3-41 and 3-42, other possibilities exist. One is the "temperature
drive/' If source and absorber have different temperatures, the
emission and absorption lines will be shifted with respect to each
other (cf. Sec. 5-4). This shift can be used to trace out a resonance
line. Another possibility is provided by phase modulation, which is
discussed in Sec. 5-5 (see also Reprint Grodzins and Phillips 1961).
The relativistic drive offers a third possibility. The source is at the
center of a rotor and the absorber on the rim. The transverse Doppler effect then provides a small and very accurately controllable
shift (cf. Sec. 5-3). These three methods allow the investigation of
very small shifts and are hence extremely well suited for the study
of very narrow lines.

3-5

CORRECTIONS

Corrections and checks are necessary in order to ensure that the
results of a Mossbauer experiment are correct.

3-51

Background

The background B due to other gamma rays and to X rays must
be subtracted from the measured counting rates I exp in order to get
40

E.g.,

LVsyn Transducers, Sanborn Co., Waltham, Mass.

APPARATUS AND PROBLEMS
the true counting rates l(v).
I

*(v>=

H - XP
! D
B
exp H
I

eX P
t
i

v

Equation

45

(59) then

reads

(v)

(60)

'

Mossbauer experiments are usually performed with gamma rays of
energies below 100 kev, and X rays hence are often very disturbing.
Very careful investigation of the pulse-height spectrum is necessary;
additional information about the background can also be gained from
absorption experiments.
3-52 Source and Absorber Thickness

The corrections for finite source and absorber thickness can be
quite complicated, particularly if the lines do not possess a Lorent-

zian shape and if they are split. Only a few remarks are given
here, in order to outline some of the difficulties.
The broadening of an absorption line in the Mossbauer effect due
to finite absorber thickness has first been treated by W. M. Visscher
(unpublished notes). He found that if emission and absorption lines
have Lorentzian shapes of width T, the overlap curve will also be a
given by the relations
Lorentzian but will show an apparent width r

T app /r = 2.00 + 0.27T

^ T < 5
(61)

r app /r = 2.02 + 0.29T - 0.005T 2

4 & T & 10

Here T is the effective absorber thickness, given by

T = f naa t

(62)

where f is the fraction of gamma rays absorbed without energy loss,
n is the number of atoms per cubic centimeter, a the fractional
abundance of the resonantly absorbing atoms, a the absorption cross
section at resonance [i.e., Eq. (10) at resonance], and t the absorber
thickness. Visscher' s relations are useful for quick estimates.
Margulies and Ehrman (Reprint) have extended Visscher' s calculations and their paper gives graphs for various cases of interest.
If the shape of the emission and the absorption lines is given by
a Gaussian distribution, the line broadening is much less pronounced
than for Lorentzian shapes. A comparison of the line broadening for
the two shapes is given in Fig. 3^4. It is clear from Fig. 3-4 that
one must be extremely careful in extrapolations to zero absorber
thickness.
So far the discussion has been restricted to unsplit emission and
absorption lines. In the case of hyper fine splitting, the analysis of

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

46

- T = f'nacro t
Fig. 3-4

Ratio of apparent full width at half height to the
widths of the emission and absorption lines as a
functions of the effective absorber thickness T.
The source is assumed to be thin (nonresonant).
(Margulies 1962.)

the transmission becomes more complicated but it can still be ob-

tained from a straightforward generalization of the results given in
the Reprint by Margulies and Ehrman (M-E) (see Margulies 1962).

Some of the essential features can be summarized as follows: If only
Wi is the relative intensity of the

the emission line is split, and if

i-th emission line, then equation 16 of M-E is still valid, provided

f

replaced by fW^. If only the absorption line is split, the effective
thickness of the resonance absorber corresponding to the j-th absorption line is not T but W^T, where Wj is the relative intensity of
the j-th absorption line. The absorber, for any given line, appears
thinner than it really is. This fact must be kept in mind when determining the line broadening from (61) or from Fig. 3-4.
is

3-53

Velocity Resolution

In any apparatus, the gamma rays will traverse the absorber at
various angles, not just normal. This spread in angle introduces a
spread in velocity which must be taken into account for accurate linewidth determinations.

APPARATUS AND PROBLEMS

47

3-54 Reemission
In most transmission experiments, one assumes that a resonant

gamma ray which has been absorbed will not be registered in the
counter. In general, this is not true and the amount of reradiation,
which depends on the conversion coefficient and the solid angle of the
counter, must be calculated and taken into account (Obenshain and

Wegener 1961).
3-6

USEFUL INFORMATION

Some data useful in preparing and evaluating Mossbauer experiments are collected in this section.
A nucleus of mass number A decays from an excited state with
spin Ib, mean life r, or half- life T l/2 to a stable ground state with
spin Ia, and emits a gamma ray of energy E with a total conversion
coefficient a. The recoil energy R of the free nucleus, the maximum
resonance absorption cross section o' and the natural line width r
,

are then given by
R(ev) « 5.37 x 10"4 E(kev)/A
2.45 x 10 9

21b + 1

E 2 (kev)

2I

A+ 1

(63)

1

1

+ a

(64)

r(ev) = 6.58 x 10" 16/T(sec)

= 4.55x 10- 16 /T 1/2 (sec)

(65)

Assume now that the nucleus is embedded in a solid and that the
solid can be described in sufficient approximation by the Debye model,

with a Debye temperature O. The fraction f of gamma rays emitted
without energy loss to the lattice is then given by (52) and (53). These
equations have been evaluated by Mossbauer and Wiedemann (1960)
and by Cotton (1960). The curves presented in Fig. 3-5 were made by
A. H. Muir, Jr. 41
To determine f from Fig. 3-5 one calculates the ratios 0/T
and R/0. T is the temperature of the solid and R is given (in ev) by
Eq. (63). The curves in Fig. 3-5 are labeled by R/6 in units of
ev/°K.
The selection of an appropriate Debye temperature is not easy.
First, published Debye temperatures (e.g.,Refs. 42 to 44)for any given
substance vary widely, depending on the method of determination.
Second, even if one finds a unique value in the literature, it is not certain that it will fit the results from Mossbauer experiments. In Table
41

A. H. Muir, Jr., Atomics International Report AI-6699 (1961)

1

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

48
f *

1

0.8
0.6

P

0.4

/

/

1

*

0.2
/

0.08
0.06
0.04

<0

&'

/

«v

V if

0.1

/

/

<0

' -•/

/

p*-

7

i
/

i

i

^

/

-*

f

/

0.02

/

/ /

0.01

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

I

/
/

/
/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

1

/

f

f
"^

/

/

/

/
/

.

J

/

i

1

i

/

1
1

to 00

O ©©

r-l

CO 00

d ©
Fig. 3-5

CO oo

o

Graph for determining the fraction f as a function of 0/T for various values of R/0. The
parameter labeling each curve is R/0 in units
of ev/°K. (From A. H. Muir, Jr., Atomics International Report AI-6699.)

3-2 the Debye temperature of iron, as found in three compilations, is
compared with the latest value obtained by the Mossbauer effect. This
table shows that one has to be very careful in using published data
when designing an experiment.
42

"American Institute of Physics Handbook/' McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1957, pp. 4-47 to 4-49.
43
F. Seitz, "The Modern Theory of Solids," McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1940, p. 110.
44
M. W. Holm, "Debye Characteristic Temperatures,' Phillips
Petroleum Co. Report IDO-16399, Office of Technical Services, U.S.
Department of Commerce, Washington 25, D. C.
45
S. S. Hanna, in "Proceedings of the Second Mossbauer Conference,'
A. Schoen and D. M. J. Compton (eds.), Wiley, New York, tentative publication Spring 1962.
'

APPARATUS AND PROBLEMS

49

Table 3-2

Comparison of Debye Temperature of Iron Found by
Conventional Methods with That Deduced from the Mossbauer Effect
Method

0,°K

Ref.

Conventional

355

42

420

43

420-460

44

490

45

Mossbauer

NUCLEAR PROPERTIES
INTRODUCTION

4-1

In many ways, investigations on the Mossbauer effect follow a path
along which nuclear resonance experiments have been going. The discovery of the Mossbauer effect grew out of the study of a nuclear property, namely, the lifetime of the first excited state in Ir 191 This goal
was attained, but at the same time a powerful tool for solving other
problems was created. Indeed, the main applications in the past two
years have not been to nuclear physics, but to other fields, such as
relativity and solid-state physics. Despite this development in an unexpected direction, applications to nuclear physics remain challenging.
A few of these are sketched in Sees. 4-2 to 4-5.
Many of the discussions in this and the following chapters refer to
Fe 57 probably the most used of the "Mossbauer nuclides." For this
.

,

reason the decay scheme of Fe 57 is shown in Fig. 4-1.

270-day Co 57
electron capture
0.137 Mev

91%
0.01437 Mev

T = 1.4 x 10" 7 sec

stable ground state of Fe 57

Fig. 4-1

Decay scheme of Fe 57

The 14.4-kev transition
3/2
1/2 is the one used in many Mossbauer
experiments.

—

50

.

NUCLEAR PROPERTIES
4-2

51

LIFETIME AND CONVERSION COEFFICIENT

In conventional nuclear resonance fluorescence experiments

10 " 12

one can measure the scattering cross section and is able to deduce
the gamma-ray width Ty by using (9) modified to take into account
the Doppler broadening. This procedure is rather indirect, and the
Mdssbauer effect permits a more straightforward approach, yielding
both T and IV. The total line width r is found by tracing out the absorption or the scattering line by using the Doppler effect, as sketched
in Fig. 3-1. The ratio of the scattering and the absorption cross secFrom the total line width one imtion, Eqs. (9) and (10), yields Ty/T
mediately gets the total lifetime r by (3) or (65). From the ratio
Ty/T one finds the total conversion coefficient a by (13).
The measurement of the line width to determine the lifetime was
first used by Mossbauer (Reprint 1958) in the case of Ir 191 In a later
investigation, Mossbauer and Wiedemann (1960) were able to find a
value of t = (1.5 ± 0.2) X 10" 11 sec for the lifetime of the 134-kev excited state in Re 187 This lifetime is at present the shortest one that
has been determined by the Mossbauer effect.
Despite the simplicity of this method, some difficulties exist. For
lifetimes of the order of 10" 10 sec or longer, extranuclear fields can
widen the line, and one may find apparent lifetimes that are shorter
than the real ones. The 14.4-kev transition in Fe 57 (Fig. 4-1) offers
an excellent example for these difficulties. The lifetime of the 3/2
state is known from electronic measurements to be r = 1.4 xl0" 7 sec.
-9
According to (65) the corresponding line width is 4.7 xlO ev. All the
early experiments, however, yielded line widths considerably larger
than that. Only after the source and absorber preparation was carefully investigated did experiments yield values T e xp within 10 per
cent of the expected one. Hence very careful measurements of the
line shape and a thorough understanding of the solid-state processes
involved in the line widening are prerequisites for valid estimates of
lifetimes longer than, say, 10" 10 sec.
Difficulties may also arise for very short lifetimes. If the nuclear
lifetime becomes comparable to, or shorter than, the inverse of the
Debye frequency (~ 10" 13 sec), it may be impossible to distinguish recoilless transitions from those in which the lattice takes up energy.
Furthermore, heat spikes due to previous decays may well destroy
the effect. Investigations in this range are very desirable and they
will probably yield information not only about nuclear lifetimes, but
also about solid-state processes connected with nuclear decays.
.

,

.

.

4-3

NUCLEAR MOMENTS

The Mossbauer effect permits the determination of nuclear moments, i.e., spin, magnetic dipole moment, and electric quadrupole
moment, in a rather direct way, provided certain conditions are met.

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

52

Consider as the simplest example a nuclide with spin
in the ground
A and spin I B magnetic moment /x B and g factor g B in the
excited state B. Assume further that emitting and absorbing nuclei
are embedded in solids in such a way that the nuclei see no magnetic
field or electric field gradient. The emission and absorption lines
will be unsplit. If one now applies an external magnetic field H to
source or absorber, the corresponding line will split into 2I B + 1
equally spaced components, with a separation between components of
state

,

,

A=g B M H

(66)

= 5.05 x 10" 24 erg/gauss
Here /i is the nuclear magneton,
12
10"
= 3.15 x
ev/gauss. If the separation is larger than the width 2T
/j.

of the overlap line (Fig. 3-1), i.e., if

g B M H 2 2T = 2ti/r

(67)

the number of components can be counted and one has found the spin
From the splitting A, one determines the nuclear g factor g B if
IB
.

The nuclear g factor and the spin together yield the magnetic moment, ji B = gBMo^B- As an example for
condition (67), take g B = 1, H = 10 5 gauss. A separation is then possible for r £ 6 x 10" 9 sec.
If condition (67) is not fulfilled, the spin I B cannot be determined
simply by counting the number of components. Nevertheless it is often
possible to find an approximate value of the g factor by measuring the
increase in line width as a function of the applied field H.
The situation encountered usually is more complicated than outlined above, since the ground-state spin will in general not be zero
and very large internal fields are often present. The first problem,
nonzero ground- state spin, results in the observation of more than
2I B + 1 components. Usually, however, the ground- state spin and moments can be measured with conventional techniques and their knowledge permits one to unravel the complex spectrum. Moreover, polarization experiments can help to reduce the number of components and
to make their identification easier (see Sec. 5-9).
The presence of very strong internal magnetic fields in ferromagnetic and paramagnetic substances introduces complications on the
one hand, but, on the other, allows the determination of g factors that
otherwise would be difficult to find. Indeed, the first observation of
the Zeeman effect of a nuclear gamma ray was performed by using
the internal magnetic field in Fe 57 (Pound and Rebka 1959a, DePasquali
et al. 1960, Reprint Hanna et al. 1960). Two limiting cases must be
distinguished when considering internal fields. One extreme occurs
when the field can be considered to be a static external field; the number and splitting of components observed in a given direction is then
the external field is known.

NUCLEAR PROPERTIES

53

given by the nuclear moments and the direction and magnitude of the
magnetic field. This case is approached, for instance, by Fe 57 in iron.
The other extreme corresponds to free atoms where the hyperfine interaction is governed by the usual spectroscopic rules: If the atomic
spin is denoted by J, the multiplicity of components depends on J also.
For instance, if J <Ia> the ground state splits only into 2 J + 1 magnetic sublevels. Obviously, a free atom cannot exhibit a Mossbauer
effect. However, in the rare earth elements situations can arise
where transitions without energy loss occur and where at the same
time the unfilled inner shells can be treated like free atoms.
To investigate the quadrupole coupling Q- VE, where Q is the nuclear quadrupole moment and VE the electric field gradient at the
nuclear site, one must place source or absorber nuclei in a surrounding with a high electric field gradient VE and measure the resulting
splitting. If one wants to find the quadrupole moment Q, one must
calculate the field gradient.

The first experimental investigation of quadrupole effects was done
by Kistner and Sunyar, using Fe 57 Fe 57 is well suited for this purpose,
since the ground- state spin 1/2 prevents the ground state from having
a quadrupole moment, and only the splitting due to the excited state
with spin 3/2 must be taken into account. Kistner and Sunyar showed
that the splitting of Fe 57 embedded in antiferromagnetic Fe 2 3 can be
explained by a superposition of magnetic hyperfine structure and quadrupole interaction (Reprint Kistner and Sunyar 1960). In the meantime,
many examples have been found in which only quadrupole splitting exists (see, for instance, Reprint DeBenedetti 1961).
The number of publications reporting investigations of magnetic and
quadrupole interactions in various systems with various nuclides is
growing steadily, and the reader is referred to the bibliography.
.

Incidentally, it is interesting to note that the measurements of moments of excited states by the Mossbauer effect have already led to
additional theoretical investigations. Attempts to derive the quadrupole moment of the 3/2 state in Fe 57 have been made, 46 47 and the
magnetic moment of the 3/2 state has turned out to be a sensitive
measure for the validity of nuclear model calculations. 48 (See also
'

Abragam 1961, Gastebois 1961.)
4-4 ISOMERIC SHIFTS

(CHEMICAL SHIFTS) 49

In atomic spectroscopy, lines from an isotopic

mixture show a

splitting which is not present in the spectrum of an isotopically pure
46

R. Bersohn, Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 609 (1960).
G. Burns, Phys. Rev., 124, 524 (1961).
48
R. D. Lawson and M. H. Macfar lane, Nuclear Phys., 24, 18 (1961).
49
Both terms, isomeric and chemical shift, are used in the literature to denote the same effect.
47

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

54

element.

In heavy elements, this isotopic splitting is due to the fact

that the addition of one or more neutrons changes the nuclear radius.
'

This change, in turn, shifts the atomic energy levels. 50 55 A change in
the radius can occur even without a change in nucleon number when
the nucleus goes from one state to another, for instance, when it decays from an isomeric state to the ground state. The corresponding
shift in energy is called an isomeric shift and such a shift of atomic
energy levels has recently been observed in Hg 197 56
A change in nuclear radius which shifts the atomic energy levels
will obviously also affect the nuclear levels by the same amount. An
isomeric shift has indeed been observed in the Mossbauer effect and
this shift may well turn out to yield more information about nuclear
and solid-state physics than, for instance, the lifetime measurements
described in Sec. 4-2. The first unambiguous observation of an isomeric shift was made by Kistner and Sunyar (Reprint 1960), using
Fe 57 Subsequently, isomeric shifts were investigated with Fe 57 (e.g.,
Solomon 1960; Reprint DeBenedetti 1960, Wertheim 1961); with Sn 119
(Boyle 1961); and with Au 197 (Shirley 1961). Systematic discussions of
the isomeric shifts have been published by Walker et al. (Reprint 1961)
and by Shirley (1961).
In the present section the physical idea underlying the isomer shift
will be outlined in simplest terms. As pointed out above, a change in
the electrostatic interaction between the nucleus and its electron shell
is responsible for the equal energy shifts of the atomic and the nuclear
levels. The observation of these two effects is entirely different, however. Consider first the atomic isotope and isomer shift. Isotopes,
and isomers have the same electron shell but different nuclear radii.
The same atomic transition hence can have a different energy in two
atoms which contain nuclei in different states, provided the two atomic
states involved in the transition are affected differently by the change
in nuclear radius. Otherwise both levels are shifted by equal amounts
and no net change in the transition energy results. In the nuclear isomer shift, one compares the same nuclear transition in two atomic
systems which have different electronic wave functions at the nucleus.
.

.

50

H. Kopfermann, "Kernmomente," Akademische Verlagsgesell-

schaft, Frankfurt, 1956;

"Nuclear Moments," Academic Press, New

York, 1958.
51

52

K. W. Ford and D. L. Hill, Ann. Rev. Nuclear Sci., 5, 25 (1955).
E. Mack and H. Arroe, Ann. Rev. Nuclear Sci., 6, 117 (1956).

J.

53
D. L. Hill, Matter and Charge Distribution within Atomic Nuclei,
"Encyclopedia of Physics," Springer, Berlin, 1957, Vol. 39, p. 178.
54
G. Breit, Revs. Modern Phys., 30, 507 (1958).
55
L. R. B. Elton, "Nuclear Sizes," Oxford University Press, New
York, 1961.
56
A. C. Melissinos and S. P. Davis, Phys. Rev., 115, 130 (1959).

NUCLEAR PROPERTIES

55

A shift can only be seen if the two nuclear states involved have different radii; otherwise both levels involved in the transition change by
the same amount, and the gamma-ray energy is not affected. The requirements for the observation of a nuclear isomeric shift hence are:
1. The two nuclear states involved must have different charge distributions.
2.

There must be electronic wave functions (usually from s elec-

trons) which overlap appreciably with the nuclear wave functions.
3. These wave functions must be sensitive to external (chemical)

changes.
All three requirements are justified by the following simple calculation.
In order to calculate the shift of the nuclear energy levels,

consider

Ze, with two levels A and B, sepaThe electrostatic potential created by this
rated by an energy E
point nucleus is shown as a dotted line in Fig. 4-2. Now consider an-

first a point nucleus, of charge
.

other nucleus, of equal charge, but with radius Ra in the ground state
A and a radius Rg in the excited state B, as shown in Fig. 4-2. Because of the diminished interaction with the electrons, the two levels
A and B will lie higher for this nucleus than they did for the point

RA RB

-_IE E B

r

u

^"constant
potential

Ej

nucleus

V(r)
Fig. 4-2

Ze/r

1AE A

Electrostatic potential for a point nucleus and
for a constant potential nucleus The radius Ra
.

of the ground state is assumed to be

than the radius

smaller

Rg for the excited state. The

level shifts from point nucleus to finite- size
nucleus are shown on the right.

nucleus (Fig. 4-2). To find for instance the shift AE^ one determines
the contribution to the total energy of the system which comes from

The potential from Ra to infinity is the
same for the finite as for the point nucleus. Hence only the volume
from to Ra needs to be taken into account when determining the energy shift. If one assumes that the wave function ^(r) of the relevant
the electrostatic interaction.

electrons is essentially constant over the distances involved and can
be replaced by ^(0), the contribution to the interaction energy from
this volume is given by

|

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

56

E(Ra) = - /

y r e l^(°)| 2 47ri 2 dr
*

(

(68)

)

o

where V(r)

is the electrostatic potential created by the nucleus.
a point nucleus, V(r) = Ze/r, and one finds

E P (RA) = -2;rZe 2 R 2 |*(0)| 2

For

(69)

A

The energy E(R^) for a finite nucleus depends on the charge distribution. Easiest to calculate is the surface charge model (top-slice

model), where the electrostatic potential is constant from the center
This
potential is shown in Fig. 4-2, and its contribution is given by
to the nuclear surface and joins the outside potential at r = R.

E g (R A = - (4/3)77 Ze 2 R 2A |*(0) 2

(70)

)

|

The difference between the expressions (70) and (69) yields the shift

AE A = E g (R A - E (R A = (2/3)77 Ze 2 R2A |^(0) 2
)

(71)

)

p

The assumption of a surface charge is unrealistic, but the calculation
can easily be performed with a nuclear charge density p(r). The result has exactly the same form as Eq. (71), but the nuclear radius R^
is replaced by the root-mean-square radius

< R A> = /p( r r2 dv = 477 /p(r)r 4 dr

(72)

)

The transition energy between two levels B and A becomes
EJ = E

+ AE B - AE A = E +(2/3) 77Ze 2 |*(0)| 2 [<Ra>- < r b>]
(73)

Ordinarily, it is impossible to observe such a small energy change.
However, if one performs a Mossbauer experiment and uses source

and absorber with different chemical environments such that the wave
functions at the nuclei in the emitter e and the absorber a are different, one finds for the difference in gamma-ray energy from (73)

6=E a -E e = (2/3)7rZe [<R B >-<R 2A >]{|^(0) a
2

2

2
|

-|^(0) e 2 } (74)
|

Equation (74) justifies the three requirements listed above, and it
gives the correct order of magnitude for the isomeric shift. However,
for many applications a more accurate formula is desired. Relevant
derivations and equations can be found in refs. 50 to 55 and 57, and in
57

A. R. Bodmer, Nuclear Phys., 21, 347 (1960),

NUCLEAR PROPERTIES

57

the publication by Shirley (1961). Applications of (74) are contained in
the Reprints by DeBenedetti et al. and Walker et al.

Equation (74) also shows that information on two different fields
can be obtained from isomeric-shift experiments. On the one hand,
differences in the nuclear radius between ground state and excited
state can be measured. On the other hand, changes in the wave function of s electrons can be studied in various substances. Both avenues offer exciting possibilities for further investigations.

4-5

PARITY EXPERIMENTS

The observation of the intensity and of the polarization of individual

Zeeman components of nuclear gamma rays (Sees. 4-2 and 5-9) permits the investigation of parity conservation in strong and weak interactions. Grodzins and Genovese (1961) have tested the parity conservation in strong interactions in the 14.4-kev transition in Fe 57 by comparing the transition rates for the Am = ± 1 components in the direction of the nuclear polarization with those opposite to it. They found
the relative strength of a parity admixed wave function to be less
-5
than lO
Morita (1961) has suggested experiments testing parity conservation and time-reversal invariance in weak interactions.
.

GENERAL PHYSICS
5-1

SURVEY

Those applications of the Mossbauer effect that are not nuclear
or solid-state physics are reviewed in this chapter. When going
through the various sections, one realizes that such a division is very
arbitrary and that it should only be understood as a scheme for arranging things. Actually, one of the beautiful aspects of the Mossbauer effect is that it shows the unity of physics and connects seemingly unrelated fields.
Comparing the applications in Sees. 5-2 to 5-5 with those of Chaps.
4 and 6, one notices that they belong to a different class. Indeed,
rather than divide the various topics as is done in this book, one can
equally well distinguish two classes: (1) experiments depending on the
line width T, and (2) experiments depending on Q = E/r, the ratio of
the transition energy to the line width.
It is really for class 2 that the Mossbauer effect shows its superiority as a research tool; it is surprising that more experiments have
not been done which take advantage of the extremely high Q values

available with nuclides such as

5-2

Fe 57 and Zn 67

.

GRAVITATIONAL RED SHIFT (APPARENT WEIGHT OF
PHOTONS)

Einstein's theory of relativity has always held a particular fascination for the scientist and the layman alike, and it has stirred imagination as no other theory has done in the present century. It is therefore not surprising that the use of the Mossbauer effect to study problems connected with relativity has received an enormous amount of
attention and publicity. Soon after the discovery of the Mossbauer effect, it was realized by many physicists that this new tool offered pos-

58

GENERAL PHYSICS

59

sibilities for investigating problems in relativity. A few groups
started to explore the feasibility of such experiments. No group has
done more admirable work, however, than Pound and his co-workers

at Harvard. They have succeeded in unambiguously demonstrating the
red shift of photons in the laboratory.
The red shift of spectral lines in a gravitational field was predicted by Einstein 58 59 and a classic description of the relevant facts
can be found in Pauli's article 60 (see also Moller 1960). Here a short
outline of the essential arguments will be given. Consider a source of
radiation at rest in a system Kq, which moves with a velocity v= /3c
with respect to the laboratory system K^. The radiation source can
be used as a clock. If this clock measures in its system Kq a time t
(proper time) between two events, then an observer in K^^ will find
a longer time tj a^ between these same events (time dilation):
'

t

lab

2 )V2

= V(l -

(75)

If the source in Kq emits a radiation of frequency oj
is given by 61
quency measured in

K^

(1 --

±

^ab " -o

j

.

2 1/2
/3

.

)

p cos fllab

In these expressions for the

" -o

1

^

+ g cos a
(1 .

,

then the fre-

™
(na

,

Doppler shift, a

the direction of emission of the photon

oj

is the angle between
and the velocity v measured

cq ab denotes the same angle measured in K^.
For small velocities, v«c, (75) and (76) can be approximated by

in Kq, and

tlab *

U +
1

(!/2)/3

2
]

(77)

and

w lab * ^ot 1 +

cos a lab - (l/2)/3 2 ]

(78)

Now consider a source which is fixed at a radius R to a disk
which rotates with an angular frequency £2. An observer at the center of the disk will receive only photons that have been emitted radiA. Einstein, Ann. Physik, 35, 898 (1911); reprinted in "The
Principle of Relativity," Dover, New York, 1923.
59
A. Einstein, "Uber die spezielle und allgemeine Relativitatstheorie," Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1956, 17th ed., p. 82; "Relativity, the
Special and the General Theory," Methuen, London, 1954.
60
W. Pauli, "Theory of Relativity," Pergamon, London, 1958,
pp. 19, 151-154.
61
E. L. Hill, Optics and Relativity Theory, in E. U. Condon and H. Odishaw (eds.), "Handbook of Physics," McGraw-Hill, New York, 1958.
58

60

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

ally, i.e., for which cq ab = 90°.

According to Eq. (78), the observer

then measures a frequency

^lab - co [l - (l/2)(Rft/c) ]
2

(79)

This relation also follows from the time dilation (77), since an increase in the time interval between two signals entails a corresponding decrease in energy.
The arguments leading to Eq. (79) are based on the Doppler effect;
the observer determines the change in frequency due to the transverse motion of the source. Einstein has shown that the frequency
shift can be considered from a different point of view— one which leads
to an extremely important generalization. Instead of postulating a
transverse Doppler effect, the observer can assume that his disk is
at rest and that the source instead is in a different gravitational potential. The centrifugal force acting on the source then is interpreted
as a gravitational force. The potential at the radius R is equal to the
negative of the work required to move a unit mass from R to the
center:

<J>=-(1/2)R2 S2 2

(80)

Equation (79) can now be written as
2

^lab ~ <o (l + $/c )

(81)

Einstein postulated Eq. (81) to hold not only for the rotating disk but
generally for all situations where observer and clock are situated in
different gravitational potentials. Whether the potential is gravitational or due to uniform acceleration does not matter (principle of
equivalence).
The derivation of Eq. (81) shows that the gravitational red shift
does not yield information about the equations of general relativity. It
only tests the principle of equivalence and shows that photons in a
gravitational field behave like particles with mass. Pound correspondingly terms the terrestrial-red-shift experiment "apparent weight of
photons." A particle with mass m gains an energy m<£, if moved
from a potential
to a potential <£. According to Eq. (81), a photon
of energy E = na; gains an amount "fico $/c 2 The photon thus behaves
like a particle with a "mass"
.

m photon=Wc = E/c
2

2

(82)

As expected, the rest mass of photons is zero. One could, of course,
start from (82) and arrive at (81).
If

a source of resonant gamma rays is situated in the earth's gravi-

GENERAL PHYSICS
tational field at a height

61

H above a resonant absorber, then the potenas long as H is small compared to

tial difference is given by <£>= gH,

the radius of the earth.

A photon, emitted by this source, will "fall"

in the gravitational field toward the absorber and actually undergo a

"violet" rather than a red shift. The corresponding relative gain in
energy is given in first approximation by (81) as

AE/E = (wiab " w )/o>o = gH/c 2

(83)

AE/E = H(cm) x 1.09 x 10" 18

(84)

or

For a difference in height between source and absorber of 10 m, one
15

gets a relative shift of about 1 part in 10
One aspect of the red-shift experiment deserves a few more
words. The arguments given above assume that the frequency of
photons depends on the gravitational potential but that the nuclear
levels, measured by an observer at rest with respect to the nucleus
.

and situated in the same gravitational potential, remain unchanged.
This assumption is based on the weakness of the gravitational interaction as compared to nuclear and electromagnetic forces. It is,
however, possible to select a coordinate frame in which the frequency of the photons moving in a static gravitational field remains
constant (Miller 1960, p. 46). Measured in this coordinate frame,
the energy of the atomic or nuclear levels depends on the gravitational potential, and it is this dependence that is responsible for the
red shift. These two descriptions are equivalent.
The basic idea of a terrestrial-red- shift experiment is very simple. A resonant source is placed at a height H above the resonant absorber, and the relative energy shift is determined by measuring the
velocity spectrum. However, the practical difficulties are enormous,
particularly because even Fe 57 the nuclide used at the present time,
has a Q value of "only" 3 x 10 12 For a height H = 10 m, a shift of
about one part in 10 3 of the line width must be determined accurately.
In addition, many disturbing effects exist and must be eliminated or
corrected for with extreme care.
The first completely satisfactory measurement was performed by
Pound and Rebka (Reprint 1960), and the reader is referred to their
excellent report and to Pound's review (1960, 1961) for an understanding and appreciation of this difficult experiment.
Two additional remarks are in order. During the past few years,
physicists have often speculated whether antiparticles will fall or rise
62
in a gravitational field. Winterberg has pointed out recently
that the
,

.

62

F. Winterberg, Nuovo cimento, 19, 186 (1961),

c

.

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

62

positive result of the Pound-Rebka experiment makes it extremely
likely that antiparticles and particles have the same sign of the gravitational interaction. Consider the following gedanken experiment. A
photon of energy 2m 2 - e falls in a gravitational field until it has
gained an energy € In the presence of a very heavy nucleus, it then
creates a particle-antiparticle pair of total mass 2mc 2 If the anti.

.

particle is subject to "anti gravity/' the pair is weightless and can
be brought to the starting point of the photon without energy loss, thus
violating energy conservation.

The second remark concerns a suggestion by Cocconi and Salpeter
(1960), who proposed to use the Mossbauer effect to set an upper limit
on a possible anisotropy of inertia. Corresponding experiments using

Mossbauer effect (Sherwin 1960) and conventional resonance techniques 63 64 failed to observe an effect and hence apparently determined a limit on the anisotropy of inertia. Dicke, however, points out
that this null result does not cast doubts on the validity of Mach's
principle, but shows that inertial anisotropy effects are universal and
the

'

the same for all particles. 65

5-3

ACCELERATED SYSTEMS

The high Q value of isotopes like Fe 57 allows the observations of
effects due to accelerated systems. The simplest such experiment is
the measurement of the energy shift of a photon emitted from a system rotating with a frequency ft. If a resonant emitter is mounted on
this system at a radius R e and a resonant absorber is situated at a
radius Ra> one finds for the relative energy shift from Eqs. (79) or
(81), in first approximation,

(E a -

E e )/E = (ft 2/2c 2 )(R| - R|)

(85)

At first one would expect that source and absorber must lie on the

same radius or that the absorber must be exactly in the center to
avoid a linear Doppler effect. However, a short calculation shows
Such a cancellation is to be
expected, since the gravitational field equivalent to the acceleration
on a rotating system depends only on the distance from the center

that the first-order terms will cancel.

[Eq. (80)]

The Harwell group (Reprint Hay 1960) first demonstrated experimentally that Eq. (85) is followed within the limits of error. This
experiment, together with the Pound-Rebka experiment discussed in
63
V. W. Hughes, H. G. Robinson, and V. Be ltrow- Lopez, Phys.
Rev. Letters, 4, 342 (1960).
64
R. W. P. Drever, Phil. Mag., 6, 683 (1961).
65
R. H. Dicke, Phys. Rev. Letters, 7, 359 (1961).

GENERAL PHYSICS

63

Sec. 5-2, shows that the equivalence principle is correct to within
about 5 per cent.
Equation (85) indicates that no shift is to be expected if source and

absorber move on the same orbit, even if their relative velocity is as
high as 2RS2. This absence of a Doppler shift has been verified by
Champeney and Moon (Reprint 1961).
Bommel has performed an experiment in which he tested the frequency shift in a linearly accelerated system 66 by mounting source
and absorber on piezoelectric crystals and driving the crystals in
phase.

SECOND-ORDER DOPPLER SHIFT

5-4

In the framework of the classical theory of the Mossbauer effect,
as sketched in Sec. 2-3, Eq. (78) can be interpreted as follows. The
emitting nucleus moves about its equilibrium position with a velocity
v(t). As discussed in remark 4 of Sec. 2-3, the characteristic time
for the lattice vibrations is much shorter than the lifetime of the nuclear state. The linear term (v/c) cos cq a b in Eq. (78) will hence
average out, giving rise to the unshifted and sharp Mossbauer line.
The quadratic term, -(l/2)(v/c) 2 will remain and it will cause a shift
in the energy of the emitted or absorbed gamma ray (second-order
Doppler shift). This shift can be calculated, since (l/2)Mv 2 = E kin
where
is the mass and E kul the kinetic energy of the decaying
atom. Hence one finds
,

,

M

6E/E = -E kin /Mc 2

(86)

In the classical limit, the kinetic

energy E km

is

equal to (3/2)kT, and

the relative energy shift becomes

6E/E = - 3kT/2Mc 2

(87)

For harmonic lattice forces, where the total energy U is twice the
E k jn one finds for the temperature dependence of the
relative energy shift from Eq. (86),
kinetic energy

,

-—- (6E/E) = -C

L /M'c

2

(88)

Here Cl = 8U/3T is the specific heat of the lattice and M' is the

gram atomic weight of the lattice substance.
The question of whether the temperature motion that causes the
shift (86) will also give rise to a broadening of the lines has been
66

H. Bommel, in "Proceedings of the Second Mossbauer Conference, " Paris, Sept. 13-16,1961, A. Schoen and D. M. J. Compton (eds.),
Wiley, New York, tentative publication Spring 1962.

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

64

studied by Snyder and Wick (1960). They find that for a perfect crystalline solid such a broadening does not occur.
If the environment of source and absorber nuclei are the same, the
term (86) will be identical for both and hence will not be observable.
However, if the source and the absorber are at different temperatures

or if source and absorber nuclei are in different surroundings, an observable shift can result. Since such a shift depends on the ''chemical
state" of source and absorber, it is sometimes difficult to separate it
from the isomeric shift discussed in Sec. 4-4.
Actually, the second-order Doppler shift was overlooked until early
1960, when Pound and Rebka (Reprint 1960) realized that such an effect
existed. They derived an expression for it and verified this expression
[Eq. (88)] experimentally. At the same time and from a different point
of view, the effect was predicted by Josephson (Reprint 1960). In an undergraduate examination at Oxford University, Josephson received the
problem to calculate the change in frequency of an oscillator which
suddenly changes its mass. He had read about the Mossbauer effect
and realized that there was a connection. When the excited state decays by gamma-ray emission, the nucleus loses energy, and its mass
2
is reduced by an amount 5M = -E/c
Its thermal momentum p is
unchanged, since the solid takes up all the recoil momentum. The reduced mass, however, causes an increase in the kinetic energy of the
atom:
.

5E kin = (8E kin /9M) 6M = (-p 2 /2M2 )(-E/c 2 ) = (l/2)E(v 2/c 2 )

(89)

which is compensated by a corresponding decrease in the energy of
the emitted gamma ray. The shift Eq. (89) thus agrees in magnitude
and sign with the classical result deduced from Eq. (78). Josephson
wrote a short note on his derivation and sent it to Harwell, where it
arrived among many crank letters. Marshall realized the importance
of Josephson's calculation and tried to reach him by telephone, only
to be told that undergraduates were not supposed to receive calls.
Despite these difficulties, Josephson's note was published.
The experiments confirming the second-order Doppler shift in Fe 57
119
(Boyle 1960) also constitute
(Reprint Pound and Rebka 1960) and Sn
a direct proof of the famous "clock paradox" or "twin paradox," as
was pointed out by Sherwin (1960). In his original paper on special
67
predicted the following effect: At a time t = 0,
relativity, Einstein
two identical clocks are synchronized at a point A. One clock remains
at A and measures the time t. The other clock travels away from A
with a velocity v(t). When it eventually returns to A, it will indicate
an elapsed time s which is shorter than the time t measured by the
stationary clock in the ratio
A. Einstein, Ann. Physik, 17, 891 (1905). Reprinted in "The
Principle of Relativity," Dover, New York, 1923, p. 49.
67

GENERAL PHYSICS

65

to

So/to = UAo) /

[l-(v/c)T 2dt

(90)

Equation (90) is a generalization of Eq. (75); in one form or another
it is an integral part of science fiction literature. The paradox lies in
the fact that a straightforward application of 'relativity/ without a
careful definition of its meaning, leads to the conclusion that one
should never be able to tell which clock is accelerated and that Eq.
(90) should be invalid. This disagreement has been discussed extensively in the literature; Sherwin summarizes the various arguments
and then shows that the emitting and absorbing nuclei in a Mossbauer
experiment play the roles of the two clocks. Assume the absorber to
be at a very low temperature, so that v =* 0; it then plays the role of
the stationary clock. The source at high temperature easily possesses
rms velocities <v 2 > 1/2 comparable to that of a jet plane, and it plays
the role of the clock moving in a space craft. According to Eq. (86) or
(87), the emission line indeed has a lower energy than the absorption
line. In other words, the traveling clock goes slower than the stationary clock, Eq. (90) is justified, and the science fiction writers can continue using it.
'

'

5-5

FREQUENCY AND PHASE MODULATION

Two methods for slightly shifting the energy of resonant gamma
rays will be discussed in this section. These methods are not only
useful to shift energies and hence can be employed as velocity drives
(Sec. 3-43), but they also serve as tools for other investigations.
The first of these methods can be called "frequency modulation of
gamma rays." In Sec. 2-3, it was shown that if one moves the source
of an electromagnetic wave [exp (iu> t)] with a simple harmonic motion, x(0) sin £2t, sidebands appear with frequencies u> ±ft, w ±2J2, ....
Ruby and Bolef (Reprint I960) have observed these sidebands by fixing a source of Fe 57 on a quartz transducer and vibrating it with a
frequency of 20 Mc/sec. The theory borrowed from Sec. 2-3 is classical; a quantum mechanical treatment has been given by Abragam
(1960).

A phase modulation of the 14.4-kev gamma ray of Fe 57 has been
observed by Grodzins and Phillips (Reprint 1961). If a medium with
a refractive index n and a length L is placed in the path of a resonant
gamma ray of frequency u) a phase shift
,

$ = (1 - n)o) (L/c)
results.

If

either the length

(91)

L or the index of refraction n is a func-

tion of time, and if the medium is placed between source and absorber,
then the time -dependent part of the wave function of the photon at the

absorber is given by

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

66

f(t)

= exp[-iw t + i$(t) - Tt/2n]

(92)

where r is the natural line width. The frequency spectrum of this
phase- modulated wave train is given by the absolute square of the
Fourier transform

g(ct)),
OO

g(w) = 1/(2tt)V2

f at exp (icot) f (t)

(93)

o
If

one modulates the phase sinusoidally, the result is similar to

the one found in Sec. 2-3 and in the paragraph above. Sidebands ap-

pear and the intensity in the central line of frequency

oo

is

dimin-

ished.

The saw-tooth modulation of the phase shift is more interesting.
Assuming
*(t) = $ t/to

to

>t>0

(95)

the integral (93) can be evaluated in closed form. All practically ob-

tainable phase shifts $
relation

$o<u
is
is

and modulation times

t

are such that the

(96)

t

easily fulfilled. In the approximation (96), the frequency spectrum
given by

«•> =

i

^

2
i

s

2

[co-. (i-v :o gp + (r/2B 2

The width of the original line of energy E
is shifted by an amount AE given by

is

unchanged, but the line

AE/E = $ /co t
If

(97)

)

(

the phase modulation also modulates the intensity

I

98 )

of the photons,

for instance, if the photons traverse material with a linear absorption
coefficient ju and a thickness varying according to L = L t/t so that
I(t) = Iq exp(-juL t/t ), then the line width T in Eq. (97) must be re-

placed by

r'=r + ^L /t
5-6

(99)

THE UNCERTAINTY RELATION BETWEEN ENERGY AND
TIME

A linear harmonic oscillator serves as a simple model for a classical radiation source. 6

If

undamped, it will emit an infinitely long

GENERAL PHYSICS

67

wave train of sharp frequency w
plitude

f

will decrease in time.

.

If

If

the oscillator

is

damped, the am-

the damping is small, this decrease

will be exponential,
f(t)

= f (0) exp [-iw t - (l/2)yt]

(100)

The intensity averaged over one period as a function of time is given
by the absolute square of f(t),
I(t)

= I(0)exp(-yt)

(101)

The mean life t of this exponential decay is equal to 1/y. The frequency of such a wave train will no longer be sharp, but will be given
by the absolute square of the Fourier transform [Eq. (93)] of f(t),
i(w) =

^ S m*
<„ -

+

(102)

Equation (102) represents a Lorentz line with full width at half-height
Decay time r and line width y satisfy the relation

y centered at co

.

T-y=l

(103)

clear from these arguments that the line will invariably broaden
the wave train is shortened. Even if the decay I(t) is not exponen-

It is
if

tial,

the relation (103) will yield the right order of magnitude for the

line width y.
In quantum theory, the

tainty relation (34).

expression (103) is replaced by the uncer-

The arguments which show that a shortening of

the time t results in a broadening of the line width y are cast in a
different language. Rather than speaking about a wave train, one dis-

cusses the possibility of measuring a given separation in energy AE
within a given time T (Sec. 2-43). The emission process and its observation can no longer be separated; both must be incorporated in
the quantum mechanical treatment. The relevancy of Eq. (34) to these
problems and its detailed interpretation have led to many arguments
and discussions. One of the exciting applications of the Mossbauer
effect is the demonstration of the correctness of the ideas leading to,
and expressed by, Eq. (34).
The corresponding experiments can be performed best with the
nuclide Fe 57 (Fig. 4-1). The 123-kev gamma ray leading from the
second to the first excited state is used to signal the time t = 0,
57
i.e., the time when the first excited state of Fe
is populated. The
14.4-kev gamma ray then can be observed in delayed coincidence with
this "signal" gamma ray. By utilizing a variable delay and a resolving time which is short compared to the mean life of the 14.4-kev photons, one can study the shape of the Mossbauer line as a function of

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

68

absorption

cm/sec
Doppler velocity
Fig. 5-1

The oscillatory behavior of the Fe 57 absorption
line when observed with delayed coincidences.

[Adapted from Wu and co-workers (I960).]
Lifetime of the 14.4-kev state in Fe 57 r ^ 1.4
x 10" 7 sec; delay time =* (l/2)r, resolving time
=*0.1r.
the time elapsed between the population of the level and the observation of the photon.

Such experiments were first performed by the Argonne group (Holland 1960, Reprint Lynch 1960), and later repeated by Wu and collaborators (I960). Hamermesh formulated a classical theory of the timedependent effects (Reprint Lynch 1960). Harris (1961) performed a

quantum mechanical calculation and found complete agreement with
the classical theory.

Theory and experiment both yield the following results: For delay
times short compared to the mean life, the Mdssbauer line is broadened in agreement with the expressions (34) and (103). This broadening can be seen clearly in Fig. 10 of the Reprint (Lynch 1960). With
increasing delay time, the line narrows and develops a damped oscillatory behavior as shown in Fig. 5-1. For times long compared to the
mean life, the oscillations are rapid and the central line becomes nar-

rower than the natural line width. For most delay times, there exist

GENERAL PHYSICS

69

energies close to the resonance energy where the number of gamma
rays seen by the detector is greater than if the absorber were not
present; the absorber produces a time bunching of photons. This
''photon excess" is shaded in Fig. 5-1.
None of these results is new in the sense that it could not have been
calculated years ago. However, the experimental observation of these
effects has stimulated thinking about elementary radiation theory, and
it allows a convincing demonstration of the uncertainty relation between time and energy.
Hack and Hamermesh (Reprint 1961) have treated another application of the Mossbauer effect to line- shape problems. Assume that a
constant magnetic field splits the initial state of a gamma transition
If one now apinto components, separated by an energy A [Eq. (66)]
plies an external radiofrequency field of frequency co r f one expects
changes in the radiation pattern of the gamma ray at resonance, Hu> r f
= A. It may be possible to detect these changes using the Mossbauer
.

,

effect.

RECOILLESS RAYLEIGH SCATTERING

5-7

Consider a beam of monochromatic X rays of energy E and momentum k which is scattered by a crystal. The scattered beam of momentum k' contains a modified and an unmodified line. 68 The modified line, shifted to lower energies and considerably wider than the

incident beam, is due to Compton effect and will not be considered
further. The unmodified line is due to Rayleigh scattering: The incident photon of energy E is absorbed by a bound electron that is virtually excited to a higher discrete level or to the continuum.
of the same energy
its

A photon

E is then reemitted while the electron returns to

original state. 29 69 70 The small fraction of the unmodified line due
'

'

to nuclear Thomson scattering will be neglected.

With the energy resolution available in ordinary X-ray experiments,
the unmodified line appears to be essentially identical to the incident

however, it consists of a coherent (elastic) and an incoherent (inelastic) part. Both parts transfer the entire recoil momentum fi(k - k') to the lattice as a whole. The incoherent beam also exchanges energy with the lattice by emitting or absorbing phonons. The
energies involved in this exchange are of the order of 0.1 ev, or less.
line. Actually,

68

R. B. Leighton, "Principles of Modern Physics," McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1959, p. 434.
69
J. M. Jauch and F. Rohrlich, "The Theory of Photons and Electrons," Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1955, p. 387.
70
G. W. Grodstein, "X-Ray Attenuation Coefficients from 10 kev
to 100 Mev," Natl. Bur. Standards Circ. 583, 1957.

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

70

Since the widths of X rays are of the order of 1 ev, these phonon processes simply lead to a line widening and a small line shift, but the incoherent part cannot be separated from the coherent part by conventional X-ray spectrometers. The coherent or elastic part, which is

now often called the recoilless part, leaves the lattice in its initial
state and has exactly the same energy E as the primary beam. It is
this coherent part of the unmodified line which is the tool of X-ray
diffraction.

The entire unmodified line, coherent and incoherent, is due to Rayleigh scattering; the electronic state of the scatterer is not changed.

To calculate the coherent part, one must first find the total Rayleigh
scattering. Contributions arise from two sources— from the different
electrons in the same atom and from electrons in different atoms.
These contributions are partially coherent, and one must combine the
amplitudes rather than the intensities due to the various electrons. 71
The scattering from the different electrons of the same atom is described by a form factor; the scattering from different atoms is strong
only at certain angles, the Bragg angles, and leads to the Bragg reflection, used for the determination of the structure of crystals.
Once one has calculated the total Rayleigh scattering, the coherent
part of the unmodified line is found by taking into account the thermal
motion of the atoms. This thermal motion gives rise to the emission
and absorption of phonons and thus introduces energy shifts and incoherence. The fraction of scattering events that occurs without energy
loss is calculated similarly to the procedure outlined in Sec. 2-5, and
it is given by the Debye-Waller factor [Eq. (54)]. (See also Sec. 6-22.)
Before the discovery of the Mossbauer effect, the coherent beam
was distinguished from the incoherent one by studying the intensity of
Bragg reflections as a function of temperature. Tzara and Barloutaud
(Reprint 1960) have shown that the Mossbauer effect permits a direct
observation of the recoilless Rayleigh scattering. Resonant gamma
rays, for instance, from a Sn 119 r an Fe 57 source, are scattered
from a crystal that does not contain resonantly absorbing nuclei. The
secondary beam k' contains a fraction of gamma rays that still possess the initial energy E. They can be distinguished from the incoherent background with a resonant absorber in front of the detector.
By measuring the velocity spectrum, i.e., by moving the resonant absorber with a velocity v with respect to the stationary source and
scatterer, one can trace out the form of the coherent line in a manner
similar to the investigation of the transmission line shown in Fig. 3-1.

A small problem in semantics arises here. Both the coherent
and incoherent part of the unmodified line must be calculated, taking
into account the coherence among the various atoms and electrons.
The coherence among the atoms is then partly destroyed by temperature motion, and this gives rise to the incoherent part.
71

GENERAL PHYSICS

71

The possibility of cleanly separating the coherent from the incoherent
line is of course due to the fact that the gamma rays used in these experiments possess a line width of about 10" 7 ev or less. This width is

not changed by the coherent scattering, whereas the incoherent line is
shifted and is smeared out over an energy of about 0.1 ev.

5-8

COHERENCE AND INTERFERENCE

The theory of coherence and interference involving Mossbauer scattering has been treated in a number of publications (Reprint Kastler
1960, Reprint Tzara 1961, Podgoretskii 1960, Lipkin 1961, Moon 1961,
Raghavan 1961, Trammel 1961, Tassie 72 ). Relevant experiments have
been performed by Black and Moon (Reprint 1960) and by Major (1961).
More recent results have been reported by Black. 73
The concept of coherence originated in classical optics. Even though
it is basically not a difficult concept, its application is often confusing,
and errors can arise because the physical situation and the meaning of
coherence have not been clearly defined. 74 75 Here, a simple example
should suffice. Consider two radiation sources, each emitting waves
'

of frequency

w with amplitudes a= |a| exp[io?(t)] and b= |b| exp[i/3(t)],

where a and

are real. The intensity I(t) observed at a given point
r in space and averaged over one period will be the absolute square
of the sum of the amplitudes
I(r,t) = |a + b|

2

= |a| 2 + |b| 2 + I int

(104)

where the interference term I^ nt is given by
I int

= 2 |a|

|b|

cos (a - j3) = 2 Re(a* b)

(105)

The two waves a and b are said to be incoherent at the point r

if

2

and |b| 2 i.e., if the interference term vanishes. The waves will be perfectly coherent if the
phases of the two bear a definite relationship to each other and
slightly coherent if there exists a small correlation between their
phases.
In quantum theory the discussion of coherence can be made along
the same lines: If the probability of finding photons from two sources
at a given point is not equal to the sum of the probabilities, one says
that the two waves possess a certain amount of coherence. This definition applies particularly to the scattering of one photon from two
the intensity

72

I(r,t)

is the

sum of

|a|

,

L. J. Tassie, unpublished report.
P. J. Black, in "Proceedings of the Second Mossbauer Conference, " Paris, Sept. 13-16, 1961, A. Schoen and D. M. J. Compton
(eds.), Wiley, New York, tentative publication Spring 1962.
74
A. T. Forrester, Am. J. Phys., 24, 192 (1956).
75
E.L. O'Neill and L.C.Bradley, Phys. Today, 14 (6), 28 (1961).
73

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

72

scattering centers (see Ref. 6, pp. 192-194, 202; and Ref. 23, pp. 133137). The scattered waves can be coherent; i.e., they can interfere
with each other provided there is a fixed phase relation between them.
The coherence is destroyed, however, if one determines by a measurement, for instance of the recoil of one center, from which center
the photon has been scattered. Such an investigation with fixed phase
relation is analogous to the famous optical double- slit experiment.
In order to discuss specifically the processes that can interfere
with Mossbauer scattering, consider a photon of momentum lik which
strikes a resonant scatterer and excites a nucleus to its first excited
state by recoilless absorption. The reemission can result in a photon
of momentum ftk' or in a conversion electron. If one detects photons,
Rayleigh scattering by the atomic electrons of one atom or by the
electrons of many atoms can be coherent with the Mossbauer scattering. If one detects electrons, the photo effect and the internal conversion can interfere. 72 If the resonant nuclei in the absorber are abundant enough, scattering from the different nuclei can be coherent. In
all these examples, coherence exists only if one does not determine
where the scattering occurs. If, for instance, a hyperfine interaction
is present at the resonant nuclei, then its observation shows that resonance scattering has occurred and all coherence with Rayleigh scattering is destroyed.
The equations describing the cross sections in the presence of coherent processes are given by Tzara (Reprint 1961). Here some of
the essential facts are summarized. If one observes all processes
leading to scattering in the direction k', without discriminating against
those which leave the lattice in an excited state, the cross section is
given by (Lipkin 1961)

a oc [|R|2 +
|

M

2
|

f(k) + 2C Re

(R*M) f(k)]

(106)

where R is the probability amplitude for Rayleigh scattering plus nu-

M

is the probability amplitude for the
clear Thomson scattering,
is the Lamb- Mossbauer factor, Eq.
f(k)
and
Mossbauer scattering,
the degree of coherence bedescribing
factor
is
a
or
C
(56).
(49)
tween the processes; it is independent of the lattice (Moon 1961).
If one uses a resonant detector to observe only those scattering

events which leave the lattice in its initial state, one finds

a cc[|R|*F'(k - k') + |M|

2

2

f (k)

+ 2C Re(R*M)F

1/2

(k-k') f(k)]
(107)

where k-k' is the momentum transferred to the lattice and
F(k - k') is the corresponding Debye-Waller factor, Eq. (54).
A few remarks about the interpretation and the application of these
equations are in order.

GENERAL PHYSICS
1.

73

Equation (106) and Eq. (107) show that one must choose

R and

M of about equal magnitude in order to make the interference term
as large as possible compared with the other terms.
2. The dependence of the interference term on the Debye-Waller
factor F (k - k') and on the Lamb- Mossbauer factor is clearly exhibited by the two equations, (106) and (107), and needs no further discussion.
3. The interference between Mossbauer scattering and Rayleigh
scattering has been observed experimentally by Black and Moon 73
(Reprint 1960). In order to get a large effect, they selected scattering
angles such that strong Bragg reflections occurred (compare Sec.
5-7). The interference term changes sign when one changes the energy from slightly above the Mossbauer resonance to slightly below,
and vanishes at exact resonance. This effect also is expected (Tzara
1961, Moon 1961).
76
4. Campbell and Bernstein
have observed interference between
the Mossbauer scattering and totally reflected gamma rays. This
technique permits the study of the chemical and magnetic environment
of those nuclei which lie in a very thin layer close to the surface.
5. One possible application of interference effects may well be the
observation of a weak Mossbauer line in a strong background, since
the interference term depends on
rather than on |M| 2 (Moon 1961).
6. Another possible application is to the determination of phases in
crystallography (Raghavan).

M

5-9

POLARIZATION77

The optical Zeeman effect has been extremely important for the
understanding of atomic structure. In nuclear physics, prior to the
discovery of the Mossbauer effect, analogous experiments were impossible. It is true that many polarization experiments have been performed with nuclear gamma rays, but these experiments have been
difficult and cumbersome. Moreover, they always had to be performed
on components unresolved in energy, and the information gathered
about the polarization of individual components was rather indirect.
The discovery of the Mossbauer effect has changed this situation.
Particularly with the 14.4-kev gamma ray emitted by Fe 57 the nuclear
Zeeman effect can be observed easily and in detail (see Sec. 4-3). The
individual components of the emitted gamma-ray lines are widely separated compared to the natural line width. The 93-kev gamma ray in
Zn 67 displays a Zeeman splitting of many line widths in fields as small
as 100 gauss (Reprint Craig 1960).
,

76
77

E. C. Campbell and S. Bernstein, Bull. Am. Phys. Soc, 6, 443 (1961),
This section follows closely some parts of a Los Alamos publica-

tion (Frauenfelder 1962).

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

74

Once the Zeeman components are separated clearly, the determinaExperiments
with the plane polarization of the Fe 57 gamma rays were first performed by the Argonne group in order to complete the understanding
of the Mossbauer spectrum of Fe 57 embedded in iron (Reprint Hanna
1960). The gamma-ray polarization has also been taken into account
by Wegener and Obenshain in order to explain the shape of the lines
observed in Ni 61 (Wegener 1961). The elliptical polarization was first
tion of their state of polarization becomes the next step.

used to simplify the investigation of the complicated spectra that appear when Fe 57 is embedded in CoPd (Reprint Nagle 1960).
Polarization measurements on resolved gamma-ray components
can be a very effective tool for unraveling complex spectra, for reducing the number of lines in complicated spectra, and for finding the
direction of the internal magnetic field inside magnetic domains in
ferromagnets, ferrimagnets, antiferromagnets, and possibly superconducting ferromagnets.
A complete theory of the polarization of gamma rays emitted and
absorbed in the Mossbauer effect has been worked out by Visscher
(Frauenf elder 1962), and this paper should be consulted for details.
In the present section, a few remarks and the description of a simple
experiment show the ease with which the elliptical polarization can be
demonstrated in the Mossbauer effect. A similar very simple experiment showing the linear polarization of the Fe 57 gamma rays has
been performed by the Argonne group (Perlow 1960).
The levels of Fe 57 embedded in ferromagnetic iron metal and
placed in an external magnetic field, are shown in Fig. 2 of the Reprint (Hanna I960). 78 The radiation pattern emitted by Fe 57 will gen,

erally consist of six lines, as shown in the same figure. However, if

one observes the pattern along the axis of the external magnetic field,
the transition Am =
is completely forbidden, and only four components appear. To discuss the polarization of the four components, one
notes that a gamma ray is called right circularly polarized if its spin
lies in the direction of motion. (This convention is opposite to the one
used in optical spectroscopy.) Consider first the highest energy component, namely, the transition -3/2 to -1/2. The z component of angular momentum must be conserved, and any gamma ray corresponding to this component hence must have a z component of angular
momentum of -1. If this gamma ray is emitted along the +z direction, its spin is antiparallel to its momentum, and it is left circularly
78
The labeling of the magnetic sublevels of Fe 57 has led to some
confusion. The magnetic moment of the excited state is negative; the
internal field in iron metal is opposite to the externally applied magnetic field. If one uses the convention that the external field is di= -3/2 state possesses the highrected along the +z axis, then the
est energy, as shown in Fig. 2 of the Reprint (Hanna, 1960).

m

GENERAL PHYSICS
Fe 57 source

Fig. 5-2

75

Fe 57 absorber

counter

A simple experiment to demonstrate the circular polarization of the 14.4-kev gamma rays
from Fe 57
is

.

The counting rate with parallel fields

much larger than with antiparallel fields at

source and absorber.
polarized. If it is emitted in the -z direction, spin and momentum are
parallel and the photon is right circularly polarized. Similarly, one
can see that the other components are also circularly polarized.

The primitive experimental setup that serves to demonstrate the
elliptical polarization of the Fe 57 gamma rays emitted closely parallel to the field axis is

shown in Fig. 5-2. (Emission completely par-

allel is hard to achieve experimentally.)

Source and absorber consist
If the fields in the two

of iron metal and both are placed in solenoids.

solenoids are parallel, the absorption at the central peak, i.e., at
zero relative velocity between source and absorber, is very much
larger than that for antiparallel fields. The explanation is obvious.
At small angles with the field axis, the emitted and the absorbed photons are nearly circularly polarized. In parallel fields, the right circular components of the source have the same energy as the right
circular absorption levels, and the left circular emission components
have the same energy as the corresponding left circular absorption
levels and the absorption is large. Reversing the field, for instance,
at the source, changes right into left circular and vice versa. The
energies for equal polarization in source and absorber no longer are
the same, and the absorption at zero relative velocity is small.

SOLID-STATE PHYSICS
6-1

SURVEY

In Chapter 4 it was pointed out that a striking similarity exists between the histories of nuclear magnetic resonance and the Mossbauer
effect. Originally both effects belonged to nuclear physics, but the
solid-state applications soon dominated both fields. The reason is
clear: The number of nuclear properties that can be investigated is
limited, but the number of solid-state parameters that can be varied
and studied is very large. It seems at the present time as if most of

the future investigations involving the Mossbauer effect will be in

solid-state physics. In the present chapter a brief sketch of some of
A more detailed discussion of
recent work can be found in the "Proceedings of the Second Mossbauer Conference" (see Sec. 7-3).

the major applications will be given.

The quantities that can be measured in a Mossbauer experiment,
namely, the Lamb- Mossbauer factors, the line shape, the line splitting,
and the line shift, have been discussed in Chapter 3. The fact that these
quantities can be determined under a wide variety of conditions and
with a wide range of parameters makes the recoilless gamma-ray
emission and absorption such a powerful tool in solid-state physics.
The choice of parameters to be varied determines which solid-state
properties will be investigated. One can, first of all, embed the resonant nuclei in the source or in the absorber. The host can be of the
same chemical composition as the radioactive material, or it can be
different. The resonant nuclei can be interstitial or substitutional impurities; their concentration can be varied over wide ranges. The host
lattice can be well annealed or it can be strained. Its temperature can
be varied or the external pressure can be changed. External magnetic
or electric fields can be applied. The emitted or absorbed radiation
and its characteristics can be studied at various angles with respect
76

SOLID-STATE PHYSICS

77

The
Mossbauer effect can be measured in transmission or in scattering;

to internal or external fields or nonisotropic lattice properties.

one can observe gamma rays, conversion electrons, or X rays following internal conversion. Interference effects can be used. The time
dependence of various properties can be studied either by means of a
delay technique or by embedding isotopes with different excited-state
lifetimes into the same host lattice.
Four typical applications of the Mossbauer effect to solid-state
problems will be discussed in the next sections. These four, lattice
properties (Sec. 6-2), internal fields (Sec. 6-3), impurities and imperfections (Sec. 6-4), and low -temperature topics (Sec. 6-5), do not
exhaust all the possibilities. The Mossbauer effect, for instance, has
also been used to get information about atomic wave functions at the
nucleus (Reprint Walker 1961) and to determine the index of refraction of lucite (Reprint Grodzins 1961). These are but two examples of
investigations that are not contained in Sees. 6-2 to 6-5. Very likely
the Mossbauer effect will also be utilized to study surfaces, liquids,

and some problems in chemistry and biophysics.
The Mossbauer effect is the youngest of the nuclear guests in solidstate physics. It fits in well indeed with the older ones, complementing
them in some areas and allowing checks in others. Table 6-1 lists the
major nuclear tools in solid-state physics and indicates the areas of
information which they have in common with the Mossbauer effect.
Table 6-1 Nuclear Tools in Solid- State Physics

Topics in common with the

Mossbauer effect

Tool

Refs.

X-ray diffraction

Lattice dynamics

18, 27-31, 79

Neutron diffraction

Lattice dynamics

Magnetic properties

Reprint Lamb 1939
80-83

Internal fields

84-89

Nuclear magnetic
resonance

Atomic wave functions
at the nucleus

Angular correlation]

Internal fields

90-93

Oriented nuclei

Aftereffects of radioactive decays

94, 95

79

J.

Bouman in 'Encyclopedia of Physics," Springer, Berlin, 1957,
'

Vol. 32.
80
C. G. Shull and E. O. Wollan in F. Seitz and D. Turnbull (eds.),
"Solid State Physics," Academic, New York, 1956, Vol. 2, p. 138.
81
G. R. Ringo in "Encyclopedia of Physics," Springer, Berlin, 1957,
Vol. 32.
82
E. Amaldi in "Encyclopedia of Physics," Springer, Berlin, 1959,
Vol. 38/2.

THE M5SSBAUER EFFECT

78

6-2

LATTICE PROPERTIES

Boyle recently divided the Mossbauer experiments to determine
lattice properties into three classes: difficult and uninteresting, very

impossible. 96 Since even impossible experiments sometimes
succeed, a few of the applications of the Mossbauer effect to lattice
problems are sketched in the present section.
difficult,

6-21

The Lamb- Mossbauer Factor f

This factor, Eq. (49), can be determined by measuring the fraction
of

gamma rays emitted or absorbed without energy loss as a function

of the temperature T.

tion

From f(T) one finds the mean- square devia-

<X > by using Eq. (56). Further evaluation depends on the model
2

one selects to describe the solid. Usually one determines a Debye
with the help of Eqs. (52) and (54) (see also Ref 97).

temperature

.

83
L. S. Kothari and K. S. Singwi in F.Seitz and D. Turnbull (eds.),
"Solid State Physics," Academic, New York, 1959, Vol. 8, p. 109.
84
E. R.Andrew, "Nuclear Magnetic Resonance," Cambridge University Press, New York, 1955.
85
G.E.Pake in F.Seitz and D. Turnbull (eds.), "Solid State Physics,"
Academic, New York, 1956, Vol. 2, p. 1.
86
W. D. Knight in F. Seitz and D. Turnbull (eds.), "Solid State
Physics," Academic, New York, 1956, Vol. 2, p. 93.
87
M.H.Cohen and F.Reif in F.Seitz and D. Turnbull (eds.), "Solid
State Physics," Academic, New York, 1957, Vol. 5, p. 322.
88
T. P. Das and E. L. Hahn, "Nuclear Quadrupole Resonance Spectroscopy," Supplement 1 to "Solid State Physics," Academic, New
York, 1958.
89
A. Abragam, "The Principles of Nuclear Magnetism," Oxford
University Press, New York, 1961.
90
H. Frauenfelder in K. Siegbahn (ed.), "Beta- and Gamma-Ray
Spectroscopy," North- Holland, Amsterdam, 1955.
91
R. M. Steffen, Advances in Phys., 4, 293 (1955).
92
S. Devons and L. J. B. Goldfarb in "Encyclopedia of Physics,"
Springer, Berlin, 1957, Vol. 42.
93
E.Heer and T.B.Novey in F.Seitz and D. Turnbull (eds.), "Solid
State Physics," Academic, New York, 1959, Vol. 9, p. 199.
94
R. J. Blin-Stoyle, M. A. Grace, and H. Halban in K. Siegbahn (ed.),
"Beta- and Gamma-Ray Spectroscopy," North- Holland, Amsterdam,
1955.
95
R. J. Blin-Stoyle and M. A. Grace in "Encyclopedia of Physics,"
Springer, Berlin, 1957, Vol. 42.
96
A. J. F. Boyle in "Proceedings of the Second Mossbauer Conference," Paris, Sept. 13-16, 1961, A. Schoen and D. M. J. Compton(eds.),
Wiley, New York, tentative publication Spring 1962.

SOLID-STATE PHYSICS

79

Boyle et al. (Reprint 1961) have shown that one can also get information about anharmonic terms from f(T). The reader is referred to
their paper for a discussion of the procedure and of the approximations involved in the evaluation.

Singwi and Sjolander (Reprint 1960) pointed out that in an anisotropic solid, such as graphite, one should expect a dependence of f and
of the line width on the direction of emission. Corresponding calculations by Kagan (1961) corroborate this statement, and an anisotropic
behavior has actually been found for Fe 57 embedded in graphite. 98 99
Two more possible experiments should be mentioned here. It is of
interest to determine whether f(T) will follow the Debye behavior at
very low temperatures or whether deviations will occur. Investigations in molecular crystals should reveal how additional degrees of
'

freedom affect f(T).
6-22 The Debye- Waller Factor
This factor, F (k - k') can be found with the help of the recoilless
Rayleigh scattering (Sec. 5-7). A few words about the difference between the Lamb- Mossbauer factor f(k) and the Debye- Waller factor
F(k - k') are in order here (Reprint Tzara 1961, Lipkin 1961, Trammell 1962). Consider a process in which an incoming beam, neutrons
or photons, of momentum tlk, is scattered by a solid into a momentum
state nk'
If the scattering process is nonresonant
then the time delay (collision time, phase shift) between incoming and outgoing wave
is of the order of, or less than, v/d, where v is the beam velocity
and d the linear dimension of the scatterer. 100 This delay time is
much shorter than the characteristic lattice time -R/k0: An X-ray
wave front moves across an atom in a time of the order of 10" 18 sec,
whereas typical lattice vibration times are longer than 10" 14 sec. In
scattering of atomic X rays, the duration of the entire wave train is
15
of the order of 10"
sec or less and hence also short compared to the
lattice vibration time. In a crude way of speaking, the entire scatter,

.

,

97

W. Marshall in "Proceedings of the Second Mossbauer Conference," Paris, Sept. 13-16, 1961, A. Schoen and D.M.J. Compton(eds.),
Wiley, New York, tentative publication Spring 1962.
98
D. E. Nagle in "Proceedings of the Second Mossbauer Conference," Paris, Sept. 13-16, 1961, A. Schoen and D. M. J. Compton(eds.),
Wiley, New York, tentative publication Spring 1962.
99
H. Pollak, M. DeCoster,and S. Amelincks in "Proceedings of the
Second Mossbauer Conference," Paris, Sept. 13-16, 1961, A. Schoen and
D. M. J. Compton (eds .), Wiley, New York, tentative publication Spring
1962.
100

D. Bohm, "Quantum Theory," Prentice- Hall, Englewood Cliffs,

N.J., 1951, p. 261.

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

80

ing process occurs on atoms that move very little during the scatter-

ing process.

The entire momentum h(k - k') is transferred to the
The fraction of X rays

lattice during such a nonresonant collision.

scattered without energy loss is found by averaging over the various
positions of the scattering atom. This calculation leads to the DebyeWaller factor,

F(k- k') = exp -<[(k- k')-X] 2 >

(108)

where X is the coordinate vector of the cm. of the decaying nucleus
(Fig. 2-3). The fraction F of recoilless nonresonant scattering depends on the scattering angle 2cp; it increases with decreasing angle
<p, i.e., with decreasing momentum transfer ft(k - k'). Since the
scattering is elastic, |k - k'| = 2k sin </?, and Eq. (108) is thus identical with Eq. (54).

The nonresonant scattering (Rayleigh scattering) with nuclear

gamma rays from a resonant source is also described by Eq. (108).
Even though the duration of the wave train is long compared to the lattice vibration time, the time delay is short. At each instant of time

the conditions implied in Eq. (108) are fulfilled, and the averaging over
the motion of the scattering atoms again leads to Eq. (108). The intensity of the recoilless Rayleigh scattering thus measures the Debye-

Waller factor F(k- k').
The resonant scattering leads to a different expression. Here, the
time delay between incident and outgoing wave front is of the order of
r = "fi/r, i.e., of the order of the lifetime of the resonant state. 100 In

Mdssbauer scattering this lifetime is much longer than the lattice vibration times, and there is negligible correlation between the positions of absorption and subsequent reemission. The fraction f s of
gamma rays scattered without energy loss is then given by the product of two Lamb- Mdssbauer factors,
fs

6-23

= f(k)f(k')

(109)

Phonon Spectra

has repeatedly been suggested that a detailed measurement of
Mdssbauer effect, particularly the observation of the one phonon exchange, will yield valuable information about phonon spectra (Reprint Visscher 1960, Petzold 1961). Unfortunately such experiments are extremely difficult
since the energy range to be covered is of the order of 10"2 ev and
hence much wider than even very wide lines. Neutrons are much better suited for such investigations (Reprint Singwi 1960), except for
elements with very large capture cross sections, such as He 3
It

the energy spectrum of the gamma rays in the

.

SOLID-STATE PHYSICS

81

6-24 Diffusion
Diffusion should lead to a broadening of the emission and absorption lines close to the melting point (Reprint Singwi 1960).

It

is very

likely that such a broadening can be observed experimentally.

6-25 Lattice Specific Heats

These can be determined by the observation of the second-order
Doppler effect, as pointed out in Sec. 5-4, Eq. (88). The main problem is the unambiguous separation of the various temperaturedependent shifts.
6-26 Pressure Effects
Increasing the ambient pressure p on a sample will increase the

Lamb-Mossbauer factor f (Hanks 1961) and will shift the resonance
line

101

(Pound 1961).

To calculate the pressure dependence f(p) of the Lamb-Mossbauer
factor, it is easiest to assume that the Debye model (Sees. 2-2 and
2-52) applies so that f - f(e). Then one has
af/ap = (af/ae) (ae/av)(av/ap)

The dependence of the Debye temperature
given by the Griineisen relation 21
3 In 0/a In

(no)
on the volume

V= -y

(111)

Neglecting the volume dependence of the Griineisen constant
(Ill) can be written

de/dv= -ye/v

V is

:

.

y, Eq.

(112)

The volume V depends on the pressure p through the compressibility

3V/ap = -KV

(113)

For simplicity assume temperatures low enough so that Eq. (33)
f = exp(-3R/2k0). Then one finds with Eqs. (33) and (110) to

holds:

(113), after integration,
f(p) = f(p = 0)
101

exp [(3R/2k0) /cyp] = exp[-(3R/2k0)(l-/cyp)] (114)

R.V. Pound in "Proceedings of the Second Mossbauer Conference," Paris, Sept. 13-16, 1961, A. Schoen and D. M. J. Compton (eds.),
Wiley, New York, tentative publication Spring 1962.

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

82

The Griineisen constant y is of the order of 2 (Table 10.3 in Ref. 21),
k varies from about 3 x 10~ 7 atm" 1 for W
5
1
10"
to about 5 x
atm" for Cs. As pointed out by Hanks (1961), it
should thus be possible to observe the pressure dependence of f. It
should even be feasible to detect a pressure- induced recoilless emission or absorption in substances where f is too small to be seen at
normal pressures.
The second manifestation of a change of the ambient pressure,
namely, a shift of the Mossbauer line, is mainly due to two contributions. One is caused by a change with pressure of the electronic wave
functions at the nucleus; this term can be called the volume dependence of the isomeric shift (Sec. 4-4). The other contribution comes
from the volume dependence of the internal energy of the solid; this
term is analogous to the second-order Doppler shift (Sec. 5-4). One
interesting difference between the second-order Doppler shift and the
pressure shift appears: The former does not depend on the zero-point
energy and thus goes to zero at low temperatures. The pressure shift,
however, does depend on the zero-point energy and thus remains finite
even at very low temperatures.
The dependence of the Lamb- Mossbauer factor f on pressure has
not yet been observed experimentally. The pressure shift, however,
has been investigated by Pound 101 who found a relative shift
-1
(l/E)(dE/3p) = -2.6 x 10" 18 atm for Fe 57 in good agreement with his
theoretical estimates (Pound 1961).
the volume compressibility

,

6-3

INTERNAL FIELDS

An inspection of the bibliography (Chapter 7) shows that the largest
number of publications is devoted to the application of the Mossbauer
These investigations have already greatly enhanced the knowledge of internal fields and it is very
likely that the fast flow of information will continue. Despite the importance of internal field studies, the present section is short. Excellent surveys already exist, for instance in the notes by Abragam (see
Sec. 7-1) and in the paper by Wertheim (Reprint 1961). Moreover,
the basic ideas underlying the study of internal fields have already
been outlined in the discussion of the nuclear moments in Sec. 4-3.
The solid-state physicist's view of Sec. 4-3 is obvious: Instead of
measuring nuclear g factors and nuclear quadrupole moments, his
effect to the study of internal fields.

interest is directed to the extranuclear fields responsible for the in-

To determine these extranuclear fields, one requires a
knowledge of the magnitude and sign of the nuclear moments. The
ground-state moments can usually be determined by conventional techniques. When the ground-state moments are known, the excited-state
properties can usually be inferred from the Mossbauer pattern. Once
the nuclear moments are known, the dependence of the internal fields
teractions.

SOLID-STATE PHYSICS

83

on various parameters, such as crystal structure, temperature, pressure, and external fields, can be studied.
In Sec. 6 of the reprints a number of representative papers are
collected. These give a fair survey of the problems that have already
been examined and the tools used in measuring and interpreting spectra. All these papers use either Fe 57 or Sn 119 as the probe. These
two nuclides permit a tremendous amount of research, and their use
has already led to a deeper understanding of the magnetic properties
of solids. The field at the iron nucleus in iron metal constitutes a
good example. The first experiments (Reprint Hanna 1960, Sec. 4 of
the reprints) yielded a magnitude of the magnetic field |H| = 3.3xl0 5
oersteds, which was in good agreement with the theoretical predictions. Then the Argonne group went one step farther and determined
also the sign of H (Reprint Hanna 1960, Sec. 6 of the reprints). They
found the internal field to be opposite to the externally applied field,
in direct contradiction to theoretical prediction. Since then theoretical
physicists have obtained agreement with experimental facts. 102
57
In addition to studies with Fe
and Sn 119 a considerable amount of
work has been performed with rare earth nuclides, and with nuclides
197
like Au
embedded in ferromagnetic materials (see the bibliography).
These areas promise to be as interesting and rewarding as the work
discussed above.
Investigations of quadrupole effects have been performed also (Reprint Kistner 1960, Reprint DeBenedetti 1961, see also the bibliography). Quadrupole splittings have been found in many substances and a
beginning has been made to correlate these splittings with the chemical and physical state of the solid. The interpretation is difficult when
magnetic and quadrupole interactions are simultaneously present. The
splitting then depends on the orientation of the magnetic field with respect to the electric field gradient (e.g., Wertheim 1961a), and it is
advantageous to work with single crystals.
,

6-4 IMPURITIES

AND IMPERFECTIONS

Every Mossbauer experiment involves nonideal lattices. Sadly,
little work has

been done so far to systematically investigate the influence of deviations from an ideal lattice on recoilless emission or
absorption. A number of publications deal with internal fields at impurity atoms but this aspect will not be discussed.
6-41

Impurities

Impurities actually form a special class of imperfections, but they
are singled out here because each radioactive atom that emits a

102

R. E. Watson and A. J. Freeman, Phys. Rev., 123, 2027 (1961).

THE MdSSBAUER EFFECT

84

gamma ray can be considered an impurity atom. These radioactive
atoms can be different from the normal lattice in a number of properties, such as mass, binding, or radius; they can also be in interstitial
positions.

The crude models that have been considered so far (Shapiro 1961,
Reprint Maleev 1961, Visscher 1962) predict some features which can
be checked by experiment. Two of these predictions are particularly
simple to describe, namely, the influence of the mass
of the impurity atom and the existence of localized oscillations. Assume that
the ideal lattice consists of atoms with a mass m and that the radioactive impurity atom possesses a mass M. The predominant part of
the mean-square deviatibn <X 2 > comes from frequencies far below
the Debye frequency o>d because the contribution of each individual
mode, <Xi>, is proportional to 1/wi. The low-frequency modes
have wavelengths long compared to the lattice spacing, and the neighboring atoms move predominantly in the same direction. The displacement of the impurity atom with respect to its neighbors is then small
compared to its displacement X from the equilibrium position. The
mean- square deviation <X 2 > of the impurity atom is in a first approximation the same as that of the normal lattice atoms. In the
Debye approximation, the Lamb-Mossbauer factor f is thus given by
Eq. (53), with R = E 2/2mc 2 If this description is correct, then the
fraction f should be determined by the mass m of the atoms in the
host lattice, and not by the mass
of the impurity atom. This conclusion has, however, not yet been substantiated by experiments.
An impurity atom in an ideal lattice produces localized oscillations,
i.e., oscillations that are large in its immediate vicinity and damp out
quickly with increasing distance from it. 103 These localized oscillations should give rise to individual discrete peaks in the recoil spectrum, separated from the unshifted line by energies of the order of
0.01 ev (Reprint Maleev 1961, Visscher 1962).

M

.

M

6-42 Imperfections

A second type of problem occurs when the host lattice is not ideal,
which is the situation normally encountered in experiments. Various
types of imperfections can then influence the Mossbauer effect. Even
though little work has been done on this aspect, there is no doubt that
experiments involving imperfections will play an increasingly larger
role in future research.

6-5

LOW TEMPERATURES

There exist some problems which are inherently dependent on tern103

A. A. Maradudin, P. Mazur, E. W. Montroll, and G. H. Weiss,
Revs. Modern Physics, 30, 175 (1958).

SOLID-STATE PHYSICS

85

peratures close to, or below, the helium boiling point and which can
be investigated with the Mossbauer effect. Two of these will be
sketched here.
6-51 Nuclear Orientation
In conventional nuclear orientation experiments,

94 ' 95

the degree of

orientation must be deduced from angular distributions of nuclear radiations. With the Mossbauer effect, this property can be determined
more directly, at least in favorable cases. The ease and accuracy with
which such measurements can be performed make it likely that the
Mossbauer effect can be used as a thermometer at very low tempera-

tures (Taylor 1962).
As a simple example, consider a single line Co 57 —* Fe 57 source and
an Fe 57 absorber that possesses a strong internal field H. The ground
state of the Fe 57 nuclei in the absorber is split into two magnetic sublevels, separated in energy by A = gfi H [Eq. (66)]. At a temperature T,
the ratio of the equilibrium populations of these two sublevels is

N(+l/2)/N(-l/2) = exp (-A/kT) = exp (-g/i H/kT)

(115)

The ratio of symmetric absorption components, for instance,
(l/2-~3/2)/(-l/2^ -3/2), is also given by (115). At very low temperatures, where A^>kT, the component originating from the higher sublevel is absent. In general, both components will be present; their intensity ratio is a direct measure for the Boltzmann factor (115) and
hence yields the temperature T if g and H are known.
An Fe 57 absorber works as a thermometer only at very low temperatures because the magnetic moment of the Fe 57 ground state is
very small. The splitting in iron metal corresponds to a temperature
T* = A/k = 2.2 x 10~ 3 °K; appreciable effects hence occur only in the
millidegree range. The Los Alamos group performed an experiment
at higher temperatures by using the much larger magnetic moment of
the parent nucleus Co 57 (Reprint Dash 1961).
6-52 Superconductivity

The application of the Mossbauer effect to superconductivity is
tempting at first glance because the energy changes detectable in the
Mossbauer effect and the energy change per atom in superconducting
transitions are of the same order of magnitude. A more detailed discussion shows, however, that one should not expect sizeable effects,
because very few electrons participate in a superconducting transition.
Careful experiments by the Los Alamos group (Craig 1960, 1961) have
indeed failed to find an influence of a superconducting transition on
the Mossbauer effect. Recent experiments (Wiedemann 1961) which indicate a very small change in f, are not conclusive.

BIBLIOGRAPHY ON THE

MOSSBAUER EFFECT
Compiled by E. Liischer, D. Pipkorn, and M. Runkel
Physics Department, University of Illinois
7-1

REVIEW ARTICLES

A. Abragam, L'effet Mossbauer et ses applications a Petude des
champs internes (unpublished lecture notes).
G. N. Belozerskii and Yu. A. Nemilov, The resonance dispersion of
y-rays in crystals, Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk, 72, 433 (1960) (in Russian);
Soviet Physics Uspekhi, 3, 813 (1961) (in English).
A. J. F. Boyle and H. E. Hall, Mossbauer effect, Repts. Progr. in

Phys. (to be published in 1962).

W. E. Burcham, Nuclear resonant scattering without recoil (Mossbauer effect), Sci. Progr., 48, 630 (1960).
E. Cotton, Emission et absorption de rayonnement gamma sans recul
du noyau emetteur emprisonne dans un reseau cristallin (Effet
Mossbauer), J. phys. radium, 21, 285 (1960).
P.P. Craig, Experimental aspects and applications of the Mossbauer
effect, in G. M. Graham and A. C. Hollis -Halle tt (eds.), "Proceedings of the Vllth International Conference on Low Temperature Physics," University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 1961,
S.

pp. 22-35.
DeBenedetti, The Mossbauer effect, Sci. American, 202, 72 (1960).

arranged (a) alphabetically by
by added joint authors, (c) alphabetically by title. In
cases where two or more papers by the same authors appeared in
the same year, the second paper (alphabetically by title) is desig* Entries in this bibliography are

author,

nated

a,

(b)

the third b, etc.

86

-

BIBLIOGRAPHY

87

W. E. Kock, The Mossbauer radiation, Science, 131, 1588 (1960).
Y. Krause and G. Liiders, Kernresonanzabsorption mit eingefrorenem Ruckstoss, Naturwissenschaften, 47, 532 (1960).
H. Lustig, The Mossbauer effect, Am. J. Phys., 29, 1 (1961).
C. Moller, The Mossbauer effect, pp. 73-79 of Selected Problems
in General Relativity, "Brandeis University 1960 Summer Institute in Theoretical Physics Lecture Notes," distributed by
W. A. Benjamin, Inc., New York.
P. B. Moon, Developments in gamma-ray optics, Nature, 185, 427
I.

(1960).

R. L. Mossbauer, Recoilless resonance absorption of gamma quanta
in solids, Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk, 72, 658 (1960) (in Russian); Soviet

Physics Uspekhi, 3, 866 (1961) (in English).
R. V. Pound, On the weight of photons, Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk, 72, 673
(1960) (in Russian); Soviet Physics Uspekhi, 3, 875 (1961) (in
English).
F. L. Shapiro, "Elementary Theory of the Mossbauer Effect," Press
of Phys. Inst., Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 1960 (in Russian).
F. L. Shapiro, The Mossbauer effect, Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk, 72, 685
(1960) (in Russian); Soviet Physics Uspekhi, 3, 881 (1961) (in
English); Fortschr. Physik, 9, 329 (1961) (in German).
G. K. Wertheim, The Mossbauer effect: a tool for science,
Nucleonics, 19, No. 1, 52 (1961).
V. Weisskopf, The Mossbauer effect, in W. E. Brittin and B. W.
Downs (eds.), "Lectures in Theoretical Physics," vol. 3, Interscience, New York, 1961, pp. 70-80.

RESEARCH PAPERS

7-2

A. Abragam, Effect of ultrasonics on the emission and absorption
of y radiation without recoil, Compt. rend., 250, 4334 (1960).
A. Abragam and F. Boutron, Moment quadrupolaire du premier etat
nucleaire excite du fer 57, Compt. rend., 252, 2404 (1961).
C. Alff and G. K. Wertheim, Hyperfine structure of Fe 57 in yttrium
iron garnet from the Mossbauer effect, Phys. Rev., 122, 1414
(1961).
S.

Aksenov, V. P. Alfimenkov, V. I. Lushchikov, Yu. M. Ostanevich,
and Yen Wu-Kuang, Observation of resonance absorption of gamma rays in Zn 67 Zhur. Eksp. i Teoret. Fiz., 40,
88 (1961) (in Russian); Soviet Physics JETP, 13, 62 (1961) (in

I.

F. L. Shapiro,

,

English).

Ya. Bar it, M. I. Podgoretzkii, and F. L. Shapiro, Several possible
applications for the resonant scattering of y-rays, Zhur. Eksp. i
Teoret. Fiz., 38, 301 (1960) (in Russian); Soviet Physics JETP, 11,
218 (1960) (in English).
R. Barloutaud, E. Cotton, J. L. Picou, and J. Quidort, Absorption
I.

THE MftSSBAUER EFFECT

88

resonnante sans recul dy rayonnement y de 23.8 de Sn 119 , Compt.
rend., 250, 319 (1960).
R. Barloutaud, J. L. Picou, and C. Tzara, Diffusion resonnante du

rayonnement y de 23.8 kev de Sn 119 emis sans recul, Compt. rend.,
250, 2705 (1960a).
R. Bauminger, S. G. Cohen, A. Marinov, and S. Ofer, Hyperfine interactions in the ground state and first excited state of Dy161 in dysprosium iron garnet, Phys. Rev. Letters, 6, 467 (1961).
R. Bauminger, S. G. Cohen, A. Marinov, and S. Ofer, Study of the internal fields acting on iron-nuclei in iron garnet using the recoil
free absorption in Fe 57 of the 14.4 kev gamma radiation from
Fe 57m Phys. Rev., 122, 743 (1961a).
R. Bauminger, S. G. Cohen, A. Marinov, S. Ofer, and E. Segal, Study
of the low temperature transitions in magnetite and the internal
fields acting on iron nuclei in some spinel ferrites, using Mossbauer absorption, Phys. Rev., 122, 1447 (1961b).
P. J. Black and P. B. Moon, Resonant scattering of the 14 kev Fe 57
y-ray and its interference with Rayleigh scattering, Nature, 188,
481 (1960).
A. J. F. Boyle, D. St. P. Bunbury, and C. Edwards, The isomer shift
in Sn 119 and the quadrupole moment of the first excited state,
Proc. Phys. Soc. (London) (to be published).
A. J. F. Boyle, D. St. P. Bunbury, and C. Edwards, The nuclear
Zeeman effect and quadrupole splitting in Sn 119 Proc. Phys. Soc.
(London), 77, 1062 (1961b).
A. J. F. Boyle, D. St. P. Bunbury, and C. Edwards, Polarization of
the conduction electrons in the ferromagnetic metals, Phys. Rev.
Letters, 5, 553 (1960).
A. J. F. Boyle, D. St. P. Bunbury, C. Edwards, and H. E. Hall,
A chemical red shift of the recoilless y-emission of Sn 119m Proc.
Phys. Soc. (London), 76, 165 (1960a).
A. J. F. Boyle, D. St. P. Bunbury, C. Edwards, and H. E. Hall, The
Mossbauer effect in tin from 120 °K to the melting point, Proc.
,

,

,

Phys. Soc. (London), 77, 129 (1961a).
V. A. Bryukhanov, N. N. Delyagin, B. Zhvenglinskii, and V. S.
Shpinel, The energy shifts of y -transitions observed in resonance
absorption of gamma quanta in crystals, Zhur. Eksp. i Teoret.
Fiz., 40, 713 (1961) (in Russian); Soviet Physics JETP, 13, 499
(1961) (in English).
A. Bussiere de Nercy, M. Langevin, and M. Spighel, Absorption
resonnante du rayonnement y de Pholmium 166 et de Posmium
193 sans recul de noyau, Compt. rend., 250, 1031 (1960).
A. Bussiere de Nercy, M. Langevin, and M. Spighel, Absorption
resonnante du rayonnement y sans recul du noyau de Ho 166 et Os 193
J. phys. radium, 21, 288 (1960a).
D. C. Champeney and P. B. Moon, Absence of Doppler shift for y-ray

,

BIBLIOGRAPHY

89

source and detector on same circular orbit, Proc. Phys. Soc.
(London), 77, 350 (1961).
G. Cocconi and E. E. Salpeter, Upper limit for the anisotropy of inertia from the Mossbauer effect, Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 176 (1960).
M. Cordey-Hayes, N. A. Dyson, and P. B. Moon, Width and intensity
57
Proc. Phys. Soc. (London), 75,
of the Mossbauer line in Fe
810 (1960).
P. P. Craig, J. G. Dash, A. D. McGuire, D. E. Nagle, and R. R.
Reiswig, Nuclear resonance absorption of gamma rays in Ir 191
Phys. Rev. Letters, 3, 221 (1959).
P. P. Craig, D. E. Nagle, and D. R. F. Cochran, Zeeman effect in
the recoilless y-ray resonance of Zn67 Phys. Rev. Letters, 4,
,

,

,

561 (1960).
P. P. Craig, D. E. Nagle, and R. D. Reiswig, Resonant absorption of
gamma radiation in superconductors, Phys. and Chem. Solids, 17,
168 (1960a).
P.P. Craig, D. Nagle, and R. D. Taylor, Mossbauer effect in superconducting indium, Nuovo cimento, 22, 402 (1961).
T. E. Cranshaw, J. P. Schiffer, and A. B. Whitehead, Measurement
of the gravitational red shift using the Mossbauer effect in Fe 57
Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 163 (1960).
J. G. Dash, R. D. Taylor, P. P. Craig, D. E. Nagle, D. R. F. Cochran,
and W. E. Keller, Mossbauer effect in Fe 57 at very low temperature, Phys. Rev. Letters, 5, 152 (1960).
J. G. Dash, R. D. Taylor, D.E. Nagle, P.P.Craig, and W. M. Visscher,
Polarization of Co 57 in Fe metal, Phys. Rev., 122, 1116 (1961).
S. DeBenedetti, G. Lang, and R. Ingalls, Electric quadrupole splitting and the nuclear volume effect in the ions of Fe 57 Phys. Rev.
Letters, 6, 60 (1961).
N. N. Delyagin, V. S. Shpinel, V. A. Bryukhanov, and B. Zhvenglinskii,
Hyperfine structure of y-rays caused by quadrupole interaction in
a crystal lattice, Zhru. Eksp. i Teoret. Fiz., 39, 220 (1960) (in
Russian); Soviet Physics JETP, 12, 159 (1961) (in English).
N. N. Delyagin, V. S. Shpinel, V. A. Bryukhanov, and B. Zhvenglinskii,
Nuclear Zeeman-effect in Sn 119 Zhur. Eksp. i Teoret. Fiz., 39,
894 (1960a) (in Russian); Soviet Physics JETP, 12, 619 (1961) (in
English).
G. DePasquali, H. Frauenfelder, S. Margulies, and R. N. Peacock,
Nuclear resonance absorption and nuclear Zeeman effect in Fe 57
Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 71 (1960).
I. P. Dziub and A. F. Lubchenko, On the theory of the Mossbauer effect, Doklady Akad. Nauk SSSR, 136, 66 (1961) (in Russian); Phys.
Express, 3, No. 9, 34 (1961) (in English); Soviet Physics Doklady,
6, 33 (1961) (in English).
P. A. Flinn and S. L. Ruby, Local magnetic fields in Fe-Al alloys,
Phys. Rev., 124, 34 (1961).
,

,

,

,

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

90

H. Frauenfelder, D. R. F. Cochran, D. E. Nagle, and R. D. Taylor,
Internal conversion from resonance absorption, Nuovo cimento,
19, 183 (1961).
H. Frauenfelder, D. E. Nagle, R. D. Taylor, D. R. F. Cochran, and
W. M. Visscher, Elliptical polarization of Fe 57 gamma rays (to
be published).
J. Gastebois and J. Quidort, Mise en evidence du moment quadrupolaire du noyau de fer 57, Compt. rend, 253, 1257 (1961).
A. Gelberg, Winkelverteilung und zirkulare Polarisation der
y-Strahlung im Mossbauereffekt, Inst, de Fiz. Atomica MaguerleBucuresti Rept. 16.
L. Grodzins and F. Genovese, Experimental investigation of parity
conservation in the 14.4 kev gamma transition of Fe 57 Phys. Rev.,
121, 228 (1961).
L. Grodzins and A. Phillips, Measurement of the refractive index of
lucite by recoilless resonance absorption, Phys. Rev., 124, 774
,

(1961a).

M. N. Hack and M. Hamermesh, Effect of radiofrequency resonance
on the natural line form, Nuovo cimento, 19, 546 (1961).
R. V. Hanks, Pressure dependence of the Mossbauer effect, Phys.
Rev., 124, 1319 (1961).
Hanna, J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J. Perlow, R. S. Preston,
and D. H. Vincent, Observation on the Mossbauer effect in Fe 57
Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 28 (1960).
S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J. Perlow, R. S. Preston,
and D. H. Vincent, Polarized spectra and hyperfine structure in
Fe 57 Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 177 (1960a).
S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, G. J. Perlow, R. S. Preston, and D. H. Vincent, Direction of the effective magnetic field at the nucleus in
ferromagnetic iron, Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 513 (1960b).
S. S. Hanna, L. Meyer-Schutzmeister, R. S. Preston, and D. H. Vincent, Nuclear Zeeman effect in Sn 119 Phys. Rev., 120, 2211
(1960c).
S. M. Harris, Quantum mechanical calculation of Mossbauer transmission, Phys. Rev., 124, 1178 (1961).
H. J. Hay, J. P. Schiffer, T. E. Cranshaw, and P. A. Egelstaff,
Measurement of the red shift in an accelerated system using the
Mossbauer effect in Fe 57 Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 165 (1960).
B. Hoffman, Noon-midnight red shift, Phys. Rev., 121, 337 (1960).
R. E. Holland, F. J. Lynch, G. J. Perlow, and S. S. Hanna, Time
spectra of filtered resonance radiation of Fe 57 Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 181 (1960).
S. Jha, R. K. Gupta, H. G. Devare, G. C. Pramila, and R. Srinivasa
Raghavan, Recoilless emission and absorption of 26 kev gammaS. S.

,

,

,

,

,

ray of Dy 161 Nuovo cimento, 19, 682 (1961).
C. E. Johnson, M. S. Ridout, T. E. Cranshaw, and P. E. Madsen,
,

BIBLIOGRAPHY

91

Hyperfine field and atomic moment of Fe in ferromagnetic alloys,
Phys. Rev. Letters, 6, 450 (1961).
B. D. Josephson, Temperature dependent shift of y-rays emitted by
a solid, Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 341 (1960).
Yu. Kagan, Anisotropy of the Mossbauer effect, Doklady Akad. Nauk
SSSR, 140, 794 (1961).
Yu. Kagan, Determination of the frequency spectrum of phonons in
crystals, Zhur. Eksp. i Teoret. Fiz., 40, 312 (1961) (in Russian);
Soviet Physics JETP, 13, 211 (1961a) (in English).
M. Kalvius, P. Kienle, K. Bockmann, and H. Eicher, Hyperfeinstrukturaufspal$ung von riickstossfreien y-Linien: II. Das 8,42
kev Niveau in Tm 169 Z. Physik, 163, 87 (1961).
E. Kankeleit, Untersuchung von Konversions-Elektronen beim
Mossbauereffekt am Wolfram 182 mit einem magnetischen
Spektrometer, Z. Physik, 164, 442 (1961).
A. Kastler, Sur la possibilite de mettre en evidence la coherence
de phase dans la diffusion de resonance des rayons y par des
noyaux atomiques, Compt. rend., 250, 509 (1960).
M. V. Kazarnovskii, Theory of resonant interaction of y-ray with
crystals, Zhur. Eksp. i Teoret. Fiz., 38, 1652 (I960) (in Russian);
Soviet Physics JETP, 11, 1191 (1960) (in English).
W. H. Kelly, V. J. Folen, M. Hass, W. N. Schreiner, and G. G.
Beard, Magnetic field at the nucleus in spinel-type crystals,
Phys. Rev., 124, 80 (1961).
O. C. Kistner and A. W. Sunyar, Evidence for quadrupole interaction
of Fe 57m and influence of chemical binding on nuclear gamma-ray
energy, Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 412 (1960).
0. C. Kistner, A. W. Sunyar, and J. B. Swan, Hyperfine structure of
the 24 kev transitions in Sn 119 Phys. Rev. 123, 179 (1961).
1. Y. Krause and G. Liiders, Experimentelle Priifung der Relativitatstheorie mit Kernresonanzabsorption, Naturwissenschaften, 48, 34
,

,

(1961).

M. A. Krivoglaz, Effect of diffusion on the scattering of neutrons and
photons by crystal imperfections, and on the Mossbauer effect,
Zhur. Eksp. i Teoret. Fiz., 40, 1812 (1961) (in Russian); Soviet
Physics JETP, 13, 1273 (1961) (in English).
W. E. Lamb, Jr., Possible use of highly monochromatic gamma rays
for microwave spectroscopy, in C. H. Townes (ed.), "Quantum
Electronics, a Symposium," Columbia University Press, New
York, 1960, p. 588.
L. L. Lee, L. Meyer-Schiitzmeister, J. P. Schiffer, and D. Vincent,
Nuclear resonance absorption of gamma rays at low temperatures,
Phys. Rev. Letters, 3, 223 (1959).
H. J. Lipkin, The Debye -Waller factor in Mossbauer interference experiments, Phys. Rev., 123, 62 (1961).

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

92

H.J. Lipkin, Some simple features of the Mossbauer effect, Ann.
Phys., 9, 332 (1960).
H. J. Lipkin, Some simple features of the Mossbauer effect, II, Ann.
Phys. (in press).
W. Low, The effect of relaxation phenomena on Mossbauer experiments, in G.. M. Graham and A. C. Hollis-Hallett (eds.), "Proceedings of the Vllth International Conference on Low Temperature
Physics, " University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 1961, pp. 20-22.
F. J. Lynch, R. E. Holland, and M. Hamermesh, Time dependence of
resonantly filtered gamma rays from Fe 57 Phys. Rev., 120, 513
,

(1960).

Lyubimov and A. I. Alikhanov, Influence of magnetic fields on
resonance absorption of gamma rays, Zhur. Eksp. i Teoret. Fiz.,
38, 1912 (1960) (in Russian); Soviet Physics JETP, 11, 1375 (1960)
(in English); Izvest. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 24, 1076 (1960) (in Russian);
Bull. acad. sci. URSS, 24, 1084 (in English).
K. J. Major, Recoil-free resonant and nonresonant scattering from
Fe 57 (to be published).
S. V. Maleev, On the use of the Mossbauer effect for studying localized oscillations of atoms in solids, Zhur. Eksp. i Teoret. Fiz.,
39, 891 (1960) (in Russian); Soviet Physics JETP, 12, 617 (1961)
V. A.

(in English).

Margulies, The Mossbauer effect in iron-57 (unpublished thesis,
Univ. Illinois, 1962) [Tech. Rept. 28, on Nonr 1834(05), Physics
Dept., Univ. Illinois (October 1961)].
S. Margulies and J. R. Ehrman, Transmission and line broadening of
resonance radiation incident on a resonance absorber, Nuclear
S.

Instr., 12, 131 (1961a).

Luise Meyer -Schiitzmeister, R. S. Preston, and S. S. Hanna, Internal
magnetic fields in manganese-tin alloys, Phys. Rev., 122, 1717
(1961).

K. P. Mitrofanov and V. S. Shpinel, Resonance absorption of the
23.8 kev y-ray of Sn 119 observed by means of internally converted
electrons, Zhur. Eksp. i Teoret. Fiz., 40, 983 (1961) (in Russian);
Soviet Physics JETP, 13, 686 (1961) (in English).
P. B. Moon, Interference between Rayleigh and nuclear resonant
scattering of gamma rays, Proc. Royal Soc. (London), A263, 309
(1961).

M. Morita, Possible parity and time -reversal experiments using
the Mossbauer effect, Phys. Rev., 122, 1525 (1961).
R. L. Mossbauer, Kernresonanzfluoreszenz von Gammastrahlung in
Ir 191 Z. Physik, 151, 124 (1958).
R. L. Mossbauer, Kernresonanzabsorption von Gammastrahlung in
Ir 191 Naturwissenschaften, 45, 538 (1958a).
R. L. Mossbauer, Kernresonanzabsorption von Gammastrahlung in
,

,

Ir 191

,

Z. Naturforsch., 14a, 211 (1959).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

93

R. L. Mossbauer, F. W. Stanek, and W. H. Wiedemann, Hyperfeinstrukturaufspaltung von ruckstossfreien y-Linien: I. Das
166
Z. Physik, 161, 388 (1961).
80,6 kev-Niveau in Er
R. L. Mossbauer and W. H. Wiedemann, Kernresonanz absorption
nicht Dopplerverbreiterter Gammastrahlung in Re 187 Z. Physik,
159, 33 (1960).
D. E. Nagle, P. P. Craig, P. Barrett, R. D. Taylor, and D. R. F.
Cochran, Internal fields at low temperatures in CoPd alloys,
Phys. Rev. (to be published).
D. Nagle, P.P. Craig, J. G. Dash, and R. R. Reiswig, Nuclear resonance fluorescence in Au 197 Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 237 (1960).
D. E. Nagle, P.P. Craig, and W. E. Keller, Ultra high resolution
y-ray resonance in Zn67 Nature, 186, 707 (1960a).
D. E. Nagle, H. Frauenf elder, R. D. Taylor, D. R. F. Cochran, and
B. T. Matthias, Temperature dependence of the internal field in
ferromagnets, Phys. Rev. Letters, 5, 364 (1960b).
61
F. E. Obenshain and H. H. F. Wegener, Mossbauer effect with Ni
Phys. Rev., 121, 1344 (1961).
S. Ofer, P. Avivi, R. Bauminger, J. Marinov, and S. G. Cohen, Nuclear resonance absorption in Dy 161 situated in Dy2 3 and dysprosium iron garnet, Phys. Rev., 120, 406 (1960).
G. J. Perlow, S. S. Hanna, M. Hamermesh, C. Littlejohn, D. H.
Vincent, R. S. Preston, and J. Heberle, Polarization of nuclear
resonance radiation in ferromagnetic Fe 57 Phys. Rev. Letters,
4, 74 (1960).
J. Petzold, Einige Bermerkungen zur Theorie des MossbauerEffektes, Z. Physik, 163, 71 (1961).
,,
Sitzber. Heidelberg
J. Petzold, "Theorie des M6ssbauer-Effektes,
Akad. der Wissen. (Springer Verlag, Heidelberg, 1961a).
J. L Picou, J. Quidort, R. Barloutaud, and E. Cotton, Absorption
resonnante des y sans recul dans la des integration du premier etat
excite de Sn 119 (to be published).
M. I. Podgoretskii and I. I. Roizen, Radiation of a nucleus in the
presence of unexcited nuclei of the same type, Zhur. Eksp. i
Teoret. Fiz., 39, 1473 (1960) (in Russian); Soviet Physics JETP
12, 1023 (1960) (in English); Physics Express, 3, No. 7, 22 (1961)
,

,

,

,

,

,

(in English).

M. I. Podgoretskii and A. V. Stepanov, The Doppler width of emission
and absorption lines, Zhur. Eksp. i Teoret. Fiz., 40, 561 (1961)
(in Russian); Soviet Physics JETP, 13, 393 (1961) (in English).
R. V. Pound, G. B. Benedek, and R. Drever, Effect of hydrostatic
compression on the energy of the 14.4 kev gamma ray from Fe 57
in iron, Phys. Rev. Letters, 7, 405 (1961).
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Apparent weight of photons, Phys.
Rev. Letters, 4, 337 (1960).
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Attempts to detect resonance scat-

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

94

tering in Zn67 the effect of zero point vibrations, Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 397 (1960a).
;

R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Gravitational red- shift in nuclear
resonance, Phys. Rev. Letters, 3, 439 (1959).
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Resonant absorption of the 14.4 kev
y-ray from 0.10 jiisec Fe 57 Phys. Rev. Letters, 3, 554 (1959a).
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Variation with temperature of the
energy of recoil-free y-rays from solids, Phys. Rev. Letters, 4,
,

274 (1960).
R. S. Raghavan, On the possibility of a new phase determining method
applying the Mossbauer effect (to be published).
S. L. Ruby and D. I. Bolef, Acoustically modulated y-rays from Fe 57
Phys. Rev. Letters, 5, 5 (1960).
S. L. Ruby, L. M. Epstein, and K. H. Sun, Mossbauer effect in ferrocyanide, Rev. Sci. Instr., 31, 580 (1960).
S. L. Ruby and G. Shirane, Magnetic anomaly in FeTi0 3 -a! Fe 2 O s system by Mossbauer effect, Phys. Rev., 123, 1239 (1961).
M. Ruderfer, First order terrestrial ether drift experiment using
the Mossbauer radiation, Phys. Rev. Letters, 5, 191 (1960);
correction: Phys. Rev. Letters, 7, 361 (1961).
J. P. Schiffer and W. Marshall, Recoilless resonance absorption of
gamma rays in Fe 57 Phys. Rev. Letters, 3, 556 (1959).
C. W. Sherwin, H. Frauenfelder, E. L. Garwin, E. Luscher, S.
Margulies, and R. N. Peacock, A search for the anisotropy of
inertia using the Mossbauer effect in Fe 57 Phys. Rev. Letters,
4, 399 (1960).
C. W. Sherwin, Some recent experimental tests of the "clock paradox," Phys. Rev., 120, 17 (1960a).
G. Shirane, D. E. Cox, and S. L. Ruby, Mossbauer study of isomer
shift, quadrupole interaction, and hyperfine field in several oxides
containing Fe 57 Phys. Rev. (to be published).
D. A. Shirley, Interpretation of the isomeric chemical shifts in Au 197
Phys. Rev., 124, 354 (1961).
D. A. Shirley, M. Kaplan, and P. Axel, Recoil-free resonant absorption in Au 197 Phys. Rev., 123, 816 (1961a).
V. H. Shpinel, V. A. Bryukhanov, and N. N. Delyagin, Effect of temperature on the hyperfine structure of gamma radiation, Zhur.
Eksp. i Teoret. Fiz., 40, 1525 (1961) (in Russian).
K. S. Singwi and A. Sjolander, Resonance absorption of nuclear y-rays
and the dynamics of atomic motions, Phys. Rev., 120, 2211 (1960).
V. V. Sklyarevskii, B. N. Samoilov, and E. P. Stepanov, Temperature
dependence of the hyperfine splitting of dysprosium levels in paramagnetic dysprosium oxide, Zhur. Eksp. i Teoret. Fiz., 40, 1875
(1961) (in Russian).
H. S. Snyder and G. C. Wick, Broadening of the Mossbauer line, Phys.
Rev., 120, 128 (1960).
,

,

,

,

,

,

BIBLIOGRAPHY

95

Solomon, Effet Mossbauer dans la pyrite et la marcassite, Compt.
rend., 250, 3828 (1960).
I. Solomon, Mesure par effet Mossbauer de champs locaux dans
divers composes du fer, Compt. rend., 251, 2675 (1960).
R. D. Taylor, A low temperature thermometer utilizing the Mossbauer
effect, in C. M. Herzfeld (ed.), ''Temperature, Its Measurement
and Control in Science and Industry," Reinhold, New York, 1962.
G. T. Trammel, Elastic scattering at resonance from bound nuclei
(to be published).
P.-K. Tseng, N. Shikazono, H. Takehoshi, and T. Shoji, Temperature
dependence of nuclear resonance absorption line width in Dy 161
J. Phys. Soc. Japan, 16, 1790 (1961).
C. Tzara, Diffusion des photons sur les atomes et les noyaux dans
les cristaux, J. phys. radium, 22, 303 (1961).
C. Tzara, Sur l'excitation resonnante deniveaux nucleaires metastables
de vie tres longue, Compt. rend., 250, 1466 (1960).
C. Tzara and R. Barloutaud, Recoilless Rayleigh scattering in solids,
Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 405 (1960a).
W. M. Visscher, Neutrino detection by resonance absorption in
crystals at low temperature, Phys. Rev., 116, 1581 (1959).
W. M. Visscher, Recoilless emission by an impurity atom (to be
I.

,

published).

W. M. Visscher, Study of lattice vibrations by resonance absorption
of nuclear

gamma rays, Ann. Phys., 9, 194 (1960).

J. van Kranendonk,

Theoretical aspects of the Mossbauer effect, in

G. M. Graham and A. C. Hollis-Hallett (eds.), "Proceedings of
the Vnth International Conference on Low Temperature Physics,"
University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 1961, pp. 9-20.
F. E. Wagner, F. W. Stanek, P. Kienle, and H. Eicher, Hyperfein-

strukturauf spaltung von riickstossfreien y -Linien: in. Das
84 kev-Niveau in Yb 170 Z. Physik (to be published).
L. R. Walker, G. K. Wertheim, and V. Jaccarino, Interpretation of
the Fe 57 isomer shift, Phys. Rev. Letters, 6, 98 (1961).
H. H. F. Wegener and F. E. Obenshain, Mossbauer effect for Ni 61
with applied magnetic fields, Z. Physik, 163, 17 (1961).
G. K. Wertheim, Hyperfine structure of divalent and trivalent Fe 57 in
cobalt oxide, Phys. Rev., 124, 764 (1961).
G. K. Wertheim, Hyperfine structure of Fe 57 in paramagnetic and
antiferromagnetic FeF2 from the Mossbauer effect, Phys. Rev.,
121, 63 (1961a).
G. K. Wertheim, Measurement of local fields at impurity Fe 57 atoms
using the Mossbauer effect, Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 403 (1960).
G. K. Wertheim, Mossbauer effect: applications to magnetism,
J. Appl. Phys. (Suppl), 32, 110S (1961b).
G. K. Wertheim and J. H. Wernick, Fe 57 Mossbauer effect on Cu-Ni
alloys, Phys. Rev., 123, 755 (1961c).
,

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT

96

W. H. Wiedemann, P. Kienle, and F. Pobell, Mossbauereffekt im
normalleitenden und supraleitenden Zustand von Sn 119 Z. Physik,
165 (1961).
C. S. Wu, Y. K. Lee, N. Benczer-Koller, and P. Simms, Frequency
distribution of resonance line versus delay time, Phys. Rev.
Letters, 5, 432 (1960).
U. Zahn, P. Kienle, and H. Eicher, Quadrupolaufspaltung und Isomerieverschiebung der 14.4 kev y-Linie von Fe 57 in metallorganischen Eisenverbindungen, Z. Physik (in press).
L. G. Zastavenko and M. I. Podgoretskii, The effect of external fields
on the angular correlations and resonance processes during quantum transitions, Zhur. Eksp. i Teoret. Fiz., 39, 1023 (1960) (in
Russian); Soviet Physics JETP, 12, 711 (1961) (in English). Excerpts also translated in Phys. Express, 3, No. 5, 21 (1961).
,

7-3

CONFERENCE REPORTS

"Mossbauer Effect; Recoilless Emission and Absorption of Gamma
Rays," Hans Frauenf elder and Harry Lustig (eds.) (Discussions
of On-Site Conference of the Advisory Committee to the Directorate of Solid State Sciences, Air Force Office of Scientific Research, Univ. Illinois, Allerton House, June 6-7, 1960). Available
only as AF-TN 60-698. This unpublished report is known in the
field as "The First Mossbauer Conference Report."
Proceedings of the Second Mossbauer Conference, Paris, Sept. 13-16,
1961, A. Schoen and D. M. J. Compton (eds.), Wiley, New York,
tentative publication Spring 1962.

REPRINTS AND
TRANSLATIONS

99

The Effect of Collisions upon the Doppler Width of Spectral Lines
R. H. DtcKE
Palmer Physical Laboratory, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
(Received September 17, 1952)

Quantum mechanically the Doppler effect results from the recoil momentum changing the translational
energy of the radiating atom. The assumption that the recoil momentum is given to the radiating atom is
shown to be incorrect if collisions are taking place. If the collisions do not cause broadening by affecting the
internal state of the radiator, they result in a substantial narrowing of the Doppler broadened line.

QUANTUM mechanically, the Doppler effect

limits, be pressure-independent. Actuunder certain circumstances, this assumption is
far from correct. Collisions which do not affect the internal state of the radiating system have a large effect
upon the Doppler breadth.
The effect of collisions upon the Doppler effect is
best illustrated with a simple example treated first
classically and then quantum mechanically. Assume
that the radiating atom, but not the radiation, is confined to a one-dimensional well of width a, and that it
moves back and forth between the two walls with a
speed v. The wave emitted by the atom is frequency
modulated with the various harmonics of the oscillation
frequency of the atom in the square well. For negligible
collision and radiation damping, the spectral distribution of the emitted radiation is obtained from a Fourier
series. A set of equally spaced sharp lines is obtained.
They occur at the non-Doppler shifted frequency plusor minus-integral multiples of the oscillation frequency

would, within

re-

from the recoil momentum given to the
radiating system by the emitted photon. 1 This recoil
momentum implies a change in the kinetic energy of the
radiating atom which is in turn mirrored by a corresponding change in the photon's energy. This change
sults

ally,

in the photon's energy is proportional to the component
of the atom's velocity in the direction of emission of the

photon and leads to the normal expression for the
Doppler effect. Since for gas pressures commonly encountered the fraction of the time that an atom is in
collision is negligibly small, it might seem reasonable to
assume that the recoil momentum is absorbed by the
single radiating atom or molecule rather than by an
atomic aggregate. In this case the Doppler breadth

of the atom in the square well. The intensity distribu-

tion of these lines is shown for several values of a/X in

a=-£ x

Fig.

1.

In the quantum-mechanical description of this example, the radiating system possesses two types of
energy, internal and external. The external energy is
the quantized energy of the atomic center-of-mass
moving in the one-dimensional square well. In a transition in which a photon is absorbed or emitted, both the
internal and external quantum numbers may change.
The frequency of the emitted photon is

^m =H-(V8Ma )(n -m
2

Here

a-*

line,

v is the

M

tegers.

is

2

2

).

frequency of the non-Doppler shifted

the mass of the radiator, and n,

m are in-

A calculation of the transition probabilities

gives results for the intensities which are for large n

and

m essentially the same as the classical results

(Fig. 1).

a=f

The introduction of a Maxwellian distribution in v
in the case of the classical calculation leads to a con-

tinuous distribution very similar to a normal Doppler
distribution plus a sharp non-Doppler broadened line

EMITTED
FREQUENCY
,

V (|-£)
Fig.

1.

v ('|-£)

Spectral distribution of radiation emitted by an
confined to a one-dimensional box of width a.

(see Fig. 2). The fraction of the energy radiated in the

atom

sharp line is
sin 2 (7ra/X)

(wa/XY

E. Fermi, Revs. Modern Phys. 4, 105 (1932).

472

100

DOPPLER WIDTH OF SPECTRAL LINES

473

The sharp line has its origin in the fact that, for a nonintegral value of 7ra/X, the normal unshifted frequency
is

emitted by

Since for
Fig.

1

all

a>^\

atoms independent of
the dominant

their speed.

noncentral

lines

in

are always close to the normal Doppler shifted

frequencies, the broad distribution has a line contour

nearly identical with the normal Doppler

a<|X, the distribution

line.

For

increases in breadth but be-

comes much weaker.
For the quantum-mechanical treatment, a MaxwellBoltzmann distribution among the various energy
levels leads to a fine complex of lines having frequencies v nm

.

If

the zero-point energy of oscillation of

the atom in the well is very small compared with kT,
the degenerate frequency

v= v nn is usually the most

intense single frequency emitted. For a small

amount

of collision or natural broadening, the complex of lines

becomes a continuous distribution (Fig. 2) essentially
identical with that given by the classical calculation.
Note that although the atom is in contact with the
walls of the cavity only an infinitesimal part of the

FREQUENCY

"V

Fig.

2.

Doppler broadened line of a gas in a one-dimensional box.

time, the probability of the photon's momentum being

given to trTe~walls rather than to the atom is finite, being

effect is the only appreciable source of the line breadth,
is found that the line has a Lorentz rather than
Gaussian shape. The line contour is given by

it

sin 2 (7ra/X)
(Tra/X) 2

2irD/\ 2
/(«) = /«r

(a- Vy+(2irD/\*y

For a gas confined to a large volume but with a

mean free path small compared with a wavelength, the
shape of a Doppler broadened line has been calculated
treating the radiation classically and using a statistical

procedure. In this treatment the phase of the radiation

emitted as a function of the time is given by the position of the radiator as a function of the time. The
probability distribution of position given by diffusion
theory

is

used to calculate the mean intensity as a

function of frequency. Substantially the same result is

obtained also quantum mechanically, using a method
similar to Foley's. 2 This quantum-mechanical calculation is valid only if the recoil energy of the radiator is
small compared with kT. Assuming that the Doppler
1

H. M. Foley, Phys. Rev. 69, 616 (1946).

The width of the line at half-intensity is, in cycles per
second, 4xZ)/X2 Here
.

D is the self-diffusion constant of

the gas. This line width is roughly 2.8Z./X times that
of a normal Doppler broadened line (L is the mean free

path). Therefore, under those conditions for which the
calculation is valid, the line breadth which is wholly
Doppler is greatly reduced.
Because of the requirement that the gas collisions

should not influence the internal state of the radiator,
the above results are ordinarily valid only for certain
magnetic dipole transitions. Nuclear magnetic resonance
absorption, paramagnetic resonance absorption, and
5-state hyperfine transitions are examples of transitions
which are but weakly affected by collisions.

101

^^^4*******4-*********«9-**-9-******4'********-9-

-5-

4-4- -5-

* 4-

-3- -5-

*** * * *
-5-

Aus dem Institut fiir Physik im Max-Planck-Institut fiir medizinische Forschung,
Heidelberg

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz von Gammastrahlung in Ir191
Von

Rudolf L. Mossbauer*
Mit 8 Figuren im Text
(Eingegangen am 9. Januar 1958)

Die Kernresonanzabsorption der dem Zerfall von Os 191 folgenden 129 keV- Gammastrahlung in Ir191 wird untersucht. Der Wirkungsquerschnitt fiir die Resonanzabsorption wird als Funktion der Temperaturen von Quelle und Absorber im
370°
gemessen. Die Lebenszeit r des 129 keVTemperaturbereich 90°

K< T<

Ir191 ergibt

K

zu (3,6+ J|g) 1CT 10 sec. Der Absorptionsquerschnitt
zeigt bei tiefen Temperaturen einen starken Anstieg als Folge der Kristallbindung
der Absorber- und Praparatsubstanzen. Die Theorie von Lamb uber die Resonanzabsorption langsamer Neutronen in Kristallen wird auf die Kernresonanzabsorption
von Gammastrahlung ubertragen. Bei tiefen Temperaturen ergibt sich eine
starke Abhangigkeit des Wirkungsquerschnittes fiir die Kernabsorption von der
Frequenzverteilung im Schwingungsspektrum des Festkorpers.

Niveaus in

sich

1.

Einleitung

Die Kernresonanzfluoreszenz von Gammastrahlung

ist

das kern-

physikalische Analogon zu der bekannten Fluoreszenzerscheinung der

Atomhulle Anregung eines Kernniveaus durch Einstrahlung der eigenen
Linie, wobei die Emission und Absorption in Kernen gleicher Art stattfindet.
Die Quanten erfahren bei ihrer Emission bzw. Absorption
Energieverluste infolge Abgabe von RuckstoBenergie an die emittierenden bzw. absorbierenden Kerne, was zu einer Verschiebung der Emissionslinie gegeniiber der Absorptionslinie fuhrt. Bei Kernubergangen
ist, umgekehrt wie bei optischen Obergangen, die durch den RiickstoBenergieverlust der Quanten bedingte Linienverschiebung immer groB
gegen die naturliche Linienbreite, d.h. die Resonanzbedingung ist verletzt. Da jedoch die tatsachliche Breite der Linien durch die Temperaturbewegung der Kerne in Quelle und Absorber bestimmt wird**, die
zu Doppler-Verschiebungen der Quantenenergien fuhrt, wird fiir einen
Teil der Quanten der RuckstoBenergieverlust kompensiert und die durch
den RiickstoBeffekt verletzte Resonanzbedingung wiederhergestellt.
:

* Neue Anschrift:
Munchen.

Labor

fiir

technische

Physik,

Technische

Hochschule

** Die naturliche Linienbreite kann in alien hier interessierenden Fallen gegeniiber der Doppler-Breite vernachlassigt werden.

:

.

;

102

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz von Gammastrahlung in Ir 191

125

Die hohen RiickstoBenergieverluste der Quanten bei Kerniibergangen ergeben bei Zimmertemperatur haufig nur eine geringe tJberdeckung der Emissions- und Absorptionslinien, d.h. die Resonanzbedingung ist nur fur wenige Quanten erfiillt und der Wirkungsquerschnitt fur den Resonanzeffekt wird unmeBbar klein. Wie zuerst Malmfors [2] zeigte, laBt sich in giinstigen Fallen durch Temperaturerhohung
ein meBbarer Resonanzfluoreszenzeffekt erzielen*. Diese Methode der
Temperaturerhohung, durch thermische Verbreiterung der Linien eine
starkere Uberlagerung der Emissions- und Absorptionslinien zu erreichen, wurde seitdem in einer Reihe von Arbeiten erfolgreich angewandt [3]. Diese Experimente erfolgten in Form von Streuversuchen,
wobei jeweils die an den Kernen resonanzgestreuten Quanten von dem
Untergrund der elastisch gestreuten und der durch den Compton-Effekt
gestreuten Strahlung abgetrennt werden muBten.
Die Messungen

muBten im allgemeinen auf Quellen beschrankt werden, die keine
hartere Gammastrahlung emittierten als die untersuchte Resonanzstrahlung, um im Nachweiskristall eine Uberdeckung des Photomaximums der resonanzgestreuten Quanten durch das Compton-Kontinuum
harterer Linien zu verhindern. Die Bestimmung des Kernfluoreszenzeffektes durch Messung der resonanzgestreuten Strahlung bietet bei
weicher Gammastrahlung zwei zusatzliche Schwierigkeiten
1

Mit abnehmender Energie wird es immer schwieriger, die Compton-

Streustrahlung von der elastischen Streustrahlung zu unterscheiden,

wegen des abnehmenden Energieunterschiedes zwischen primaren und
Compton-gestreuten Quanten. Erschwerend wirkt sich aus, daB das
Auflosungsvermogen der Szintillationsspektrometer mit abnehmender
Energie abnimmt. AuBerdem steigt der Wirkungsquerschnitt fiir die
Rayleigh-Streuung bei niedrigen Energien stark an [4].
2.

Der Wirkungsquerschnitt fiir die Resonanzfluoreszenz ist umge-

kehrt proportional zur Lebenszeit xy desResonanzniveaus**. Fur Lebens-

zeitmessungen eignen sich daher gerade die kurzlebigen magnetischen
Dipol (Ml)- und elektrischen Quadrupol (£2)-t)bergange (ry <10 _10 sec),

Methode der verzogerten Koinzidenzen nicht mehr erfaBt
werden konnen. Die Strahlungsiibergange niedriger Multipolordnung
die mit der

zeigen

bei

niedrigen Energien

eine

betrachtliche

Kon version.

Bei

der Resonanzfluoreszenz wird von den resonanzabsorbierten Quanten

nur der Bruchteil (1+a) -1 (a = Konversionskoeffizient) wieder als
Quant reemittiert und nur dieser Bruchteil der resonanzabsorbierten
Quanten steht fiir die Messung zur Verfiigung.
* Einen t)berblick iiber die verschiedenen Verfahren zur Kompensation der

RiickstoBenergieverluste gibt Malmfors [2].

** Diese Beziehung
Abschnitt 3.

vgl.

gilt

nicht

mehr fiir Festkorper bei tiefen Temperaturen

103

Rudolf L. Mossbauer:

126

Die genannten Schwierigkeiten lassen sich umgehen, wenn der KernDa jedoch der Effekt,
besonders bei weicher Gammastrahlung, sehr klein ist gegenliber den
Absorptionseffekten der Atomhulle, werden bei einem Absorptionsexperiment zur Messung der Lebenszeit eines Kernniveaus extreme Anforderungen an die Genauigkeit und Stabilitat der MeBapparaturen
gestellt.
Dafiir bietet ein Absorptionsexperiment gegeniiber einem
Streustrahlungsversuch den Vorteil eines urn einen Faktor 1
a hoheren
Wirkungsquerschnittes und ermoglicht eine einfachere Interpretation
resonanzeffekt in Absorption gemessen wird.

+

der MeBergebnisse.

Die Kernresonanzfluoreszenz besitzt besonderes Interesse im Energiegebiet weicher Gammastrahlung, da bei tiefen Temperaturen in diesem

Energiegebiet bei Festkorpern Einflusse der chemischen Bindung zu

erwarten sind.
In der vorliegenden Arbeit wurde durch ein Gamma-Absorptions-

experiment die Lebenszeit ry des 129 keV-Niveaus in Ir191 bestimmt.
Untersuchungen bei der Temperatur des fliissigen
ergaben einen
2
starken EinfluB der chemischen Bindung auf den Wirkungsquerschnitt
fur die Kernabsorption. Der aufgefundene Bindungseffekt wurde mit
Hilfe der Theorie von Lamb, die zu diesem Zweck fur den Fall der

Der BindungsSchwingungsspektrum des Festkorpers

Emissionslinie erweitert wurde, theoretisch gedeutet.
effekt ist sehr empfindlich vom

abhangig.
2.

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz und chemische Bindung

Die Absorptions- und Emissionslinien sind ihrer Lage und ihrer Form
nach vom Bindungszustand abhangig. Insbesondere ist der RuckstoBenergieverlust der emittierten und auch der resonanzabsorbierten Quanten abhangig von den Energieaufnahme- und Energieabgabemoglichkeiten der Systeme, denen die betrachteten Kerne angehoren (z.B.
Molekule oder Kristalle).

Ein freier Kern der Masse m ubernimmt bei Emission eines Quants
eine RiickstoBenergie R, die gegeben ist durch

der Energie E

2
R = Ej2mcK

(1)

Im Falle einer chemischen Bindung des Kernes in einem Kristall muB
Wegen

der Kristall die RiickstoBenergie als innere Energie aufnehmen.

der Quantelung der inneren Energie konnen jedoch beim RiickstoB nur
diskrete Energien aufgenommen werden und die RiickstoBenergie
hangt ab von den Wahrscheinlichkeiten flir die Anregung der Gitterschwingungen des Kristalles. Bei Temperaturen T, die groB sind gegen
die Debyesche Temperatur
des Kristalles, ist die statistische Geschwindigkeitsverteilung der Kerne unabhangig von der Bindung und

104

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz von Gammastrahlung in Ir 191

127

es erfolgt eine ungehinderte Ubertragung der vollen RiickstoBenergie
nach (1). Mit abnehmender Temper atur gelangt eine zunehmende An-

zahl vorzugsweise der hochfrequenten Schwingungsoszillatoren des Kri-

den Grundzustand. Diese Oszillatoren konnen keine Energie

stalles in

mehr abgeben und die Linienform wird unsymmetrisch, wenn die RiickstoBenergie nicht groB ist gegen die obere Grenzenergie % co g des Schwin-

gungsspektrums des Kristalles. Lamb [5] berechnet die Lage und Form
der Absorptionslinie beim Resonanzeinfang langsamer Neutronen in
Kristallen und gibt Naherungen fur spezielle Bindungsfalle an. Hiernach besitzt die Absorptionslinie im Fall schwacher Bindung und unter
der Annahme, daB der Kristall als Debye-Kontinuum aufgefaBt werden
kann, dieselbe Form wie in einem idealen Gas, wobei jedoch an die Stelle
der tatsachlichen Temperatur T eine Temperatur T*>T tritt, die
der mittleren Energie pro Schwingungsfreiheitsgrad des Kristalles ent-

Im

spricht.

Falle starkerer

Bindung

zeigt

die Absorptionslinie bei

tiefen Temperaturen eine komplizierte Struktur und eine Verschiebung

zu kleineren Energien, verbunden mit dem Auftreten eines Maximums
an der Stelle der Resonanzenergie. Die Linienform wird um so unsymmetrischer, je kleiner das Verhaltnis R/kO ist.
Die Arbeit von Lamb laBt sich leicht fur die Emissionslinie erweitern
und kann dann direkt auf die Gammaresonanzprozesse angewandt
werden. Bei der Resonanzfluoreszenz des 129keV Niveaus in Ir 191 ist
R = 0,046 eV und £(9 = 0,025 eV. Der Fall schwacher Bindung in der
Definition nach

Lamb [5] ist hier bei Temperaturen T<200°K nicht

mehr realisiert.
3.

Theorie

Nach Lamb [5] gilt fur den Wirkungsquerschnitt fur die Resonanzabsorption:

{T

a[ E )

= r^)a Wa{E)

(2)

[

— totale Energiebreite des Resonanzniveaus E = Energie der einQuanten; a = Wirkungsquerschnitt fur exakte Resonanz).
;

fallenden

W (E) bestimmt Lage und Form der Absorptionslinie
a

:

oo

W (E) (2/r) Real / dp exp [*> (£-£„+ 7)2) + g.
i

a

(3 a)

(fi)] .

Dabei ist

M = Z 2m

(p « s )

2

hco.N

X

X [(a -f 1) ex P (— i ft ft a)
s

E

(4a)
s)

+ a exp (ijuH(o — — 2aJ
s

s)

\

ist die Resonanzenergie, oj s die Frequenz der s-ten Normalschwingung

des Kristalles,

m die Kernmasse, p der Impuls des Gammaquants,

~e

der

Polarisationseinheitsvektor, 32V die Zahl der unabhangigen Freiheits-

:

T

:

:

105

Rudolf L, Mossbauer:

128

grade im Kristall und a 5 die mittlere Besetzungszahl des s-ten Oszillators
(5)

Wie sich leicht zeigen laBt* gilt fur die Emissionslinie **
oo

W (E) = (2/r) Real / dp exp [»> (£ - E + T/2) + g
*

e (fi)]

X [(oc s + 1) exp (ijuha) s + a exp (— ijuha) s

1-2S.1.

e

(3 b)

o

mit

&M = 2j 2ma JaN x

(4b)
)

s

)

Die Berechnung der Integrale (3) wird in Debyescher Naherung durchgefuhrt***. Die Debye-Temperaturen der transversalen und der longitudinalen Schwingungskomponenten werden gleichgesetzt.
a)

Fm

in k

6 <Ci folgt

^ — *'/*? — ^ £
&(/<*) ^ + i/uR—ju Re.
2

gaijA

A*

(6a)

>

2

ft

ist

die RiickstoBenergie

nach

und

(1)

£

(6b)

die mittlere Energie pro

Schwingungsfreiheitsgrad des Kristalles
0/

e (D = * r* = 3*r(r/©)»j"( ^+ |)«<.
1
1
-

(7)

b) Fur,aft6>>1 gilt
2

(Pes)
=
a +
2£ 2mha>*N
l

goo(T)

«.{<»; fl

2

5

J A^O) \ e nmlkT __

x

+ 2

3N(ha))<
J

d(hcj)

(kG) 3

(8)

e/T

- (6Rlk&) (Tie)' /(-^y + |)*«.
* Der Beweis sei kurz angedeutet
sionslinie zu ersetzen

:

Die Gl. (8) von Lamb [5] ist fur die Emis-

durch W({cc s }; {n s }) =

(«,«>,
£ + £K)-£(a +tT/2
s)

wo (as |H'|w s

)

das Matrixelement fiir einen Ubergang n s ->ct s des Gitters bedeutet,

der von der Emission eines Quants mit dem Impuls p begleitet ist. In Gl. (17)
von [5] erscheint dann n s an Stelle von a s Wenn man dann alle folgenden Summierungen iiber a s statt iiber n s erstreckt und iiber n s statt iiber a s mittelt, so erhalt
man unsere Gin. (3 b) und (4 b), wenn man im Endergebnis wieder a s statt n s setzt.
** Die Funktionen
(E) und
£
a {E) und damit auch die Emissions- und Absorptionslinien liegen spiegelsymmetrisch zur Geraden E = E
*** Die Summationen in (4) enthalten auch die Summationen iiber die Polari.

W

W

.

sationsrichtungen.

•**• Tj nsere Gl. (8) unterscheidet sich um einen Faktor 3 von der bei Lamb [<5]

angegebenen Gl. (36).

:

106

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz von Gammastrahlung in Ir 191

129

Der experimentell bestimmbare mittlere Wirkungsquerschnitt o r (Tq Ta
;

)

ergibt sich, wenn man a(E) in (2) mit der auf 1 normierten Verteilungs-

funktion der emittierten (einfallenden) Quanten multipliziert und liber
alle

Energien summiert (Tq

,

Ta = Temperatur

von Quelle bzw. Ab-

Wegen

sorber).

oo

(ri27i) f

W (E) dE =
e

i

gilt daher
OO

= fa(E){ri2n)W {E)dE

of

t

(9)

und mit (2)
d r = (n87i)a

JW (E)W (E)dE.
a

e

Wenn der Ubergang in den Grundzustand auch durch innere Umwandlung (Kon version) erfolgen kann, dann

dem Wirkungsquerschnitt
Wirkungsquerschnitt

(a ) s

fur

fur

die

(o ) a

zu unterscheiden zwischen
Resonanz-Streuung und dem
Resonanz- Absorption.
Fur die
ist

die

Resonanz-Streuung gilt nach Jackson [6]

(2/q+0 %

n ._
Voh(27g+
t

\

1}

2n

:

(2/ fl +1)

rf _
- {2Ig+i)
" -j*
rr

'

„
H n
27Z

i

(1

+a)2

,
•

,

y™)

Dabei sind 2l-\-\ die statistischen Gewichte des angeregten (a) und
Grundzustandes (g),
die relative Haufigkeit des resonanten

H

des

Isotops,

X Q die Resonanzwellenlange,

r die totale Energiebreite des

Resonanzniveaus, Ty die partielle Energiebreite fur Strahlungsemission

und a der Konversionskoeffizient.
Bei der Resonanzfluoreszenz geht durch Quantenemission nur der
Bruchteil Ty \T aller Zwischenzustande in den Grundzustand iiber, der
Bruchteil {T

— T^\T aber durch Kon version. Bei der Resonanzabsorp-

tion tragen alle Zwischenzustande zu dem Wirkungsquerschnitt bei und
es gilt daher

k). =

wr Ms = |^f ^
v)

mm

(»)

Im Falle der Resonanzfluoreszenz an Ir391 (E = 1 29 keV) kann die
Berechnung der Linienformen bis herab zur Temperatur des fliissigen
naherungsweise in zwei Schritten durchgefuhrt werden:
1. Im Bereich \E — E \^>T ergeben nur die Werte juk&<\ einen
wesentlichen Beitrag zu dem Integral (3), und (6) kann noch als brauch2

bare Naherung beniitzt werden

Wj (E) = (2/JT) ftp cos (E

-E ±R)fi exp (- p T\2 Q

ju

2

Re)
(12)

= (4ir*MS;x)

,,

:

,

:
.

107

Rudolf L. Mossbauer:

130

Dabei gilt fur die Emissions-

und Absorptionslinie

(e)

(a)

bzw.*

Vfe: *«) = (1/2) V»f.exp (-1? 4/4)

(13a)

= (1/2) V^f.exp (-{• 4/4)

(13b)

Vtf.; *J

wobei
*e = (£-£„ 4- .R)/Ar;

Zl ist

*.= (£-£,-fi)/|r.

4=2]/^l2f;

J.= 2y«*5

h = riA

£«

e;

= riA

a

(14)

F

(15)

,

(16)

.

die Doppler-Breite des Niveaus und T*, T* bezeichnen die Tem-

peraturen des Absorbers und der Quelle, die nach

den mittleren

(7)

Energien pro Schwingungsfreiheitsgrad des Kristalles entsprechen.
2. Im Bereich um E = E erhalt man eine gute Naherung fiir W(E),
wenn man den Integrationsbereich in (3) an der Stelle fjikO — \ aufspaltet und in den beiden Bereichen die Naherungen (6) bzw. (8) beniitzt

WH (E) =

ilk®

dju cos [E

(2/JT) J

— E ± R)juexp (—

/* JT/2

- p*R e +
)

00

+ {21r) / dp cos (E - E

) 11

exp ( goo (T) - p T/2)

1/kO

Wn (E) und es

Das erste Integral liefert nur einen kleinen Beitrag zu
gilt in guter Naherung (rjk&<^l)
:

WIl{E) = Wl{ E) + {E

^f^

(17)

.

jA

Im Bereich \E — E \^>T kann der zweite Summand in (17) gegeniiber
Wj(E) vernachlassigt werden und es folgt durch Zusammenfassen von
(1 2) und (1 7) fiir die Emissions- bzw. Absorptionslinie

W {E) = (4in f
e

(ie ; xe)

+ ^^cSEA—

W (E) = (4/P)y(f.;«J + {E r^)?™
a

(18a)

•

2/4

<

18b

)

Die durch die Kristallbindung modifizierten Emissions- und Absorpdes 1 29 keV-LJberganges in Ir 191 besitzen nach (1 8) ** (mit

tionslinien

Ausnahme in der Umgebung der Resonanzstelle E bei der Temperatur T
nahezu die gleiche Form und Lage wie in einem idealen Gas bei einer
)

Temperatur T*, die nach (7) der mittleren Energie pro Schwingungsfreiheitsgrad des Kristalles entspricht.

An der Resonanzstelle E = E

*Vgl. Lamb [5], Gl. (32).
** Die

Gin. (18)

verlieren ihre

Temperatur des fliissigen

2

.

Giiltigkeit

bei

Temperaturen unterhalb der

:

:

;

108

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz von Gammastrahlung in Ir 191

erhebt sich dariiber bei Temperaturen

131

T<0

eine mit abnehmender
Temperatur stark ansteigende Linie der Breite r (Fig. 1). Die Resonanzbedingung wird also mit abnehmender Temperatur fur einen immer
groBer werdenden Bruchteil der Quanten erfullt.

Emissionsspektrum

>*750

E +R

Energie

Lage und Form der Emissions- und Absorptionslinien des 129 keV-t)berganges in Ir191 bei T = 88° K,
fur eine Lebenszeit r = 10~ 10 sec. Nullpunkt der Energieskala unterdruckt; Einheit der Ordinate willkurlich
Fig. 1.

Hohe der Linien bei E = E (Resonanzenergie) im Vernal tnis 1:150 verkiirzt dargestellt

in

Der Wirkungsquerschnitt ar ergibt sich durch Eintragung von (18)
Dabei liefern nur zwei Integrale einen wesentlichen Beitrag:

(9).

oo

ex.

f(4iny>(Ze ;xe )(4in W (£a ;xa )dE

und

J

exp[g 00 (rg ) + goo (ra )]
{{E

-£

2
)

+ T2/4]

2

dE.

Ausfiihrung der Integrationen ergibt fiir den mittleren Wirkungsquerschnitt fiir die Resonanzabsorption

K)a
]/*

exp

Pi + A>

4R 2

Al+Al\

^exV

[goo

m+

goo (Ta )].

(19)

Die Unscharferelation ergibt fiir die mittlere Lebenszeit r des Resonanzniveaus und fiir die mittlere Lebenszeit ry fiir Zerfall durch Strahlungsemission

= hir= %\Ty + a) = ry /(l + a) = 2]/ln 2
(a == Konversionskoeffizient, 7] = Halbwertszeit).
r

(1

(20)

Bei hoheren Temperaturen kann der 2. Term in (19) vernachlassigt
werden und es folgt nach (11), (19), (20) ora ~\\xy Bei tiefen Temperaturen dominiert der von der Lebenszeit unabhangige 2. Term in (19).
.

109

Rudolf L. Mossbauer:

132

Versuchsanordnung

4.

Fig. 2 zeigt die Versuchsanordnung, Fig. 3 den Aufbau des Absorberdicke gewalzte IridiumKryostaten. Die Absorber, zwei je etwa 0,4
Durchmesser waren so befestigt, daB bei
bzw. Platinbleche von 35
der Abkuhlung eine ungehinderte Kontraktion derselben moglich war.
Untersucht wurde die Absorption der beim Beta-Zerfall von Os 191
ausgesandten 129keV Gammastrahlung in Iridium. Fig. 4 zeigt das
Zerfallschema [7] und das beobachtete Spektrum, das neben der l6d-

mm

mm

Aktivitat von Os 191 noch

Komponenten der 95 d-Aktivitat von Os 185

enthalt [8]. Die harten, beim iC-Einfang von Os 185 ausgesandten Linien

von Re 185 bei 640 keV und bei 875 keV durchsetzten die Absorber
Pb

m
«t
^§§^
M^§
1
mm
^-n\$^\\^

p

70cm

Fig. 2.

(22

Versuchsgeometrie.

A Absorber- Kryostat; P Kryostat mit Quelle; D Detektor: NaJ(Tl)-Kristall

mm hoch, 40 mm Durchmesser) und Photomultiplier; K Kollimator (Bohrung 18 mm); A und P werden
von den Armen eines schweren Stativs getragen

nahezu ungeschwacht, wahrend die weiche 129 keV-Strahlung von
Ir191 durch den Photoeffekt stark absorbiert wurde. Die harten Komponenten von Re 185 uberlagerten daher im Nachweiskristall mit ihrem

Compton-Kontinuum erheblich die 129 keV-Resonanzlinie.
Wahrend die Selbstabsorption der Resonanzlinie in der Quelle
stark mit der Dicke des Praparates zunimmt, erfahren die harten

Strahlungskomponenten von Re 185 nur eine geringfugige Selbstabsorption. Die von der Quelle emittierte Strahlungsintensitat verschiebt sich
daher mit zunehmender Schichtdicke des Praparates zugunsten der
harteren Strahlungskomponenten. Die Praparatsubstanz wurde deshalb
2
flachenformig angeordnet (Oberflache 80
) und die Menge auf 0,6 g
beschrankt. Die Substanz — analysenreiner pulverformiger Osmiumschwamm — wurde vor der Bestrahlung im Vakuum in eine dunnwandige Quarzkiivette eingeschmolzen. Die 65 mCurie starke Quelle wurde
an den Boden eines zur Aufnahme von fliissiger Luft dienenden zylinderformigen Quarzbehalters angeschmolzen, der sich mit dem Praparat
in einem DewargefaB befand. Die beschriebene Montage der Quelle
war erforderlich, um Praparatbewegungen infolge einer Kontraktion
der Aufhangevorrichtung bei der Abkuhlung auf ein Minimum zu beschranken. Derartige Praparatbewegungen konnten zu einer Anderung
der von der Quelle ,,gesehenen" mittleren Schichtdicke des Absorbers

mm

110

fiihren,

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz von Gammastrahlung in Ir 191

133

sofern dieser nicht vollstandig planparallel ist*.

Die haupt-

sachliche experimentelle Schwierigkeit bei der Lebenszeitmessung lag
in einer sicheren Ausschaltung eines solchen Einflusses von Anderungen

der Geometrie bei der Abkiihlung auf die Messung. Das Problem wurde

w(K )
a
w
Ir (K )
Re

a

N
sec^

729 keV
191

(Ir

)

—

woo-

E3

I

5,6 sec

0,0¥2 fleV

m

>5-70' 7Osec

m+E2 0,729'MeV
750-

Jr'

500-

6V0 keV

250 ~

675 keV
(Re

O

0,7

0,2

0,3

0,¥

0,5

0,6

0,7

0,6

m)

0,9

1,0

b
Fig. 4 a u. b

Fig. 3

Fig. 3. Absorber- Kryostat (schematisch) mit einer durch zwei Schnurziige bedienbaren Drehvorrichtung,

um

abwechselnd zwei verschiedene Absorber A 1 und A 2 in den Strahlengang zu bringen. D DewargefaB; S Achse
des senkrecht zur Zeichenebene verlaufenden Strahlenbiindels T Trolitulisolator. Schnurzug und Thermoelemente werden durch die fliissige Luft in Messingrohrchen gefiihrt, die in den Boden des Luftbehalters
;

eingelotet sind
Fig. 4 a u. b.

a Zerf allschema von Os 191
hinter 0,4

.

b Spektrum des natiirlichen Osmiumisotopengemisches, gemessen

mm Iridium 4d nach AbschluB der 12d-Neutronenbestrahlung

befriedigend gelost durch die beschriebene Art der Aufhangung der
Quelle, durch die Verwendung von nahezu planparallelen Absorbern**
* Eine Anderung der Schichtdicke des Absorbers von nur 0,1 [i hatte bereits
zu Absorptionseffekten in der GroGenordnung der gemessenen Effekte gefiihrt.
** Wir danken der Fa. Heraeus Platinschmelze fur die Herstellung und leihweise Uberlassung der Edelmetallabsorber.

Y\M

)

Ill

Rudolf L. Mossbauer:

134

groBer Oberflache und durch die Wahl eines relativ groBen Abstandes
der Quelle von den Absorbern (mindestens 50 cm). Die Temperaturen

der Quelle und der Absorber wurden mit Eisen-Konstantan-Thermoelementen gemessen. Die ganze Anordnung wurde auf optischem Wege
justiert.

Fig. 5 zeigt das Blockschema der elektronischen Nachweisapparatur.
Der Aufbau und die Betriebsweise waren darauf abgestellt, Schwankungen in der Zahlhaufigkeit auf ein MindestmaB zu beschranken, z.B.

A

Fig. 5-

B

Ci

7

£1

Fi

c2

D2

5

Fi

Blockschaltbild der elektronischen MeBanordnung. (Die Strom versorgung wurde nicht dargestellt.

A Photomultiplier RCA 6342 Betriebsspannung 1,3 kV; B Vorverstarker [9]; C Hauptverstarker D Einkanaldiskriminator [10]; E Dualuntersetzer Untersetzungsfaktor 2 *; F Registrierstufe mit mechanischem
;

1

Zahlwerk

durch Verwendung von Schaltelementen mit kleinen Temperaturkoeffizienten. Die ganze Anlage wurde von einem auf ±0,5% spannungsstabilisierten Netz betrieben. Das Hochspannungsgerat und die
Heizung der Verstarker wurden zusatzlich durch einen magnetischen
Spannungsgleichhalter stabilisiert.

5.

Mefiverfahren

Eine direkte Bestimmung des Wirkungsquerschnittes fur die Kerndurch eine Messung des totalen Schwachungskoeffizienten ist im allgemeinen nicht moglich, da die Kernresonanzabsorption gewohnlich sehr klein ist gegeniiber den Absorptionseffekten
der Atomhiille. Der Kernresonanzeffekt in Ir 191 wurde daher durch
eine Differenzmessung bestimmt, wobei die Absorption der Resonanzlinie im Resonanzabsorber Iridium bei verschiedenen Temperaturen
unter Bedingungen gemessen wurde, bei denen die auftretenden Intensitatsanderungen in direkter Beziehung zu dem Wirkungsquerschnitt
fur die Resonanzabsorption standen und jegliche Nebeneffekte ausgeschaltet wurden. Der Wirkungsquerschnitt ara ist nach (19) eine
Funktion der Temperaturen der Quelle und des Absorbers. Aus Grunden
der Temperaturabhangigkeit der totalen Absorption wurden alle Messungen bei konstanter Temperatur des Absorbers durchgefuhrt, d.h.
es wurde jeweils nur die Temperatur der Quelle variiert. Die Temperaturabhangigkeit der totalen Absorption hat ihren anschaulichen Grund
darin, daB sich die Zahl der Atome pro cm 2 der Oberflache einer absorbierenden Substanz mit der Temperatur andert [1]. Dieser Effekt
hatte im vorliegenden Fall dem Kernresonanzeffekt entgegengewirkt

resonanzabsorption

112

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz von Gammastrahlung in Ir 191

und ihn dabei

vollstandig iiberdeckt,

Temperaturvariationen auf die

135

was durch Beschrankung der

Quelle verhindert wurde.

Naturlich

zeigt auch die Selbstabsorption in der Quelle einen (allerdings kleineren)

Temperaturgang. Dieser Effekt, der ebenfalls dem Resonanzeffekt
entgegenwirkt, konnte jedoch experimentell eliminiert werden durch
abwechselnde Intensitatsmessungen mit dem Resonanzabsorber und
einem Vergleichsabsorber. Da der Selbstabsorptionseffekt der Quelle
die Intensitat hinter beiden Absorbern beeinfluBt, wahrend der Kernresonanzeffekt nur beim Resonanzabsorber auftritt, fallt ersterer Effekt
bei einer Differenzmessung heraus, wenn
die Absorber so abgestimmt sind, daB
sie ungefahr gleich stark absorbieren.
Die Resonanzlinie wurde aus dem
Zerfallspektrum des Osmium-Isotopengemisches durch den Einkanaldiskriminator D x (Fig. 5) ausgeblendet. Um den
EinfluB von Schwankungen des Schwellenwertes des Einkanaldiskriminators auf

N(E2)

die Messungen zu vermindern, wurde der

Kanal auf 25 % des ganzen erfaBbaren

—»

Spektralbereiches geoffnet *. Die aus dem

Spektrum ausgeblendete Resonanzlinie
wurde durch entsprechende Wahl der
Verstarkung der maximalen Kanalbreite

/mpu/shdhe.

Fig. 6.

Einstellung der Begrenzungen des

Kanals

des

Einkanaldiskriminators

zur

Stabilisierung der Impulshaufigkeit gegeniiber Verstarkungsschwankungen

angepaBt. Die harteren Komponenten des Spektrums fuhrten dabei zu
einer Obersteuerung des Hauptverstarkers, die jedoch keinen EinfluB auf

den ausgeblendeten Teil des Spektrums hatte.
Um die Schwankungen der Verstarkung (insbesondere des Multipliers) aufzufangen, wurden die Begrenzungen des Kanals so eingestellt,
daB kleine Schwankungen der Verstarkung in erster Naherung keine

Anderung der Impulshaufigkeit im Kanal verursachten. Das Verfahren wird durch Fig. 6 illustriert Eine Anderung der Verstarkung
fiihrt zu einer Expansion bzw. Kontraktion des Spektrums langs der
Abszisse. Wenn der ausblendende Kanal so eingestellt wird, daB
:

N(EJE,

N{E,)E,._

so

wird die

Impulshaufigkeit,

wie sich leicht

zeigen laBt, in erster Naherung nicht durch kleine Verstarkungsschwan-

kungen beeinfluBt, weil sich die bei einer Verstarkungsanderung neu
Spektrums
kompensieren. Diese Beziehung ist annahernd erfullt bei der in Fig. 7
gezeigten bei den Messungen beniitzten Einstellung des Kanals auf die
Resonanzlinie.
Durch das beschriebene MeBverfahren konnten die
in den Kanal eintretenden und die austretenden Anteile des

* Hierzu wurde die Gegenkopplung im Fensterverstarker der Schaltung [10]
erhoht.

113

Rudolf L. Mossbauer:

136

relativen Schwankungen nicht-statistischer Natur in der Zahlhaufigkeit

auf rund 0,1 % beschrankt werden.
Als Resonanzabsorber diente Iridium (Z

= 77) als Vergleichsabsorber
,

= 78).

Der Intensitatsunterschied der die beiden Absorber
durchsetzenden Strahlung betrug bei Zimmertemperatur etwa 0,1%.
Platin (Z

—Fig. 7.

Impulshohe

Einstellung des Kanals des Einkanaldiskriminators auf die 129keV-Linie in Ir 191

schnitt aus dem Zerfallspektrum von

m + Os

Aus

.

191

5d nach der Neutronenbestrahlung.
Ausschnitt
aus dem Zerfallspektrum einer Osmiumquelle, deren Os181 -Aktivitat bereits abgeklungen ist. Beide Spektren
sind auf gleiche Intensitat bei hohen Energien normiert. — Das Verhaltnis v der Impulshaufigkeiten der
129 keV-Linie zu alien im Bereich des Kanals liegenden Linien ist v = 0,757

Os

Gemessen wurden die totalen Strahlungsintensitaten 7j r und If hinter
1

dem Resonanzabsorber (Ir) und dem Vergleichsabsorber (Pt).
Bei den Messungen zur Bestimmung der Lebenszeit des 1 29 keVNiveaus in Ir 191 befanden sich die Absorber stets auf Zimmertemperatur
und es wurde nur die Temperatur der Quelle variiert. Bei jeder MeBreihe wurden zunachst wiederholt abwechselnd die Intensitaten I] T (T2 )
und If l (T2) gemessen, wobei sich die Quelle auf der Zimmertemperatur
T2 befand. Nach Abkuhlung der Quelle auf die Temperatur Jj des
flussigen
2 erfolgten analog wiederholte Messungen von I^iTj) und
eo
JfPi)- J ^ e Messung mit dem Resonanzabsorber wurde eingeschlossen

,,,.

114

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz von Gammastrahlung in Ir 191

137

durch zwei Messungen mit dem Vergleichsabsorber, urn einen linearen
Gang in der elektronischen Apparatur zu eliminieren.
Bei den Messungen zur Untersuchung des Einflusses der chemischen
Bindung auf die Kernresonanzabsorption befanden sich die Absorber
Die Temperatur der Quelle
stets auf der Temperatur des fliissigen
2
wurde variiert zwischen dem Siedepunkt des 2 und dem des Wassers.
Mit Hilfe des zweiten Zweiges der elektronischen Nachweisapparatur
(vgl. Fig. 5) wurde parallel zum eigentlichen Experiment taglich das
gesamte Zerfallspektrum des Osmium-Isotopengemisches aufgenommen.
Die hierbei gemessenen Spektren dienten zur Ermittlung des (zeitabhangigen) Beitrags des der Resonanzlinie uberlagerten ComptonKontinuums der harten Komponenten von Re 185 zu der Zahlhaufigkeit
im Kanal des Einkanaldiskriminators. In der Versuchsgeometrie der
Fig. 2 wurde das Spektrum von Os 185 (95 d) durch Messungen mit einem
Osmiumpraparat bestimmt, dessen l6d-Os 191 -Aktivitat bereits abgeklungen war. Subtraktion des auf den zeitlichen Aktivitatsabfall
korrigierten Zerfallspektrums von Os 185 vom Gesamtspektrum Os 185 +
Os 191 lieferte dann das Zerfallspektrum von Os 191 Aus diesen Daten
ergab sich unmittelbar das fur die Auswertung der Messungen benotigte
zeitabhangige Verhaltnis v der Intensitat der 1 29 keV- Resonanzlinie
zur gesamten im ausgeblendeten Bereich des Spektrums gemessenen
.

.

Intensitat.

Fig. 7 zeigt ein Beispiel.

6.

Auswertung der Messungen

Im folgenden bezeichnet der Index

= \,2,

die 1 29 keV-Resonanzstrahlung,

n die nicht-resonanten Strahlungskomponenten,
die der Resonanzstrahlung im ausblendenden Kanal tiberlagert sind.
1
2
fur die Abof' und a] sind die Wirkungsquerschnitte (Einheit cm
der Index

i

...

)

sorption der i-ten Strahlungskomponente in Platin (Pt) bzw. Iridium

n ist die Zahl der Atome pro cm 2 Absorberoberflache und T ist
die Temperatur der Quelle. Fur die hinter den Absorbern gemessenen
(Ir).

Strahlungsintensitaten gilt

= 2 I]' (23 = 2 I, (rj exp [- n

l

<

^

(7,)]

(21 a)

IT ft) = 2 IT ffi) = 2 I.m exp [- » af (23]

(21 b)

I}' (2i)

PI

t=0

i=0

= 2 II' (7J = 2 1> (2i) exp [- n" a," (23]

(21 c)

IT (TJ = 2 IT (23 = 2 1, (?3 exp [- » of (73]

(21 d)

I}' (23

t=0

i=0

pt

:

t=0

i=0

:,

:

.

115

Rudolf L. Mossbauer:

138

Da nur die Temperatur der Quelle variiert wird, sind nlT und w pt konstant und es gelten die Beziehungen
t

<yf

(T2 )=(rt t (T1)

^ ra = ^ (r
r

r

= of
=

*

r

i)

= 0,1,2,...,*,
= 1,2,...,*,

*
*

crJ

k; ra-<rai=i^ra-^rai<iy
r

(22a)

(22b)
r

(22c)

.

Weiter werden eingefuhrt die relativen Intensitatsanderungen <x >0,
die sich beim Temperaturiibergang T1 -+T2 (T2
7i) der Quelle infolge
Anderung der Selbstabsorption in der Quelle ergeben
t

>

Ii{T2 )

=

+ « /.(TJ

(1

i

t)

= 0, 1, 2, ..., ».

(23)

Die Absorber absorbieren nahezu gleich stark (vgl. Abschnitt 5) und alle
Temperatureffekte verursachen nur kleine Intensitatsanderungen, d.h.
es gilt
|/Pt

(r)

_ 7 (r) <7 (r)

= 0,1,2,...,*,

(24a)

»*0, 1,2, ...,*.

(24b)

ir

,-

.

|

a^<l
Fiihrt man als experimentell bestimmbare

M = lfHT )-I?(T
(r

2)

2

GroBe die Differenz ein:

_ /Pt^-jjt^

r

/J

/fcrj

2)

so erhalt man aus (21) bis (23)

M ^{2a,/ (r [exp (- »»o«) - exp(- «
i

l)

Ir

r

aJ

(T2 ))] -

- 1,(23 [exp (- n»ol<(T - exp (- n^tf))]}//*^)
2 ))

Der erste Term wird nach (24) klein von hoherer Ordnung und es folgt

if«7,(r )e«p(-i»fc «f(r ))x
I

l

1

xti-exP (^(Tjr(r1)-» of(r2))]/// (r^.
Ir

r

}

Bezeichnet man mit v den zeitabhangigen Bruchteil, der von der gesamten im Bereich des Kanals des Einkanaldiskriminators gemessenen
Intensitat auf die Intensitat der Resonanzlinie entfallt (vgl. Abschnitt 5)
v

= /.(T.) exp [- « af (rOJ/i^tr.)
fc

(27)

so folgt aus (26) und (22 c)

M^i;n

Ir

[*fa (r2 )-tfr J7i)].

(28)

Bei den Messungen zur Bestimmung der Lebenszeit wurden die Absorber
nicht gekiihlt.

Dann kann der zweite Term in (19) vernachlassigt wer-

den und der Wirkungsquerschnitt ara fur die Resonanzabsorption wird

7

:

:

116

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz von Gammastrahlung in Ir 191

139

umgekehrt proportional zur Lebenszeit ry des Niveaus. Nach (1), (11),
(15), (19), (20) gilt in diesem Fall:

2la + 1

h 2 c*

rj

%

m

"]/

X

~V
y \/2kn(T* + T*)

(29)

2
c*k(Tq* + T*)]
X exp [- E j2m

.

J

Bei der Auswertung wurden folgende numerische Daten verwendet:

Spin des Grundzustandes von Ir 191
Spin des 1 29 keV Niveaus von Ir

—f

[11]

Ia = §

[7]

Ig

:

191
:

Relative Haufigkeit des Isotops Ir191

H = }8,5%
= 285° K

:

Debye-Temperatur von Iridium:

[12]

Fiir die Temperaturen T* und 7^* von Absorber und Quelle folgt aus (7)

T* = 3 16° K

Zimmertemperatur (3 03° K)
Flussige Luft (gemessener Mittelwert 8$° K)

Zahl der Iridium-Atome pro cm
7.

Tabelle

1

T* = 129° K

:

5

2,78

•

10 21 cm- 2

MeBergebnisse

enthalt die Ergebnisse der Messungen zur

der Lebenszeit des 1 29 keV-Niveaus in Ir 191

.

Bestimmung

(Temperaturen der Quelle

Tabelle 1
2

1

Nr.

T = T = 303° K

T = r, = 88°K

1,346±0,31
4,585±0,19
0,580 ±0,25
0,653 ±0,16
0,767±0,17
0,649 ±0,23
0,249 ±0,21
0,386 ±0,24
0,397 ±0,24

1,074 ±0,24
4,359 ±0,21
0,127 ±0,23
0,297 ±0,28

f

1

2
3

4
5

6
7

8

9
10
11

12
13
14
15
16

4

3

M-10

{M/v)

±

0,038 ±0,20
0,037 ±0,25
0,052 ±0,26
0,326 ±0,1
0,266
0,26
0,542 ±0,1

-1,797 ±0,25
-2,274 ±0,19

-1,775±0,20
-2,379 ±0,28

±

0,359±0,31
0,367 ±0,34
0,1 89 ±0,48
— 0,224 0,22
0,520 ±0,30
0,418 ±0,34
— 0,022 ±0,32
0,105 ±0,34

±

-0,303 ±0,30
0,711 ±0,41
0,578 ±0,47
-0,031 ±0,45
0,149 ±0,48

Ausgeglichen er Mittelwert (M/v ) -10 3

T = 88°K; r2 = 303°K.)
1

Versuchsserie

:

Spalte

1

10 3

0,574 ±0,43
0,453 ±0,42
0,240 ±0,33
0,186 ±0,37
0,108 ±0,34
0,504 ±0,46
0,474 ±0,41
0,488 ±0,45
0,254 ±0,64

±

0,404
0,23
0,241 ±0,40
0,102 ±0,14
0,786 ±0,1 5
0,960 ±0,29

•

0,341 ±0,49
0,285 ±0,35

0,272 ±0,39
0,226
0,28
0,453 ±0,34
0,356 ±0,33
0,188 ±0,26
0,145 ±0,29
0,26
0,083
0,385 ±0,35

0,579±0,19
0,504 ±0,17
0,166±0,16
0,001 ±0,25

±

5

3

0,268 ±0,07

der Tabelle gibt die Nummer der

Jede Serie best and aus mindestens

je

10 Messungen

117

Rudolf L. Mossbauer:

140

jeder der vier Intensitaten I]x {T^j,

If^TJ, Ij {T2 ), I^{T2 ). Bei der
Intensitatsmessung betrug der statistische Fehler 0,04 bis
0,05 % und die MeBzeit 12 bis 20 min. Taglich wurde eine MeBreihe aufT

einzelnen

genommen.

Um systematische Fehler auszuschlieBen, wurde die Geo-

metrie bei jeder MeBreihe etwas variiert, durch Drehung der Absorber
jlridium_ jP/atin
rPlatin
1

0%
\

1

\

\

&ra
[barn]

-1%
\

-2%

I
%70

-i"/

\

60°

2¥0°

160°

320°K

Temperafur Tg der Quelle

a

«

_L
80°

'I

720°

p.w°
2W°

?nn°
200°

Temperafur

Tg

pa
280°

320°

380°K

der Quelle

b
Fig. 8 a. Relatives Intensitatsverhaltnis (7 Ir

— I pt)/J pt der hinter Iridium- bzw. Platinabsorbern gemessenen

129keV-Gammastrahlung als Funktion der Temperatur der Quelle.

Die Temperatur der Absorber betrug

konstant 88° K
Fig. 8 b. Der Wirkungsquerschnitt a ra fur die Kernresonanzabsorption in Ir in als Funktion der Temperatur
der Quelle, fur eine Absorbertemperatur von 88° K. £ MeBpunkte;
theoretischer Verlauf fur
ein quadratisch mit der Frequenz v ansteigendes Schwingungsspektrum (Debye-Spektrum)
theore3
tischer Verlauf fur eine mit v proportionale Frequenzverteilung, die bei der gleichen Qrenzfrequenz abge;

schnitten wurde, d.h. die gleiche Debye-Temperatur besitzt.

Die Debye-Temperaturen der transversalen

und der longitudinal en Komponenten wurden gleichgesetzt

um

ihre Symmetrieachsen, sowie durch kleine Ortsveranderungen
von Quelle und Absorbern. Der EinfluB dieser Geometrieanderungen
zeigt sich in den Unterschieden der Intensitatsdifferenzen der Spalten 2
bzw. 3 der Tabelle 1
Spalte 4 enthalt die Dif ferenz der MeBwerte der
Spalten 2 und 3 [vgl. Gl. (25)]. Da die Geometrie bei der einzelnen MeBreihe konstant gehalten wurde, sollten (in guter Naherung) die Werte
der Spalte 4 nicht von der Geometrie abhangen und ein Vergleich
etwa der Spalten 2 und 4 laBt auch keinen EinfluB der Geometrie auf
.

M

M

;

:

118

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz von Gammastrahlung in Ir191

141

erkennen. Spalte 5 enthalt die auf den Beitrag anderer Linien korrigierten MeBwerte (M/v) [vgl. Gl. (27)]. Die relativen Schwankungen nichtstatistischer

Stunden.

Natur der Zahlrate betrugen etwa 0,1%

iiber

mehrere

Dariiber hinaus zeigte die Zahlrate im Verlauf einiger Tage

langsame elektronisch bedingte Anderungen von einigen Promille, die
Die angegebenen
mittleren Fehler wurden aus den Schwankungen der Einzelmessungen
ermittelt. Der Fehler jeder MeBreihe setzt sich zusammen aus den
Fehlern von vier Intensitatsmessungen [vgl. (25)]. Mit dem Mittelwert
naturlich keinen Einflufi auf die Messung hatten.

Wjv der Tabelle 1 folgt nach (28)
ry

= (3.6± J5) lO"
-

10

sec.

=

Mit dem Konversionskoeffizienten a
2,47 [13] ergibt sich die mittlere
10"10 sec.
Lebenszeit r des Niveaus zu r
rY l(i
a)
(1 ,0i J;J)

=

+ =

•

Fig. 8 enthalt die Ergebnisse der Messungen, bei denen die Absorber

wurden. In Fig. 8a wurden die Differenzen der hinter dem
Resonanzabsorber und dem Vergleichsabsorber gemessenen Intensitaten I aufgetragen, in Fig. 8 b der daraus mit Hilfe von (28) berechnete
Wirkungsquerschnitt cra (Tq )
ara (T1 ). (Bezugstemperatur T2 0° C
0~10
Lebenszeit ry
sec
Konversionskoeffizient a
2,47 [13] .)
3 ,6 1
Fig. 8 b enthalt neben den MeBpunkten den theoretischen Verlauf des
Wirkungsquerschnittes nach (19) fur zwei verschiedene Frequenzverteilungen des Schwingungsspektrums von Iridium.
gekiihlt

—

=

=

•

=

;

8.

Diskussion

Die gemessene Lebenszeit ist in Einklang mit der von Sunyar [14]
0~
angegebenen oberen Schranke von 5 1 10 sec fur die Halbwertzeit des
Niveaus. Messungen der Konversionskoeffizienten ergaben fur die
Multipolordnung des 1 29 keV-t)berganges M\-\-E2[15]. Die Werte
fur das aus den Konversionskoeffizienten der K- und L-Schalen bestimmte Intensitatsverhaltnis MijE2 liegen im Bereich 1,5:1 bis
5:1 [16], [17], [18]. Das hier gefundene ry ergibt mit diesen Daten findie t)bergangswahrscheinlichkeit des 1 29 keV-t)berganges einen Verzogerungsfaktor von mindestens 22 gegeniiber den theoretischen Vor•

hersagen des Einteilchenmodelles [19] fur einen

M l-t)bergang. Der

£2-t)bergang erfolgt dagegen um mindestens einen Faktor 64 schneller
Der 129keV-Zuals nach dem Einteilchenmodell zu erwarten ware.
stand ist daher als Mehrteilchenzustand aufzufassen. Das Niveau ist
jedoch vermutlich kein reines Rotationsniveau im Sinne des Kollektivmodelles, denn das Verhaltnis der Energien des

1.

und 2. ,,Rotations-

niveaus" weicht nach [13] um rund 10% von dem durch das Kollektivmodell fur reine Rotationszustande geforderten Wert ab. Tabelle 2

119

Rudolf L. Mossbauer:

142

enthalt die durch Messungen der Coulomb-Anregung bestimmten re-

duzierten Ubergangswahrscheinlichkeiten B (E 2) fur die E 2-Komponente

des 1 29 keV-t)berganges in Ir191 sowie die daraus berechneten Lebenszeiten r (£2)* und Mischungsverhaltnisse M\\ E2.
,

y

Die Mischungsverhaltnisse der Tabelle 2 deuten auf eine starkere
Bevorzugung der Ml-Komponente hin, als aus den Verhaltnissen der
Konversionskoeffizienten folgen wiirde [16], [17], [18], doch sind die
B(£"2)-Werte fur genaue Aussagen noch zu unsicher.
Tabelle 2

Literatur

B(E2)**

Ty{E2)

«*cm 4 10+ 60

(£ = 129keV)

US]

51

6,1

[20]

56
97

5,6

[16]

3,2

•

Mi IE 2
furTv = 3,6-1O- l0 sec

l(T 9 sec
10~ 9 sec
10~ 9 sec

16:1
15:1
8:1

Die tJbereinstimmung der Messungen an der 129 keV-Gammalinie
r<200° K mit dem in Debyescher Naherung
berechneten Verlauf des Absorptionsquerschnittes ist nur qualitativ.
Die Debyesche Theorie fuhrt in der hier verwendeten Form, bei der die

in Ir191 bei Temperaturen

Debye-Temperaturen der longitudinalen und der transversalen Komponenten gleichgesetzt werden, zu einer Unterdruckung der hoheren
longitudinalen Komponenten. Eine Berucksichtigung der atomistischen
Struktur fuhrt jedoch umgekehrt bei Schwingungen mit Wellenlangen
von der GroBenordnung der Gitterkonstanten wegen der gegentiber dem
Kontinuum groBeren Tragheit des Gitters zu einer Verschiebung des
Spektrums zu kleineren Frequenzen. Die Messungen deuten auf eine
groBere Dichte der Frequenzverteilung des Schwingungsspektrums von
Iridium bei den hoheren Frequenzen hin, als sie die Debyesche Kontinuumstheorie liefert.

Untersuchungen des Verhaltens der spezifischen Warmen ergaben
bei den meisten Metallen bei tieferen Temperaturen einen Anstieg der

Debyeschen Temperatur B [21]. Tatsachlich lassen sich die in Fig. 8
Abweichungen der MeBergebnisse von dem nach der
Debyeschen Theorie zu erwartenden Verlauf des Wirkungsquerschnittes
ebenfalls durch die Annahme eines Anstiegs von
mit abnehmender
Temperatur erklaren. Zur genaueren Untersuchung sollen die Messungen
zu tieferen Temperaturen hin ausgedehnt werden.
dargestellten

* Es

wobei

gilt die Relation (vgl. [13])

If, 7j

:

iJr (E2)

y

=

2li

+

(^\j-(?±J 21/ +1

B{E2),

= Spin des angeregten und des Grundzustandes, E = Anregungs-

energie.

** Die B (£2)-Werte sind nach Angabe der Autoren um einen Faktor 2 unsicher.

120

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz von Gammastrahlung in Ir 191

143

Die Bestimmung der Lebenszeiten von Kernniveaus mittels Absorptionsmessungen der hier beschriebenen Art sind infolge der auBerordentlich kleinen Effekte nur in Ausnahmefallen durchfiihrbar. Dagegen treten bei Untersuchungen der Bindungseigenschaften von Festkorpern bei tiefen Temperaturen urn GroBenordnungen starkere Effekte
auf. Analoge Bindungseffekte wie bei Ir 191 sind im ganzen Energiebereich weicher Gammastrahlung zu erwarten. Wegen der star ken Abhangigkeit der Absorptionsquerschnitte von den Schwingungsspektren
eignet sich die Methode der Resonanzfluoreszenz von Gammastrahlung
bei tiefen Temperaturen zu Untersuchungen der Frequenzverteilung
der Schwingungsspektren fester Korper. Die Methode kann daneben
auch bei der Aufstellung von Zerfallschemas verwendet werden, da die
starke Resonanzabsorption bei tiefen Temperaturen nur bei solchen
Linien auftritt, die einem Ubergang in den Grundzustand entsprechen.
Die Untersuchungen werden fortgesetzt.
Es ist mir ein Anliegen, Herrn Professor H. Maier-Leibnitz fur die Anregung
zu dieser Arbeit, fur interessante Diskussionen und freundliche Forderung herzlich
zu danken. Herrn Professor J. H. D. Jensen danke ich fur aufschluBreiche Diskussionen. Herrn Professor W. BoTHE(f) und Herrn Professor K. H. Lauterjung danke ich dafiir, daB sie die Durchfuhrung dieser Arbeit am Max-PlanckInstitut fur medizinische Forschung in Heidelberg ermoglicht haben.

Literatur
[1] Malmfors, K. G.: Ark. Fysik 6, 49 (1953)- — [2] Malmfors, K. G. in:
K. Siegbahn, Beta- and Gammaray Spectroscopy. Amsterdam 1955- — [3] Metzger, F. R. Report at the Glasgow Conference 1954, S. 201. — J. Franklin Inst.
:

- Phys. Rev. 101, 286 (1956); 103, 983 (1956). - Schopper, H.:
Physik 144, 476 (1956). - Swann, C. P., and F. R. Metzger: J. Franklin
Inst. 261, 667 (1956). - [4] Franz, W.: Z. Physik 98, 314 (1936). - [5] Lamb jr.,
W. E.: Phys. Rev. 55, 190 (1939). Siehe auch Steinwedel, H., u. J. H. Jensen:
Z. Naturforsch. 2a, 125 (1947). — [6] Jackson, J.D.: Canad. J. Phys. 33, 575
(1955)- — [7] Mihelich, I. W., M. McKeown and M. Goldhaber: Phys. Rev.
96, 1450 (1954). — [8] Marty, N., et M. Vergnes: J. Phys. Radium 18, 233
(1957)- - [9] Foote, R. S., and H. W. Koch: Rev. Sci. Instrum. 25, 750 (1954). [10] Johnstone, C. W. Nucleonics 11, No, 1, 36 (Jan. 1953). — [11] Murakawa,
K., and S. Suwa: Phys. Rev. 87, 1048 (1952). — [12] Seitz, F.: The Modern
Theory of Solids, S. 110. 1940. — [13] Davis, R. H., A. S. Divatia, D. A. Lind
and R.D.Moffat: Phys. Rev. 103, 1801 (1956). — [14] Sunyar, A. W.: Phys.
Rev. 98, 653 (1955). — [15] Swan, I. B., and R.D.Hill: Phys. Rev. 88, 831
(1952). - [16] Bernstein, E. M., and H. W. Lewis: Phys. Rev. 105, 1524 (1957)[17] Mihelich, I. W., and A. de-Shalit: Phys. Rev. 93, 135 (1954). - [18] McGowan, F. K.: Phys. Rev. 93, 163 (1954). — [19] Blatt, I. M., and V. F. Weisskopf: Theoretical Nuclear Physics. New York 1952. — [20] Huus, T., I. H.
Bjerregaard and B. Elbeck: Dan. Mat. Fys. Medd. 30, Nr. 17 (1956). —
[21] Leibfried, G., u. W. Brenig: Fortschr. Phys. 1, 187 (1953).
261, 219 (1956).
Z.

:

KERNRESONANZFLUORESZENZ
VON GAMMASTRAHLUNG IN Ir 191 1
(Nuclear Resonance Fluorescence
191
of Gamma Radiation in Ir
)

3.

THEORY
According to Lamb 5 $ the cross section for resonance absorption

is

a(E)=(r 2/4)a W a (E)

(2)

where r= total width of the resonance level, E = energy of the incident photons, and a = cross section at resonance.
The position and shape of the absorption line is given by

Wa (E) = (2/D Real / dpi exp [i/x(E - E + ir/2) + g a

W a (E):

(/i)]

(3a)

where
,

y

(p-e s ) 2

x [(a s + l) exp(-ip.Hw s ) + Q? s exp (ip.tiw s ) - 1 - 2a s ]
In these equations

E

is the resonance energy,

the s-th normal mode of the crystal,

co s

(4a)

the frequency of

m the nuclear mass, p the mo-

mentum of the photon, e the unit polarization vector, 3N the number
of degrees of freedom of the crystal, and

~a s

the average occupation

number of the s-th oscillator,
a s = l/[exp (nu> s /kT) - 1]

(5)

As can easily be shown, §
t Translation of Sec. 3 of the article from Z.

Physik, 151, 124

(1958) which is reproduced in its entirety preceding this translation.
|For references see the German original.

§The proof may be briefly indicated: For the emission line, Eq. (8)
of Lamb 5 must be replaced by

W({a s };{n s })-

(a s |H'|n s )

E -E + E(ns - E(a s + ir/2
)

121

)

THEORY

122

one obtains for the emission linet
oo

W e (E) = (2/D Real / d M exp

[i/Lt(E

- E + ir/2) + g e (/i)]

(3b)

o

where

V (P«e s

2

1

)

— 2mfia> s N

g e (M) f *

s

x [(a s + 1) exp (i/iliaj s ) + a s exp (-i/i"hw s ) - 1 - 2a s ]
(4b)

The integral in (3) will be evaluated in the Debye approximation
with the Debye temperatures of the transverse and longitudinal modes
set equal to each other. I
(a) For /ik0<^l one obtains
2
g a (/x)» — i/xR - \i Rz

g e (M)«+i/uR -

2
jLt

Rc

(6a)

Here R is the recoil energy as given by (1) (see the German original,
is the average energy per vibrational degree of free-

p. 126), and e

dom of the crystal:
e/T
e(T) = kT* = 3kT(T/0)

3

r

J
o

(b)

f

1

l\

T^— + ±^/
\e - 1
-

t

3

dt

(7)

l

For /xk0^> 1 one has

where (a s |H'|n s ) is the matrix element for a lattice transition n s
— a s accompanied by the emission of a photon of momentum p. In
Eq. (17) of Ref 5, a s must be replaced by n s Extending all the following sums over a s instead of n s and averaging over n s instead of
a s one obtains (3b) and (4b), provided a s is substituted for n s in the
-

.

.

,

final relation.

fThe emission and absorption lines W e (E) and W a (E) are mirror
images of each other with respect to E = E
JThe summations in (4) also extend over the polarization direc.

tions.

THEORY

123

ge<-; T) = g a (-; T) = g„(T) = -2

(P*e s )

£ ^£n &*

-- 2R

nss^at./sJ

/

0/T /
= -(6R/k0)(T/0) 2 /

+ (1 / 2 »

s

s

1

f— pi

—

a^r-

d(t!a;)

\
1

+ ±

t

dt

(8)t

To get the experimentally determined average cross section
(T
;T ), where T and T a are the source and absorber temperar q
a
q
tures, respectively, ct(E) in (2) is multiplied by the normalized distribution function
e (E) of the emitted (incident) photons, and the
product integrated over energy. That is,
<J

W

oo

a r = f o (E) (r/27r)W e (E) dE
6

and, using (2),
oo

(E)W e (E) dE
/ W a VJ-./vv

3
r = (r /87r)a

<f

(9)

i

o

where
(1/2*)/

W e (E)dE =

1

o

If the transition to the ground state can also take place by internal
conversion, one must differentiate between the cross section (a ) s
for resonance scattering and the cross section (a ) a for resonance
absorption. For resonance scattering, according to Jackson, 6

2I a + 1
°>s "

(cr

A

2

2i^TT ^T

H

it _ 2I a + 1 A 2
r*

"

SgTl 2i

1

H

(10)

(T+~5p

Here 21+1 are the statistical weights of the excited state a and the
ground state g, H the relative abundance of the resonantly absorbing
isotope, A the resonance wavelength, r the total energy width of the
resonance level, T the partial energy width for radiative transition,
y
and a the conversion coefficient.
In the case of resonance fluorescence, only the fraction T /T of
y

tOur Eq. (8) differs from Eq. (36) of Lamb5 by a factor of 3.

THEORY

124

all intermediate states proceeds to the ground state by photon emis-

sion, the fraction (r - T )/T proceeding through conversion. In the
case of resonance absorption, all intermediate states contribute to
the cross section, and we have
2i a +

r

a2

l

rv

K)a=fr K)s=^TT i Hf

(11)

For resonance fluorescence in Ir 191 (E = 129 kev), the line shape
down to liquid-oxygen temperature can be calculated using two different approximations.
1. In the region |E - E |^> T, only values of /xk0<l yield a substantial contribution to the integral in (3), and (6) is still a useful ap-

proximation:

Wj(E) = (2/D /

d/i

cos(E-E ± R) ju exp(-jur/2 - ^i 2 Rz)

o

= (4/r 2 )^;x)

(12)

Here, for the emission line
0(«e;xe) = ti/2)Yv ( e

exp(-||x2e /4)

(13a)

while for the absorption line

^a;* a = (l/2)l/5T la exp(-| 2a x2a /4)t

(13b)

)

In the above

equations

x e = (E - E + R)/(l/2)r

x a = (E - E

A e = 2VRkTq

A a = 2KRkT*/

£e = r/A e

|a =

T/A a

- R)/(l/2)r

(14)

(15)

(16)

The quantity A is the Doppler width of the level; T£ and Tg denote,
respectively, the effective absorber and source temperatures, which,
according to (7), correspond to the average energy per vibrational
degree of freedom.
2. In the region near E = E
a good approximation for W(E) is
obtained by splitting the integral in (3) at p.k0 = 1 and using approximations (6) and (8) in the regions of their validity. Thus
,

tSee Lamb, 5 Eq. (32).

THEORY

125

l/k0

W n (E) = (2/r) J
+ (2/D

d/i

cos (E - E

f

djLt

±R)

/Li,

exp (-/jT/2- p. 2 R C )

cos (E - E ) /x exp [ goo (T) - /xr/2]

1/ke

The first integral makes only a small contribution to Wji(E), so that
for (I/kO) <$C 1 one obtains as a good approximation,

exp[g w (T)]

W n (E) = W (E) + (E I Eq)2 + r2/4

(17)

X

- E |^> T the second term in (17) is negligible comCombining
pared to Wj(E).
(12) and (17), the energy distributions of
the emission and absorption lines become
In the region

|E

e

T

we (E) = (Vil * (S e ;xe + (E ?E g; + rV4
(

[

)

<

18a >

o

and

exp[g 00 (T

wa (E) = (4/r ^(| a ;xa + (E _ Eo)2 + ra y4
2

)

)]

)

(18b)

According to (18), f the crystal binding modifies the emission and
absorption lines of the 129-kev transition in Ir 191 in the following
way: Except for the region near resonance, at a temperature T, the
lines have almost the same shape and positions as they would have in
an ideal gas at a temperature T*. As shown in (7), T* corresponds
to the average energy per vibrational degree of freedom of the crystal. For temperatures
an additional line of width r, whose intensity increases greatly with decreasing temperature, appears at the
resonance energy E = E (Fig. 1; see the German original). Thus,
the fraction of photons satisfying the resonance condition increases
with decreasing temperature.
The cross section a r is obtained by substituting (18) into (9). Only
two of the integrals yield an appreciable contribution:

T<0

oo

/(4/I*)*(«e;*e)(Vl*)*(* a x a) dE
;

and

7 expfeooCTql + gooCTa)]
dE
[(E-E ) 2 + r 2/4] 2
J
t Equations (18) lose their validity at temperatures below liquid
oxygen temperature.

THEORY

126

The average cross section for resonance absorption obtained by integration of these expressions is

K)a
'ra

2

2

|/A a

x exp[g 00 (T

q)

+A|

exp

4R

2

K>;

2

A a + A|_

+ g c0 (T a )]

(19)

According to the uncertainty relation,
t

=Vr = Vry (l + a) = Ty/(1 +a) = T

1/2

/ln 2

(20)

where r is the mean life and T x/ 2 is the half- life of the resonance
is the partial life for y decay, and a is the conversion colevel, T
y
efficient.

At higher temperatures one can neglect the second term in (19),
and from (11), (19), and (20) it follows that a ra ~ 1/t^. At low temperatures the second term in (19), which is independent of lifetime,
dominates.

NUCLEAR RESONANCE ABSORPTION
OF GAMMA RAYS IN Ir 19l t

Under normal conditions, it is difficult to observe the resonance
fluorescence of nuclear gamma rays because of the recoil energy lost
by the photons during both emission and absorption. In general, these
losses are sufficient to appreciably displace the emission and absorption lines, thereby destroying the resonance condition. It is possible
to compensate for the recoil energy losses by, for example, moving
the source with respect to the absorber with the aid of an ultracentrifuge, 1 or by increasing the thermal motion of the emitting and absorbing atoms. 2 In performing experiments of the latter type, we found
that at low temperatures, contrary to what was expected, a pronounced
increase in resonance absorption occurred. 3 With the help of a theory
developed by Lamb, 4 this effect was attributed to the fact that in solids
the recoil momentum does not always produce a change in the vibrational state of the crystal lattice. Instead, for a fraction of the gamma

transitions, the solid as a whole can take up the recoil momentum.

Thus, according to this theory, the emission and absorption spectra

10 cm
Fig. 1. Experimental arrangement: The detector D accepts only photons emitted by the source while

moving on the solid portion of the path shown.
t Translation of article in Naturwissenschaften, 45, 538 (1958).

127

NUCLEAR RESONANCE ABSORPTION

128

contain very strong lines of natural width superimposed upon a broad
distribution resulting from the thermal motion of the atoms bound in
the crystal lattice. Because of the vanishingly small recoil energy
losses, these lines appear undisplaced at the resonance energy position (i.e., at the excitation energy of the nuclear level under investigation).

We have now demonstrated the existence of these unshifted resonance lines by means of a "centrifuge" method, employing velocities
of only a few centimeters per second. The experimental arrangement
is shown in Fig. 1, while Fig. 2 shows the results obtained for the
jJr.jPt
jPt

AE

-2xl0
1

_s

-lxl0"

s

1x10"
|

1

1

-4-2
1

1

2xl0~

2
|

5

i

4

1

*•

3xl0"

5

4xl0

i

-5

5xl0~

5

ev

i

i

6

8

10

.

.

.

T

12 cm/sec

j.

i
-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

-0.8

-1.0

V

-1.2

Fig. 2,

Difference in intensity of the 129-kev gamma
191

measured behind a resonance
transition in Ir
absorber (iridium) and a comparison absorber
(platinum). This intensity difference is plotted as
a function of v, the relative velocity of the source
with respect to the absorber. Both source and absorber are at a temperature of 88 °K. aE = (v/c)E
denotes the energy shift of the 129-kev gamma
rays.

129-kev transition in Ir 191 Thus, a new method for the direct determination of the level widths of low- lying excited nuclear states has
been found. In our case, the line width of the 129-kev level in Ir 191
agrees, within the limits of error, with the value 6.5 x 10" 6 ev deter.

.

NUCLEAR RESONANCE ABSORPTION

129

mined previously, using a less direct approach. 3 This width corresponds to a lifetime of 1.0 x 10" 10 sec.

Laboratorium fiir Technische Physik der Technischen Hochschule,
Miinchen, und Max- Planck- Institut fiir Medizinische Forschung,
Heidelberg.

RUDOLF L. MOSSBAUER
Received August 13, 1958

REFERENCES
P. B. Moon, Proc. Phys. Soc. (London), A64, 76 (1951). b W. G.
Davey and P. B. Moon, Proc. Phys. Soc. (London), A66, 956 (1953).
b
a
2.
K. G. Malmfors, Ark. Fysik, 6, 49 (1952).
F. R. Metzger and
C
W. B. Todd, Phys. Rev., 95, 853 (1954). F. R. Metzger, Phys.
Rev., 97, 1258 (1955); J. Franklin Inst., 261, 219 (1956). d H. Schopper, Z. Physik, 144, 476 (1956).
3. R. L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik, 151, 124 (1958).
4. W. E. Lamb, Jr., Phys. Rev., 55, 190 (1939).
1.

a

130

KERNRESONANZABSORPTION VON y-STRAHLUNG IN Ir "

211

1

Kernresonanzabsorption von y-Strahlung in Ir

191

Von Rudolf L. Mossbauer
Aus dem Laboratorium fiir technische Physik der Technischen Hochschule in Miinchen
und dem Institut fiir Physik im Max-Planck-Institut fiir medizinische Forschung in Heidelberg
(Z. Naturforschg. 14 a, 211—216 [1959] ; eingegangen am 5. November 1958)

Bei der Emission und Selbstabsorption von weicher y-Strahlung in Kernen treten bei tiefen Temperaturen in Festkbrpern sehr starke Linien mit der naturlichen Linienbreite auf. Diese Linien erscheinen als Folge davon, daB bei tiefen Temperaturen bei einem Teil der Quanteniibergange der
;'-RiickstoBimpuls nicht mehr vom einzelnen Kern aufgenommen wird, sondern von dem Kristall als
Ganzes. Da die scharfen Emissions- und Absorptionslinien energetisch an der gleichen Stelle liegen,
tritt ein sehr starker Resonanzfluoreszenzeffekt auf. Durch eine „Zentrifugen"-Methode, bei der die
Emissions- und Absorptionslinien gegeneinander verschoben werden, lafit sich der Fluoreszenzeffekt
unterdriicken und so eine unmittelbare Bestimmung der naturlichen Linienbreite von Resonanzlinien
vornehmen. Erste Messungen nach dieser Methode ergeben fiir die Lebenszeit x des 129 keV-Niveaus

inlr»": T=(l,4 lj;f) -10"" sec.

Die Methode,

Kernniveaus durch Einstrahlung

der eigenen y-Linie 1

zur Fluoreszenz anzuregen,

wird in zunehmender Weise zur Bestimmung der
Lebenszeiten x kurzlebiger Kernzustande
sec)

1

In besonderen Fallen ist eine Fluoreszenzanregung durch
Einstrahlung eines Quantenkontinuums moglich : J. E. DraE.
per u. R.L.Hickok, Phys. Rev. 108, 1280 [1957].
Haywakd u. E.G. Foli.br, Phys. Rev. 106, 991 [1957].

-

(t<10 -10

verwendet.

Die Kernresonanzfluoreszenz von y-Strahlung ist
unter normalen Bedingungen nur schwer zu beobachten. weil die y-Quanten bei ihrer

Emission und

131

R. L. MOSSBAUER

212

dem 129 keV-Niveau in Ir 191

Absorption infolge Abgabe von RiickstoBimpuls an

tion bei

und absorbierenden Kerne so
hohe RiickstoBenergieverluste erleiden, daB die
Emissions- und Absorptionslinien erheblich gegeneinander verschoben werden und daher die Resonanzbedingung verletzt wird. Es gibt im wesentlichen drei Methoden, durch Kompensation der
RiickstoBenergieverluste meBbare Werte fiir den

Dieser Effekt wurde mit Hilfe einer Theorie von

die

emittierenden

Wirkungsquerschnitt

fiir

Kernresonanzfluores-

die

1.

DoppLER-Verschiebung

der

Quantenenergien

durch mechanische Bewegung der Kerne mit Hilfe

von Ultrazentrif ugen 2
2.

Lamb 6 als Folge der Kristallbindung der Absorberund Praparatsubstanzen gedeutet und ist in Festkorpern allgemein bei tiefen Temperaturen und
weicher y-Strahlung zu erwarten.

Die Emission oder Absorption eines Quants durch
einen in einem Kristall gebundenen Kern fiihrt im

allgemeinen zu einer Anderung des Schwingungszustandes

zenz zu erzielen:

des

Kristallgitters,

das

den

RiickstoB-

impuls aufnimmt. Wegen der Quantelung der inneren Energie kann der Kristall die RiickstoBenergie

nur in diskreten Betragen aufnehmen. Mit abneh.

Emissions-

und

durch Temperaturerhohung,

um

DoppLER-Verbreiterung

Absorptionslinien

beobachtet.

der

die Uberdeckung der beiden Linien zu verbessern

mender Temperatur nimmt die Wahrscheinlichkeit
fiir die Anregung der inneren Niveaus immer mehr
weshalb bei weicher y-Strahlung 7 bei einem

ab,

3
.

DoppLER-Verbreiterung oder DoppLER-Verschiebung der Quantenenergien durch einen fruheren
3.

Quantenubergange der Kristall als Ganzes
den RiickstoBimpuls aufnimmt. Die hierbei emittier-

Teil der

Emissions- oder AbsorptionsprozeB, z. B. einen dem

Quanten erleiden wegen der
groBen Masse des Kristalles praktisch keine Energie-

y-Ubergang vorangehenden /?-t)bergang oder einen

verluste

Teilcheneinfang 4

.

In der vorliegenden Arbeit wird iiber eine Me-

thode berichtet, bei der das Auftreten der RiickstoBenergieverluste verhindert wird

ten bzw. absorbierten

und erfiillen ideal die Resonanzbedingung.
Abb. 1 zeigt die theoretischen Emissions- und Absorptionsspektren des 129 keV-Uberganges in Ir 191
bei einer Temperatur von 88 °K.
Die Spektren enthalten je zwei Anteile:

und die Resonanz-

bedingung daher nicht verletzt wird. Das beschriebene Verfahren dient zur unmittelbaren Messung

Kristallgitter

der Lebenszeiten niedriger, angeregter Kernzustande.

Verteilung. Die in den Bereich dieser „thermischen

191

Linie" fallenden Quantenubergange sind mit einer

Erste Messungen an dem 129 keV-Ubergang in Ir

1.

Eine breite, die thermische Bewegung der im

gebundenen Atome

widerspiegelnde

Anderung des Schwingungszustandes des

werden mitgeteilt.

Kristall-

gitters gekoppelt.
1.

2.

Grundlagen der Mefimethode

Eine auBerordentlich starke Linie mit der na-

turlichen

In einem fruheren Experiment 5 wurde bei tiefen

Temperaturen im Gegensatz zur klassischen Erwartung ein starker Anstieg der Kernresonanzabsorp-

A 64, 76 [1951]. P. B. Moon u. A. Storruste, Proc. Phys. Soc, Lond. A 66,
585 [1953]. - W. G. Davey u. P. B. Moon, Proc. Phys.
Soc, Lond. A 66, 956 [1953]. - F. R. Metzger, J. Franklin Inst. 261, 219 [1956]. - V. Knapp, Proc. Phys. Soc,
Lond. A 70, 142 [1957].
s
K. G. Malmfors, Ark. Fysik 6, 49 [1953]. - F. R. Metzger
u. W.B.Todd, Phys. Rev. 95, 853 [1954]. - F. R. Metzger, Phys. Rev. 97, 1258 [1955] 98, 200 [1955]. - F. R.
Metzger, J. Franklin Inst. 261, 219 [1956]. - H. Schopper,
Z. Phys. 144, 476 [1956].
4
K.Ilakovac, Proc. Phys. Soc, Lond. A 67, 601 [1954]. F. R. Metzger, Report at the Glasgow Conference 1954,
S.201; Phys. Rev. 101, 286 [1956]; 103, 983 [1956];
110, 123 [1958]. - H. Schopper, Z. Phys. 144, 476 [1956].
— C. P. Swann u. F. R. Metzger, Phys. Rev. 108, 982
2

tritt,

der Kristall als Ganzes den RuckstoB-

-

-

-

—

-

s

6
7

er-

Rev. 108, 1644 [1957].
L. Grodzins, Phys. Rev. 109,
1014 [1958].
V. Knapp, Proc. Phys. Soc, Lond. 71,
194 [1958].
P. B. Smith u. P. M. Endt, Phys. Rev. 110,
397, 1442 [1958]. - F. R. Metzger, C. P. Swann u. V. K.
Rasmussen, Phys. Rev. 110, 906 [1958].
V. K. Rasmussen,
F. R. Metzger u. C. P. Swann, Phys. Rev. 110, 154 [1958].
B. Duelli u. L. Hoffmann, Z. Naturforschg. 13 a, 204
[1958].
G. M. Griffiths, Proc. Phys. Soc, Lond. 72,
337 [1958].
L.
Mossbauer,
R.
Z. Phys. 151, 124 [1958].
W. E. Lamb jr., Phys. Rev. 55, 190 [1939].
Bei harter y-Strahlung ist die RiickstoBenergie groB gegen
die obere Grenzenergie des Schwingungsspektrums des
Kristalles und es ist eine ungehinderte Aufnahme der RiickstoBenergie in Form von innerer Energie durch den Kristall
moglich.

-

;

— S. S. Hanna u. L. Meyer-Schutzmeister, Phys.

weil

impuls aufnimmt. Diese „riickstoBfreie Linie"

P. B. Moon, Proc. Phys. Soc, Lond.

[1957].

die die Quantenubergange
denen kein RiickstoBenergieverlust auf-

Linienbreite,

enthalt, bei

:

132

KERNRESONANZABSORPTION VON y-STRAHLUNG IN Ir191

Emissionsspektrum

I(v)

const

213

/> (E + 1. E \ e-°( £ )-" dE
e

(1)

.

x2O0

n ist die Zahl der Atome des resonanten Isotops pro
cm 2 Absorberflache und E ist die Resonanzenergie.
e (E) ist die Energieverteilung der Quanten einer
ruhenden Quelle und a(E) ist der Wirkungsquer-

W

schnitt fiir die

Resonanzabsorption:

0(£).-(r»/4)o,r.(£)

(2)

mit

Dabei sind /a und /g der Spin des angeregten und
des Grundzustandes,

A

die Resonanzwellenlange,

r die totale Energiebreite des Resonanzniveaus und
r die partielle Energiebreite des Resonanzniveaus

Energie

v

Abb. 1. Lage und Form der Emissions- und Absorptionsspektren des 129 keV-t)berganges in Ir 191 bei T = 88 °K fiir eine
-10 sec. Nullpunkt der Energieskala
Lebenszeit t = 1,4-10
unterdriickt; Einheit der Ordinate willkiirlich;

nien bei

Hone der Li-

E=E (Resonanzenergie) im Verhaltnis 1

:

geben durch
CO

W& (E) = (2/r) Real/d/* exp

[i

iu(E-E + i JT/2)

und Absorption unver-

schoben an der Stelle der Resonanzenergie E
In der vorliegenden Arbeit wurden

die Emissionslinie nach groBeren

+ ga(/0]-

(4a)

.

am Beispiel

von Ir 191 die „riickstoBireien" scharfen Emissionsund Absorptionslinien mit Hilfe einer „Zentrifugen"-Methode nachgewiesen. Dabei wurde die Quelle
gegen den Absorber bewegt, wobei durch den DoppLER-Effekt

Strahlungsemission.

Die Absorptionslinie ist nach Lage und Form ge-

200 ver-

kiirzt dargestellt.

scheint daher in Emission

fiir

oder

Dabei ist

*W"'?i^3rIft +1
•

E

(4b)
»

exp (

— ijuh <o s +a, exp (i ju h co s — 1 - 2 a s ]

ist

die Resonanzenergie,

)

)

a> s

.

die Frequenz der

m die Kern-

kleineren Energien verschoben wurde. Durch diese

5-ten Normalschwingung des Kristalles,

Verschiebung der Emissionslinie wurde die bei ru-

masse, p der Impuls des y-Quants, ^T der Polarisa-

hender Quelle vorhandene vollstandige Uberdeckung

tionseinheitsvektor, 3 A^ die Zahl der

der „riickstoBfreien" Emissions- und Absorptions-

Freiheitsgrade

linien aufgehoben. Damit wurde die Resonanzbedingung verletzt und der starke Resonanzabsorptions-

setzungszahl des 5-ten Oszillators.

effekt der „riickstoBireien

u

Linien

zum Verschwin-

den gebracht. Eine Analyse der den Resonanzabsordurchsetzenden 129 keV-y-Strahlung
von Iridium als Funktion der Relativgeschwindigkeit
von Quelle und Absorber lieferte dann unmittelbar

ber (Iridium)

die Breite

der „ruckstoBfreien"

Linien,

d. h.

Im Fall der Emissionslinie [W e (E)] ist ga (yu) in
(4 a) zu ersetzen durch
ge(/")

(pes)'

2 mh

-

2

+

Wenn die Quelle mit der Geschwindigkeit v in
fiir die Intensitat / der Resonanzstrahlung
:

(5)

e

(6)

o

> 1 gilt (h a> g = obere Grenzenergie des

Schwingungsspektrums)
8

Fiir Einzelheiten der Ableitung wird auf Anm. 5 • verwie-

9

Die Absorption der Hiillenelektronen kann im Bereich der
Resonanzlinie als unabhangig von der Energie angenommen werden.

i

sen.

Richtung auf den Resonanzabsorber bewegt wird,

dann gilt

2 a,].

fw& (E)dE = fW (E)dE = 2n/r.
Fiir ju h a)g

Theorie

hinter dem Resonanzabsorber 9

[(a s + l) exp(i>feco s )

exp(-ijuho) s ) -1

o

.

8

s

N

die

und damit auch die Lebens129 keV-Niveaus von Ir 191

2.

a.

a>s

Ferner ist

natiirliche Linienbreite
zeit des

unabhangigen

im Kristall und a s die mittlere Be-

:

133

R. L. MOSSBAUER

214

ge(°o;D=ga (oo;r)

(7)

Mit abnehmender Temperatur wachst die „riickscharfe Linie auf Kosten der „thermischen" Linie n Beim Ubergang zur Temperatur
stoBfreie"

.

Wenn der Wirkungsquerschnitt fiir die Resonanzabsorption vorzugsweise durch die „rucksto8freien"
Linien bestimmt wird und wenn zwischen der Niveaubreite J" und der oberen Grenzenergie hw g des
Schwingungsspektrums die Ungleichung T <^ k <o g
besteht, dann gilt in der Umgebung der Resonanzstelle E in guter Naherung (T q , T a = Temperatur

von Quelle bzw. Absorber)

T=

erreicht die „riicksto6freie" Linie ihre maxi-

male Hohe, doch existiert daneben immer noch eine
breite thermische Verteilung, weil die Quanten bei

^=

zwar keine Phononen mehr absorbieren kon-

nen, eine Phononenemission aber immer nodi moglich

wenn audi nur mit

ist,

einer kleinen

Wahr-

scheinlidikeit.

„riickstoBfreien"

die

Fiir

Linien

gilt

bei

T=

:

fiir ein DEBYEsches Sdiwingungsspektrum

W (E) = (2/r) fdju cos (£-£„)
e

(8)

fx

6

•exp[ goo (T)-f*r/2]

o(E) = (r /4) o

und

*

)

Das
(9)

in der vorliegenden Arbeit besdiriebene Ver-

fahren zur Messung der Lebenszeiten von Kernniveaus

Damit folgt fiir die Strahlungsintensitiit hinter dem
Resonanzabsorber bei einer Verschiebung der Emissionslinie

von der GroBenordnung der natiirlichen

und (9):

Linienbreite aus (1), (8)

I(v) — const

standen

nur bei energetisch niedrigen Kernzuanwendbar, namlich bei solchen Kern-

ist

niveaus, bei denen die RiickstoUenergie

Nur unter
(10)

[£+(t;/c)£ -£: ]*+rV4

(6)

dieser

Bedingung

tritt

nach

wirklidi eine starke „riickstoBfreie

dem Untergrund der „thermischen"
exp
I(v)

1+[(2ID(E-E )]*

d£.

ist eine symmetrische Funktion.

nahme der
,

!l

^

u

und

(12)

Linie aus

Linie hervor.

Der anschauliche Grund hierfiir ist, daB bei RiickstoBenergien von der GroBenordnung k
die Auf-

Im Fall „schwacher Absorption" 10 d. h. fiir
na expg oo (T )<l folgt aus (10) [mit (E - E ) /
(r/2)=xund(v/c)Ej(r/2)=y]:

/H = r/2L expg

E 2 /2 m c2

hodistens etwa das Doppelte der Abschneideenergie

k & des DEBYEschen Schwingungsspektrums betragt.

exp goo (r q )

/

(12)

2

2
)/fc0 ]
_^ exp[-(3/2)(M2mc
(£-£ a + rV4

(E-E )* + r*/4

^_

(0 >

%

e

exp goo (rq )

expg °° (r

2

x p*~
W (E) - W {E) - (£-£:
)*+r /4

RiickstoBenergie

vorzugsweise

durch

im energiearmen Bereich des Sdiwingungsspektrums erfolgen muB. Dieser Bereidi be12
sitzt aber nur eine geringe Oszillatordichte
und
Oszillatoren

die Wahrsdieinlichkeit fiir die Aufnahme des Riick00

(7'

(11)

q)

stoBimpulses

ist

entsprediend klein, was das Auf-

treten einer starken „riickstoBfreien" Resonanzlinie

dx

(*+yy

=c,

I

reg exp goo (r a )

[l+x*][l+{x + y)*]

dx

zur Folge hat. Wenn dagegen E 2 /2
tretenen

i+.Uv/c) sjry

Die Halbwertsbreite der Intensitatsverteilung I(v)
hangt im Fall starker Absorption nach (10) und
(7) von der Form des Schwingungsspektrums des

Absorbers ab. Im Fall „schwacher Absorption"

hochfrequenten

Wahrsdieinlichkeit

Oszillatoren

starker

zur

fiir

die ungehinderte

Aufnahme

des RuckstoBimpulses.

ist
10

/=/„ exp (-rear) mit a r = f(r/2jt) a{E) W e (E) d£

und der Praparatsubstanzen. Dagegen

wird die Konstante C 2 in (11), die das Verhaltnis
der resonanzabsorbierten zu den nicht-resonanten
Quanten bestimmt, erheblich durch die Form der

In diesem Fall laBt sich ein „mittlerer" Wirkungsquerschnitt a r definieren:

hangig von der Form der Schwingungsspektren der

Schwingungsspektren beeinfluBt.

so

,

Energieaufnahme herangezogen werden und mit
der Zahl der Kombinationsmoglichkeiten steigt die

die Halbwertsbreite der Intensitatsverteilung unab-

Absorber-

mc2 ^> k@

konnen die im Sdiwingungsspektrum reidilidier ver-

,

6
vgl.

Anm. 5

,

Gl. (9).

11

vgl. Gl. (6).

12

Die Dichteverteilung ist z. B. im DKBYE-Spektrum proportional dem Quadrat der Oszillatorenenergie h <o
.

7

;

134

KERNRESONANZABSORPTION VON y-STRAHLUNG IN Ir "
1

3.

Versuchsanordnung und MeBergebnisse

215

Strahlungsintensitaten hinter den beiden Absorbern

bestimmt. Die gesamte MeBzeit betrug 14 Tage. Die

Abb. 2 zeigt die Versuchsanordnung. Der Aufbau
der Kryostaten wurde friiher

5

beschrieben.

Der Re-

Strahlungsintensitat hinter

dem Vergleichsabsorber

sonanzabsorber (Iridium) und ein Vergleichsabsor-

war innerhalb der Grenzen der MeBgenauigkeit unabhangig von der Relativgeschwin-

ber (Platin) konnten wechselweise in den Strahlen-

digkeit v

^\W^

(Platin)

Die eingetragenen mittleren Fehler wurden aus den Schwankungen der Einzelmessungen
bestimmt und sind immer groBer als die statistischen
Fehler.

.

Beim vorliegenden Experiment wurde der

Fall „schwacher Absorption" [Gl. (II)] noch nicht
verwirklicht. Die eingetragene, den MeBwerten ange-

:tBE2M

Wege nach

paBte Kurve wurde auf numerischem

s^>

«^^

Abb. 2. Versuchsgeometrie. A Absorber-Kryostat

;

(10) berechnet 13 und entspricht einer Niveaubreite

1

r-(4,6±0,6)-10-

6

eV fiir das 129 keV-Niveau
Berechnung des Absorptionsquerschnittes nach (9) wurde das Schwingungsspektrum
des Absorbers durch ein DEBYEsches Spektrum mit
= 285 °K angenahert.
einer DEBYE-Temperatur
in Ir 191 . Bei der

Q rotieren-

M

der Kryostat mit Quelle; D Szintillationsdetektor.
ist der
bei der Messung ausgeniitzte Teil des Rotationskreises der
Quelle.

Diese Naherung ergibt eine zusatzliche, unter den
Bedingungen des vorliegenden Experimentcs allerdings unerhebhche Unsicherheit in der Bestimmung
von r.

4.

Diskussion

In der friiheren Arbeit 5

Lebenszeit r Y

fiir

wurde fiir die partielle

Strahlungsemission des 129 keV-

Niveaus in Ir 191 ein Wert von
T y =(3,6:^)-10- 10 sec

gef unden. Mit dem Konversionskoef fizienten a = 2,47

nach Davis und Mitarb. 16 folgt daraus fiir die Le-

10 -10 sec.
Die Unscharferelation ergibt mit der im vorliegenbenszeit x = r y/(l + a) = 1,0 !o'.a)

Abb. 3. Relatives Intensitatsverhaltnis (/I r — P ')// Pt der hinter Iridium- bzw. Platinabsorbem gemessenen y-Strahlung als
Funktion der Geschwindigkeit der Quelle relativ zu den Absorbern. E=(v/c)-E ist die Energieverschiebung der 129 keVQuanten relativ zu den ruhenden Absorbern. Als Strahlungsquelle diente eine 65 mCurie starke Osmiumquelle, deren
enthalt.
Zerfallsspektrum die 129 keV-Linie in Ir

m

•

den Experiment bestimmten Niveaubreite
Lebenszeit des 129 keV-Niveaus in Ir 191

fiir

die

:

T =(l,4:S:?)-10- 10 sec.

Wir sehen den im vorliegenden Experiment gewonnenen Wert als zuverlassiger an und verzichten
auf eine Mittelung der Ergebnisse der beiden nach

verschiedenen Methoden vorgenommenen Messun-

gang gebracht werden. Die Absorber und die Quelle
befanden sich auf der Temperatur des fliissigen 2
Das Szintillationsspektrometer wurde durch eine
Photozelle so gesteuert, daB nur solche Quanten
registriert wurden, die von der Strahlenquelle wah•

rend ihres Aufenthaltes langs des markierten Teiles
ihres Rotationskreises emittiert wurden.

Abb. 3

zeigt

die MeBergebnisse.

MeBpunkt wurde aus etwa

je

Jeder einzelne

10 Messungen der

gen,

wegen der Unsicherheit in dem Wert des Kon-

versionskoeffizienten a und weil sich bei der friihe-

ren Messung systematische Fehler wesentlich schwie13

= 3/2 (s. Anm. w
= 5/2 (s.Anm. 15 ); n = l,07-10 21 cm- 2 T q = TA = 88°K.

Fiir die Rechnung wurden verwendet 7g
/a

14

)

;

K. Murakawa u. S. Suwa, Phys. Rev. 87, 1048 [1952].
16
J. W. Mihelich, M. McKeown u. M. Goldhaber, Phys. Rev.
96, 1450 [1954].
18
R. H. Davis, A. S. Divatia, D. A. Lind u. R. D. Moffat, Phys.
Rev. 103, 1801 [1956].

135

216

H.VOSHAGE UND H. HINTENBERGER

riger ausschlieCen lassen als bei der vorliegeriden,

sind und daher nur Relativgeschwindigkeiten der

mehr direkten Messung der Niveaubreite.
thode der Verschiebung „riickstoBfreier" j^-Linien

GroBenordnung cm/sec benotigt werden, im Gegensatz zu der um GroBenordnungen hohere Geschwindigkeiten erf ordernden Ultrazentrif ugenmethode 2

auf mechanischem Wege gestattet eine unmittelbare

bei der die thermisch verbreiterten Linien gegenein-

Die in der vorliegenden Arbeit beschriebene Me-

Bestimmung der Niveaubreiten und damit audi der
niedriger, angeregter Zustande von
Kernen, die in Festkorpern gebunden sind. Die Methode eignet sich u. a. hervorragend zur Messung
von Lebenszeiten energetisch niedriger Kernzustande
-10
-11
in dem Ubergangsgebiet von 10
bis 10
sec,
das mit der Methode der verzogerten Koinzidenzen
schwer erfaBbar ist. Der groBe Vorteil dieser Methode liegt bei Messungen von Lebenszeiten der
GroBenordnung 10 -10 sec darin, daB die erforderlichen Verschiebungen der Quantenenergien nur von
der GroBenordnung der natiirlichen Linienbreite
Lebenszeiten

,

ander verschoben werden. Das beschriebene Verfahren bietet dariiber hinaus im Energiegebiet weicher
y-Strahlung eine einfache Moglichkeit, die Resonanzstreustrahlung von der Streustrahlung der Elektronenhulle,

insbesondere

von

der

RAYLEiGH-Streu-

strahlung gleicher Wellenlange, ?u unterscheiden.

Die Untersuchungen werden fortgesetzt.
Es ist mir ein Anliegen, Herrn Professor H. MaiebLeibnitz fur sein reges Interesse und fordernde Diskussionen herzlich zu danken. Herrn Professor K. H. Lauterjung danke ich dafiir, daB er die Durchfiihrung der
Arbeit

am

Max-Planck-Institut

fiir

schung in Heidelberg ermoglicht hat.

medizinische

For-

136

VOLUME 55

PHYSICAL REVIEW

JANUARY

Capture of Neutrons by Atoms in a Crystal*
Willis E. Lamb, Jr.
Columbia University, New York, New York
(Received November 21, 1938)

The precise determination of the properties of nuclear resonance levels from the capture of
slow neutrons is made difficult by the fact that most of the substances used for absorbers and
detectors are in the solid state, so that the calculations of Bethe and Placzek for the influence
of the Doppler effect are inapplicable, since these were based on the assumption of a perfect
gas. In this paper, their calculations are generalized to include the effect of the lattice binding.

Under the assumption that the crystal may be treated as a Debye continuum, it is shown that
for sufficiently weak lattice binding, the absorption curve has the same form as it would in a
gas, not at the temperature

T of the crystal, however, but at a temperature which corresponds

to the average energy per vibrational degree of freedom of the lattice (including zero-point

energy). In cases of somewhat stronger lattice binding, the line form is found to be more complicated, and may even have a fine structure. Plots are given of the absorption line in several

typical cases. An approximate formula for the cross section for self-indication is also derived.

ACCORDING to the theory of the compound

an equation of the form

nucleus proposed by Bohr and by Breit and

Wigner, 1 the cross section for the capture of a
slow neutron with an energy near to a resonance
level of a nucleus at rest in free space is given by
* Publication assisted by the Ernest Kempton Adams
Fund for Physical Research of Columbia University.

N. Bohr, Nature 137, 344 (1936)
Wigner, Phys. Rev. 49, 519 (1936).
«

;

G. Breit and E.

o-o

4 (£-£o-i?) 2 +£r 2

where ff

,

(1)

the cross section at resonance, varies

inversely With v, the velocity of the neutron in

E is the kinetic energy of the
E is the energy that the neutron

the rest system,
neutron, and

4

:

137

CAPTURE OF NEUTRONS
would have at resonance if the atom were infinitely heavy so that the compound nucleus
would take up no recoil energy. For atoms of
finite mass, the recoil energy R = (m/M)E must
be included in the energy denominator. 2 (We
of the atom is much
assume that the mass
greater than the mass m of the neutron, and
neglect terms of higher order in m/M.) T is the

M

total half- value width of the resonance level, and
is

proportional to

compound

the rate of decay of the

nucleus; in most cases this corre-

sponds to the process of emission of a high
energy gamma-ray.
Actually, of course, it never happens that one
has to do with a free atom at rest. This somewhat
complicates the determination of the properties
of the resonance level from slow neutron data.
The atoms in a gas may be treated as free, but
at finite temperatures, there is a Maxwellian
distribution of velocities,

modified,

as

has

been

and Eq. (1) must be
done by Bethe and

Placzek3, for this case. It is here necessary to
change the resonance energy denominator according to the relative velocity of the neutron
and atom, and to average over the Maxwellian
distribution of velocities of the gas atoms. The
proportionality of the cross section to 1/v

191

becomes simple in the following limiting cases

*»l/£ 2

(a)

,

*-*l/(l+*2),

far enough from resonance, the line has its
normal form.
i.e.,

(b)

1,

^->1/(1+* 2 ),

when the natural breadth is much larger
than the Doppler breadth, the line is again
normal.

i.e.,

£«1,

(c)

i.e.,

*<1/S 2

,

,

iA->*ir*$e-K *

,
I

when the natural width is small compared

to the Doppler width, the absorption line has an
effective

width

strongly

dependent

on

The total activation induced in a thin detector
by a beam of neutrons distributed smoothly in
energy is proportional to the area under the
absorption curve

/ dEao^iZi

x)

= §7rrV

,

independently of the temperature of the gas.
Another quantity of experimental interest is at
the cross section for self-indication 6

f**/f.«*E-W($vZ,.0)

gives

(W»*W-**(«/Sfl)J
*=«#(&*),

(2)

x=(E-E -R)/hT, £=r/A

(3)

A = 2(RT)>

(4)

where

and
is the "Doppler" width of the level. 6 The function

e-HHx-v)*
(5)
2

2
As it is usually written, the capture cross section refers
to the coordinate system in which the compound nucleus
is at rest, so that no energy of recoil appears in the denominator of Eq. (1).
» H. Bethe and G. Placzek, Phys. Rev. 51, 462 (1937).
* H. Bethe, Rev. Mod. Phys. 9, 140 (1937).
* We will measure temperatures in energy units, taking
the Boltzmann constant to be unity. The results quoted
here were derived on the assumption that the Doppler
width of the level is much less than the energy E at
resonance of the neutron. This condition is satisfied in all
cases of practical interest, and we shall have occasion to

assume it in our calculations also.

(7)

where $ is the Gaussian error function.
The above results are valid, however, only for
free atoms.

l+y

(6)

,

is

thereby unaltered, as this factor arises just from
the normalization of the incident neutron Wave
function to unit flux required by the definition
of a cross section. The result of the averaging

2ttU_ 00

the

temperature.

Most of the experiments, of course,

have been performed with solid absorbers and
detectors in which the atoms are bound in a
crystal lattice of some sort with a characteristic
Debye temperature of the order of room temperature, and if the chemical binding is of importance, as we shall see is the case, it is clearly not

permitted to apply the free atom theory of the

Doppler broadening, as was done by Bethe, 4 to
such cases as silver at ordinary temperatures.

We shall want, therefore, to calculate the
shape of the absorption line for an atom which is
bound in a crystal lattice. We do not expect that
the chemical binding will cause any difference in
6

See reference 4, Eq. (520).

138

WILLIS

192

E.

the 1/v variation of the capture cross section.
This has been shown analytically for the case of
capture by bound protons, 7 but the result is much
more generally valid, following in every case just
from the normalization of the neutron wave
function. The calculation will be made without
detailed assumptions about the crystal model,
but in using the final result, for simplicity, we
will treat the crystal as a Debye continuum, and
hence the results will not admit of an exact
application to experimental cases. Nevertheless,
the general features of the dependence of the
absorption line on the characteristics of the
lattice and on the temperature may be expected
to be fairly independent of the detailed model.
For just as in the theory of specific heat, there
are several limiting cases in which the results
may not depend on the model of the lattice assumed, so that any fairly smooth interpolation
should approximate the rigorous result fairly
closely. For example, let us consider a crystal
lattice at the temperature absolute zero. If the
lattice binding is sufficiently strong (as defined
below), the absorption line will be normal in
while for very
form, but centered about
weak binding, as for instance might be the case
with a different substance containing the atom in
question,
he absorption line will again be
normal in form, but centered about an energy

E=E

,

E=E +R. Since in practice, this shift R

is often

LAMB, JR
vibrational degree of freedom (including zero-

point energy) of the crystal.

We must now ask for the probability W^/S,}
{

;

a, \ ) for the capture of a neutron of momentum

p by a definite lattice atom L of nuclear type A
to form a nucleus B with emission of a gammaray of wave vector k when the crystal undergoes
a transition from a state {a s to a state {/},}.
Here the set of numbers denoted by {a,} gives
the numbers a, of quanta (phonons) in the
\

various modes 5 of oscillation in the lattice. We

must consider that the

final state is reached
through an intermediate state in which there is
neither neutron nor gamma-ray, but a compound
nucleus8 C with the lattice in a state {n,}. The
usual dispersion theory gives, apart from a
trivial constant factor,

(Bfijk

I

H' Cn.) (Cn. H' \Aa,p)
|

I

J5o-E+E(«.)-£(«.) + (*/2)r(«.)

(8)

where r(n„) is the total half- value width of the
intermediate state (C, n,). 9 Because of the short
range of nuclear forces and hence the independence of the motion in the crystal of the center
of gravity and the internal degrees of freedom
of

the

nucleus,

the

matrix elements of the

perturbation H' which appear in the numerator
of (8) can be factored into

of the order of T, the half-width of the absorption
this change in the curve can be experimentally important, even though the recoil
energy is numerically quite small. It might thus
be possible to detect the effect of the chemical
line,

(Cn,\H'\Aa,p)

= {n, exp (ip-x L /h) a,)Mcomp
\

I

(9)

(B0.\H \Cn t)

binding, especially at low temperatures, by use of
different

crystals,

containing

in

-09. exp (-ik-x L /h)\n t )Mnd (k),
1

common an

element with a slow neutron resonance capture
level, but in which the remaining elements do
not appreciably capture or scatter slow neutrons

,

f

where

M

T *&{k) and

for radiation

M mp are the matrix elements
CO

and compound nucleus formation,

respectively, for a free nucleus, and, for example,

of the resonance energy.

(».|exp(*p«Xi/ft)|a.)

In the intermediate cases, the shape of the

absorption line is in general much more compli-

is the matrix element for transfer of a

cated. However, in the case of weak binding, as
8

momentum

We will ignore throughout the circumstance that the

be possible to treat the

compound nucleus C is heavier than the atom A. This

bound atoms as if they were in a gas, not however

neglect is certainly valid if m<g.M, as is the case in practice,
and may be seen to subject our results to a limitation on
the effective width of the level analogous to that met by
Bethe and Placzek (reference 5) for free atoms. As there,
this limitation is of no importance experimentally.
8
The curly brackets denoting a set of numbers will be
dropped when it will not cause confusion.

defined below,

it

will

with a temperature T, but at a larger temperature corresponding to the average energy per

W. E. Lamb, Jr., Phys. Rev. 51, 187 (1937).

139

CAPTURE OF NEUTRONS
p to the crystal through the Lth atom with excitation of the lattice from a state {a.} to a state
\n t ). In practice, the lattice is in thermal equilibrium, therefore not in a definite state {a,},
and further, because of the high energy of the
gamma-ray, the experiments will give only the
total probability of capture, i.e., not

W({0,

«.))

[«.}),

by use

M

c

l/l(E-E y+iT*l,
£«({a.}) = l.

since

art

We now turn to an evaluation of the matrix
elements in Eq. (11). In terms of the wave

(10)

iMxi,

a.

where the sum over the initial states of the lattice
is weighted according to the Boltzmann factor
g({a,}) for each state when the temperature of
the lattice is T. Because of over-all conservation
of energy, the magnitude of the wave vector k
in (8) is a function of the final state of the lattice
{/?,}. In all cases of importance, however, one
may neglect a variation of k of the order of the
zero-point energy of oscillation in the lattice,
and perform the sum over the final states of the
lattice

|

completeness relation would reduce just to

functions 9

but
fit

factor

of

193

the completeness relations,

finding

•

Xw)

• • ,

of the crystal, which is assumed to be periodic in

a large volume containing
tions are denoted by Xi,
element is

N atoms whose posi•

•

• ,

Xn, this matrix

({«.}|exp(*p.x L A)|{«.})

/-/

•dX^n,*(XiX 2

-

•

>X N )

Xexp (*p- x L /h)+at {xv

•

•

xN).

dXidX 2

'

•

(12)

We introduce normal coordinates for the crystal
in the usual form : 10

W(E)=\M > d \Meomp \*Zg(a.)
2

t

XL

Xo=X O +Ug

\

(13)

|(».|exp(ip.x*/»)|a.)|«

[£-£ -E(rc.-«.)W] +Kr(tt.))
2

(ID
2

where the energy of the lattice has been expressed in terms of the frequencies «, of the
lattice oscillations. Thus one sees that the probability of

gamma-ray emission

is

proportional

just to the probability of formation of a com-

pound nucleus C irrespective of the state of the
lattice, and this despite the fact that very often

a gamma-ray may be emitted in a time short
compared to the periods of oscillation of the
lattice,

giving the

atom a recoil energy of the

order of a hundred volts. Eq. (11) will be much
less complicated if one may neglect the depend-

1

u<?=

—
LLe<u'C4<i;exp (iq-xo°A)+conj.),
N*
q

is

the unit polarization vector for the

from the emission of slow neutrons, i.e., in case
of a large capture cross section. If one were also

to neglect the energy given to the lattice, the

expression (11), from which we will now drop the

wave

characterized by the propagation vector q and
polarization j. The spectrum of eigenvibrations
is

determined by the periodic boundary condi-

tions, and it is cut off at an upper frequency limit

such that the number of degrees of freedom agrees
with the number 3N belonging to the
atoms
in the fundamental volume of the lattice. The
single index 5 will often be used to denote the

N

pair of indices

ence of T(n,) on the state \n t ) of the lattice. This
will be so except in the case, unimportant for our
purposes, that the main contribution to V comes
of a large elastic scattering cross section instead

j

where x© is the equilibrium position of the Gth
atom, u<? its displacement from equilibrium, e<j

(q, j).

In terms of the quantities

Q,=A.+A *
t

(14)

where «. is the frequency belonging to the 5th
normal mode, the Hamiltonian of the crystal
10 See
for instance, A. Sommerfeld and H. Bethe,
Handbuch der Physik, vol. 24/2, second edition (1933),

p. 500.

:

140

WILLIS

194

E.

takes the form appropriate for a system of linear

harmonic

oscillators

Q and

with coordinates

s

LAMB,

JR,

will enter the final result

only linearly in sums

like

momenta P,

H=ZH„
(15)

H = %Mo>SQ, +P. /2M.
2

stance.

n, = 0, 1,2, •••

.

of the higher powers of the q 8 2 in Eqs. (17).

Consider now the expression

and the wave functions normalized in terms of

W(a,) =

S,~Q.(h/2Mw.)-*
,

where A»( (&) is the »«th Hermite polynomial. If,
for convenience, we take the rest position of the

capturing atom Xl° = 0, as may be done without
loss of generality, the matrix element (12)

with

the help of Eq. (13) takes the form

n f <*€.*».({.) exp (ip-e$./(2M*«.iV)»)*«.($.),
*J-co

U \K(n„a ;q )\
8

Z-

fn.(Q t) = (2i)-*(».0-*r«« *».(«0.

are

Debye temperature of the sub-

the

is

Any sums of the form £s<Z«4 etc. would

vanish as the transition to the continuum is
made, which provides a justification for neglect

The eigenvalues of this Hamiltonian are
£. = (n.+J)A«.;

where

2

s

8

2

8

(18)

[£-£o-L.(w.-a.)Aa>.] 2 +ir 2

This is made difficult to evaluate only by the
presence in the denominator of the term
J^,(n s — a,)hw,. This suggests that it will be convenient to group together the terms in the
expression for which this quantity has the same
value. One may accomplish this most easily by
the introduction of a delta-function, writing
(18) as

(16)

where the product is to be extended over
the normal modes. Integrals of the form

all

/:

dp8(p —

£ (»«— a«)

ho),)

>

XE
K(n„a,;q ) = f &&n****i, m .(i.)

n.|x( )

(£-£ -p) +ir
2

(19)
2

8

where for the delta-function, use is made of the
are readily evaluated 11 by use of the generating

usual representation

formula for the Hermite polynomials. In our
1

case,

r

«(*)=—/

dpe**.

(20)

2irJ_«,

(p-e,) 2
Qs

2 -

Thus one finds

2Mhw,N

and is arbitrarily small if we take the fundamental volume of the crystal large enough, so

i

rm

r>

a

W(a )=—\ dpi

that only terms to the first order in q 82 need be

««w

dn

a

XLn{|ii:(n 8 ,a,;5.)| 2

kept in K(n 8 a,; q a ), as will be seen more clearly

n,

,

s

below. Then there are three possibilities

Xexp (-i»(n -a )ho,,) }.
s

\K(a s ,a,;q 8 )\ 2 =(l-2a 8 q 8 2 )e-<»

|X(a,-M,a,; 5a )| 2 = (a.+ l)g, 2 e-"

\K(a,-l,a,;q s )\ 2 = a 8 q $ 2e-^,

t
,

a

(21)

(17a)

From Eqs. (17), one finds

2
,

(17b)
(17c)

as all the other K's are of higher order. The q s 2
F. Bloch and A. Nordsieck, Phys. Rev. 52, 54 (1937).

I*

= H \K(n„ a

= e-"' \\-\-q

2
8 ;

'

i

i
8

q,)

\

exp —ifi(n 8 — a,)hu 8

\_-2a 8 -\-{a 8 +\)e- iha '
i>

+a^<"*-]}.

(22)

y

141

CAPTURE OF NEUTRONS

195

The integral over p in (26) may be done at once
by residue formation, and one has the generally
valid final result

PT(£) = 2/rReal

f dy.

Xexp[^(£-£o+*T/2)+g( M )].

(28)

Naturally, it would be most difficult to evaluate

W(E) exactly. One may however easily obtain
simple expressions which are valid in the various
limiting cases. The function g{y)

is

the cause of

the complication, and it is possible to evaluate
Fig. 1. Plot of the ratio of "effective temperature" and
temperature of a crystal as a function of the real
temperature measured in units of the Debye temperature
real

of the substance.

At this point it is most convenient to carry out
the average over the values of the initial quantum
numbers a„ since now each a, appears at most
linearly. The result of the averaging is that each
a, above is replaced by its average value a, at
thermal equilibrium, where

the

integral

(28)

|(m)

= -^I3« 2

cases

V£<z. 2 (5.+§)(ko.) 2 +

(29)

The sums may be evaluated under the assumpa wave

(23)

in

K

tion of an isotropic crystal,

e U,lkT_\

only

analytically

where the values of n given by m#~1 do not
play a dominant role. For /*0<d, one may expand
in powers of /x and obtain

is

i.e.,

the velocity of

assumed to be independent of

its

direction of propagation, although not necessarily
of its polarization

The product over the various oscillators 5 is

;

iGO-

and one finds

ipR-^Ri,

(30)

then of the form

where R is again the

energy and I the
average energy per vibrational degree of freedom

n(i+x. 2 . 2 ) = i+LX.g. 2
*

«

of

+LI>.Xr<z.V+---

(24)

and if one remembers the smallness of the q,2

the crystal

recoil

(including zero

point energy).

If the condition

\Y+{Ri)^d

so that

(31)

("weak binding")

,

the series may be summed to give exp (£,X,g»2 ),

is met, only small values of ju in g{n) in the
integral (28) need be considered, and one finds

1= UI, = exp £?« 2 (5»+ l)«-«"*{

+a,e ihu — 2a ,\,
i>

'

l

2 /•*

(25)

W(E) =-

dn cos (i(E-E -R)

IVo

Thus one has

Xexp (-§r M -M 2-Ri)
(32)

W{E)=—\

dp

d»

.

(26)

2

cos yx exp (— y—

2

2

/£ )

= (4/r ),K£,*),
2

where the function g(/*) is given by
g(M) = L<Z.

J>

L

{(5.+l)e-W^

where ^(£, x), 12 x, and £ are as defined by Eqs.

*

+ a,e '"*"«-l-2a,}.
,

(27)

12
Equation (32) gives Reiche's form of the ^-function.
See Born, Optik (1933), p. 482.

—

E

142

WILLIS

196

E.

LAMB, JR
and transverse waves. One has the limiting
values
e

= T+d-0(6/T)

T»0

(34a)

«=!(0i+20 )+r-o(r70 ).
3

(34b)

t

In Fig. 1, a plot is given of l(T)/T as a function

T/0 for the case that the various charac-

of

teristic temperatures are equal.

The other limiting case is /iO>l. Here one
finds

g(oo)=-2E<Z.2(5.+!) =

-KG(T/ei)+2G(T/e )l

(35)

r Vx
/ »
C
\
dt t(
+| )
J
\e'-l
/

(36)

t

where
G(x) =

2R
x*

T
with

G(x)=xR/T *«1,
G(x) =

Fig. 2. Plot of the neutron resonance absorption curve in
cold solid silver for an assumed value of T equal to 0/4.

The curve one would obtain with free atoms is shown for
comparison. The abscissa measures the distance from
resonance in units of §r. If the lattice binding were very
strong, the curve for the crystal would have the same
form for the gas, except that it would be centered about
the point shown by the arrow.

(5)

and (3), but now with an effective Doppler

width

A = 2(2*8)*,

—

(36a)

2R

*»1

x*

(36b)

T
For special ranges of values of E—
a good approximation to

obtain

,

one may

W{E) by

splitting the range of integration in Eq. (28) at

1x0=1, and in each range, using the appropriate
expansion for g(n). One finds in this way that
for very strong binding of the atoms in the
crystal (d—>°o),

(33)
1

W(E)=
provided only the condition A+V>2d is met,
the atoms in a crystal at a temperature T give
the same absorption line as they would in a gas
at a temperature I equal to the average energy

per vibrational degree of freedom of the crystal.

This quantity is well known from the theory of
specific heats

i«i(ii+2i«),

(34)

(37)

,

(£-£o) 2 +*r 2

which involves i instead of T. Thus we see that
i.e.,

the normal absorption line centered about

£=£„.
In general, however, a certain amount of
numerical integration is required to find the
shape of the line. To illustrate the possibility
of using the general Eqs. (28) and (27) except in

the two limiting cases of Eqs. (31) and (37),
give plots of a 2^-volt resonance energy

we

absorption line in a substance at a temperature

where

much

lower than the Debye temperature of

= 21O°K (Case of cold silver if one abstracts

™-ii) T£ **{?-?*)-

(34j)

where the indices / and / refer to the longitudinal

from the difference between 6i and 6 ), for
assumed values of V. In each case, the
curve for free atoms at the same temperature is
also shown. One sees that for these cases of intert

several

143

CAPTURE OF NEUTRONS
mediate binding, there

is

a rudimentary

197

fine

structure in the probability of capture which is

suggestive of the neutron absorption lines that
one would obtain from an atom harmonically
bound, say in a molecule with energy levels

separated by 6. (See Figs. 2 and 3.)

The area under the general absorption curve
(28)

may be evaluated immediately, again under

the assumption of footnote (4), and one finds

dEW(E)

(38)

which, of course, agrees with the result for free

atoms.

The expression for the cross section for

self-indication, which involves the integral of the

square of W(E)

is

more complicated, but may

be reduced to

"I

dfiexpl- Tm+«00+*(-m)].

(39)

In the case T+^>6, this integral may again be

evaluated by expanding g(n) for small ju, and the
cross section for self-indication has the value

Fig. 3. Same as Fig. 2 except that the assumed value of
r is now equal to 0. For values of r>40, one is already
in the domain of applicability of Eq. (32). The precise
value of r for silver is not well known experimentally.

corresponding to that for a gas at an effective

temperature i instead of T. In the general case
T, A and 6, however, one may

of arbitrary

derive an approximate formula by splitting the

range of integration at n8= 1,

,.= (W ^,[*(i + A)-*(±)]
-f-exp[2g(oo)-r/0],

(40)

which may be used provided the result does not
depend too much on the precise value of 6.
This research was largely carried out during
the summer session at Stanford University, and
I wish to thank Professor F. Bloch for his generous advice and hospitality. I am also greatly
indebted to Professor G. Placzek and to Dr. A.
Nordsieck for many valuable discussions and
suggestions.

1

144

ANNALS OF physics: 9, 194-210 (1960)

Study of Lattice Vibrations by Resonance Absorption
of Nuclear Gamma Rays*
William M. Visscher
University of California, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory,

Los Alamos, New Mexico

It has recently been demonstrated by Mossbauer that in a large proportion

of emissions or absorptions of gamma rays by nuclei bound in crystals at low

temperature the recoil energy is taken up by the crystal as a whole (no phonons are emitted). This makes it possible to observe resonance absorption of
nuclear gamma-rays without high-speed rotors or elevated temperatures, as
had been done in the past. In the present paper we show that an extension of
Mossbauer 's technique can be utilized to directly observe the frequency distribution of lattice vibrations in the crystal. Specifically, if the emitter and
absorber have the same favorable crystal structure, then the self -absorption
cross section observed in a rotor experiment at low temperature will be proportional to N(S)/S, where N(S) dS is the number of phonon states in an
energy interval dS, and S is the doppler shift in the gamma-ray energy induced by the rotor motion. Criteria are given for determining favorable
cases.
I.

INTRODUCTION

The observation of resonantly scattered or absorbed nuclear 7-rays has been
made difficult in the past by the fact that the natural width of nuclear isomeric
states is almost always small compared to the energy of the recoiling nucleus.

1

Thus if Eq is the energy of the nuclear excited state, the spectrum of gammas
emitted by a free nucleus at rest will be centered at energy E Q — R, where R =

Eq/2Mc is the recoil energy of the nucleus whose mass is M. A gamma can be
absorbed, however, by a free nucleus at rest only if the gamma energy is within
the natural width V of E

+ R. The devices which had been used to observe

resonance scattering before 1958 all supplied, in one way or another, the 2R
difference between the energy of the emitted 7 and the energy which it needs

to be absorbed.

One way to supply the difference is to spin the source on a

high-speed rotor, to Doppler shift the emitted gammas. A Doppler shift of 2R
requires a linear velocity of Eo/Mc, which amounts to 2
cal case (Eq

work performed under the auspices of the U. S. Atomic Energy Commission.
For a review of this field, see Malmfors (/ ).

* This
1

X 10 cm/sec for a typi-

= 100 kev, A = 150). Another method involves varying the tem-

194

145

ABSORPTION OF GAMMAS BY CRYSTALS

195

peratures of the source and absorber (or scatterer) over rather wide ranges, to

Doppler broaden the gamma spectra. Temperature ranges comparable to the
recoil energy must be used in order to observe the change in overlap of the emis-

sion and absorption spectra.

A third method utilizes as a source a nucleus which

is recoiling from a previous decay.

The decay product is required by coincidence

techniques to be travelling, in a certain direction with respect to the direction of
the subsequently emitted gamma, thus fixing the component of velocity of the
nucleus along that direction and the Doppler shift in the gamma energy.

A remarkable new method was devised last year by Mossbauer (#), and was
191

His method is different
used to measure the width of the 129-kev level in Ir
in principle from those preceding it, in that the emitting (or absorbing) nucleus
.

is not allowed to recoil, thus obviating the need to have the emitting

and absorb-

ing nuclei in rapid motion relative to one another. This is accomplished simply

by having the nuclei bound in crystals at low temperature. Mossbauer showed
that when the 129-kev gamma is emitted or absorbed by such a nucleus, the
recoil momentum is taken up a large part of the time by the whole crystal, with

no energy transferred to internal excitations of the lattice. The kinetic energy
is negligible compared to r,
even for crystals as small as a fraction of a cubic micron in volume. Thus, the
recoil shift discussed above is essentially zero, and many of the gammas emitted
by a nucleus in a crystal at rest can be resonantly absorbed or scattered by anassociated with the crystal recoiling as a whole

other nucleus in another crystal at rest, in marked contrast to the situation
when gaseous or room-temperature crystalline sources and absorbers are used.
The emissions which take place without energy transfer to the lattice give rise

T in the energy spectrum of gammas emitted by the crystal.
The height of this "no-recoil pip" is a strongly decreasing function of temperature. The absorption cross section, too, contains a no-recoil pip with similar
to a pip of width

properties. In both cases the pip is centered at

E = E

Q

,

the nuclear excitation

energy.

We will now give a brief resume of some of Mossbauer's experimental results
and of the theory due to Lamb (8) which explains them.
II.

MOSSBAUER'S EXPERIMENTS

In the interest of brevity, we will only outline the essential features of two
of Mossbauer's observations.
191

Mossbauer measured the transmission of Ir 129-kev gamma rays through a
191
191
which
crystalline natural iridium (38.5% Ir ) absorber. His source was Os
,

i8-decays with a 16-day half-life to a long-lived (5.6-sec) state of Ir

191

at 171 kev.

A 42-kev y is emitted, and the iridium nucleus is left in its first excited state
(129 kev) which has a lifetime of 1.4 X 10~ sec.
10

The most startling result which Mossbauer obtained was the "turntable

146

VISSCHER

196

-4
-20

o

8 SOURCE SPEED (cm /sec)

4

-10

20

10

~7

DOPPLERl SHIFT (uV)

30

r
i

i

0.4

>

'\

/

0.8

i

•>

i

i

i

i

i

Fig. 1. The relative intensity of 129-kev gamma rays transmitted by the iridium absorber
as measured by Mossbauer with both source and absorber at 88 °K, as a function of source
speed. The ordinate is dependent upon the source thickness. The width of the dip in the

transmission for a thin absorber is dependent only on the natural width of the 129-kev nuclear level. The curve here is theoretical and will be discussed in Part IV; the experimental

points are taken from the third of Mossbauer's papers

(2), Fig. 3.

effect." Here he kept both source and absorber at 88° K, but had the source
mounted on a turntable, so that the relative velocity of the source and absorber
during the time the source was seen by the absorber could be controlled. Figure
1

shows the variation of transmission he observed as a function of turntable

speed. The absorption peak is centered at zero relative speed of the source with
respect to the absorber; it has a half -width of about

1

cm/sec.

When the abscissa is converted to energy units corresponding to the Doppler
shift in the gamma energy AE = (v/c)Eo the points can be fitted within statis,

tical error

by a Breit-Wigner curve of width (9.2 =fc

1.2)

X 10" ev. This is

interpreted to be twice the natural width of the 129-kev level, the factor of 2
is the result of folding an emission
spectrum together with an absorption cross section, each of which have a "norecoil pip" of width T. In the thin-absorber approximation, the absorption is
proportional to the product of the emission spectrum with the absorption cross

arising because the observed absorption

section, integrated over all energies.

At zero relative velocity the pips overlap
Tc/E the overlap is destroyed, and

perfectly; at velocities large compared to

the absorption disappears.

The other measurement of Mossbauer's which we wish to discuss here is his
observation of the "temperature effect." Here he had both source and absorber
at rest, with the absorber at a fixed temperature of 88° K, and the source temperature variable from 88° to above room temperature. He measured the trans-

147

ABSORPTION OF GAMMAS BY CRYSTALS

197

400
SOURCE TEMPERATURE °K

The effective absorption cross section per Ir 191 nucleus, for the absorber crystal
at 88°K and the source temperature given by the abscissa. The curve is a theoretical one to
Fig.

2.

be discussed in Part IV; the experimental points are taken from Mossbauer's first paper (2),
Fig. 8b.

mission of the 129-kev gammas through the absorber as a function of source

temperature. His results, which were expressed in terms of effective absorption
cross sections, are shown in Fig. 2. The rise in the cross section with decreasing

temperature (quite contrary to its behavior with gaseous sources and absorbers)
is interpreted as being caused by the increase in the probability of no-recoil
emission by the nuclei in the source as the temperature is lowered. The absorber

temperature was not varied in this measurement because any temperature dependence of the non-nuclear absorption cross section of the atoms in the crystal
(mostly K-photoeffect) would obscure the temperature dependence of the nuclear absorption which Mossbauer sought to measure.

An explanation of these results was achieved by Mossbauer by modifying a
theory due to Lamb (3), describing the resonance absorption of neutrons by
nuclei bound in crystals, to apply to the gamma-absorption process.
III.

THEORY

We will now explain Lamb's notation and outline his theory.
The crystal is described by a wave function which depends on the center-of-

148

198

VISSCHER

+

mass coordinate of each of the AT constituent nuclei. x G = x o
u<? is the coordinate of the 6rth nucleus, where x ° is its equilibrium position and u<? is its displacement from equilibrium. If the interactions between the nuclei in the crystal
can be approximated by harmonic forces, the crystal Hamiltonian can be written
as the sum of 3N independent harmonic oscillator Hamiltonians. This transfor-

mation to normal coordinates is carried out as follows. Let
3tf

Ug

=

J

I

£ y 2M^ N

+ a* exp(-iq -x

e s [a s exp(iq s -x G °)

)]

s

(1)

be a Fourier expansion of u<? in terms of the 3N normal modes characterized by
polarization vectors e s

,

frequencies o> s

,

and propagation vectors q s

.

If a s and a s * satisfy
[a s

>

,

= 8

a s *]

'
S s

(2)

,

then the commutation relations between the components of u

and their conjugate momenta are satisfied, and if we define normal coordinates and momenta

(3)

,

P8 = —i A/ —2~ {a - a *),
s

s

they satisfy [P s
Q s = —ihb s s
The Hamiltonian becomes separable into
>

>

]

,

.

3N

H =T,H

S

;

s=l

H = P /2M + y2 Mo>?Q
= fe(a *a + Y2 = hu (N + K);
2

s

2

(4)

s

S

s

s

)

s

s

where A^ s = a s *a s can, with the help of Eq. (2), be seen to have eigenvalues 0,
The state of the crystal can therefore be specified by a set of numbers
1,2,
a s which are the eigenvalues of the phonon number operator s for each normal mode s. To describe the entire system for a gamma-ray resonance absorption
or emission problem we must also specify the state of internal excitation of each
of the nuclei, and the momentum p of the gamma if any is present. Thus, for
•

{

•

•

.

N

}

example, the ket

|

A(o; s (p) means that a gamma ray of momentum p is present,

a s and a specific nucleus is in state A All the effects
due to excitation of different nuclei are incoherent with one another, so it is
the crystal is in state

{

\ ,

.

legitimate to consider each nucleus separately.
If

we assume that each nucleus has two states, the ground state A and an

149

ABSORPTION OF GAMMAS BY CRYSTALS
excited state C which has energy

199

E and decays like e~ rtn then application of
Q

,

perturbation theory yields the following results.

{

The probability that a gamma of momentum p incident on the crystal in state
will be resonantly scattered by a particular nucleus into momentum k, leav-

as

}

ing the crystal in state {&}

is

proportional to

7 (A{(3 s }k\H'\C{ns })(C{ns \H'\A{a a }p)
E - pc + E{n s ) - E(a.) + iV/2
ra]
]

TT({/3.}k, {«.}p)

(5)

where pc is the energy of the incident gamma, E(a B ) = Yl* fc(a s
%) is
the crystal energy in the initial state, and H' is the energy operator describing

+

the interaction between the gamma ray and the nucleus in question. The sum
is over all

in which the nucleus is in its excited
Energy conservation is implicit in Eq. (5);

intermediate crystal states \n s

state C and no gamma is present.

]

final states {£,} are possible only if

E(0S ) +ck = E(a ) + cp.

(6)

s

In the derivation of Eq. (5) it is also assumed that the state of the crystal {n s
remains unchanged during the time the nucleus is excited. It is therefore valid
only when the relaxation time of the crystal is long compared to the lifetime
}

h/T of the nuclear excited state.

On the other hand, if we ask only for the absorption probability, it is not
necessary to assume that the crystal relaxation time is long. In this case one is
led to the expression

for the absorption probability, where T' is equal to the nuclear level width plus

and {a }. The calculations will be greatly
we assume the relaxation time to be independent of the crystal

the widths of the crystal states {n s
simplified

if

s

}

state; we will, in fact, assume it to be infinite, or r'

= T.

The probability for the. emission process is also proportional to (7), with {a
and {n interchanged in the summand.
The matrix elements of
which occur in Eqs. (5) and (7) can each be expressed as a product of two factors. One factor depends only on the change in
s}

s}

W

internal state of the radiating nucleus, and only weakly on the gamma energy.
It will be hereafter omitted, since it is common to all subsequent formulas. The

other factor describes the absorption of the gamma's momentum by the lattice.

Thus we make the following replacements:
(C{n s

\

|

H'

|

A{a }p) -> [{n
s

s}

|

exp(ip-x*/ft)
|

{«.}],

(8)
(A{/3.}k

|

H'

|

C{n \) -» [{&}
s

|

exp(-ik.x L /ft)

{n.}]
|

150

VISSCHER

200

for the absorption and emission matrix elements, respectively.

out nucleus L at x L

= xL

+ uL

;

We have singled

without loss of generality we can, following

Lamb, choose x L = 0, the origin of our coordinate system. After substituting
u L (Eq. 1) into the matrix elements (8) they may be factored into 3N matrix
elements, one for each phonon state.

-^==-

1
/. p-e (q g + a*)
/*mi(a,)]
n = TtT
*S
II |_». exp ^

c

[{n.}II exp(tp-u L /ft)
ri

|

s

I

|

\

|

(9)

J.

Because of the factor 1/y/N in the exponent, no term of order higher than
2
2
(p-e s ) = Ps in the expansion of the exponential on the right can give a nonvanishing contribution to TF({a s J> p) after the sum over [n s is performed and
— « is taken. The terms which do contribute are
the limit
]

N

MZl a4r ] « - A- (ay- +
L V2MM J

^pK \j

i

!)

2MNfto) s

+

«'

p

'/^vf
V2MNhw

}
-

do)

s

Since a s and a s * are phonon absorption and creation operators, respectively, we
see that any phonon state can change its occupation number by at most one.

Also, Eq. (10) exhibits explicitly the reason for the existence of the "no-recoil

pip." It is that the phonon creation or absorption matrix element is of order

1/y/N smaller than the no-phonon ({««) = \n s \) matrix element. After sumof the same order
ming over phonon states, the two can give contributions to

W

of magnitude.

Of physical interest is the quantity

W(E) =

E g({a })W(ia
s

s

},p),

(11)

where g({oc 8 }) is the probability that the crystal will initially be in a state {a s }>
and where we have assumed, for simplicity, that the crystal is isotropic, so that
(11) is dependent only on E = pc, and not on the crystal orientation relative
to p. W(E) can be evaluated by methods standard to field theory. The only
information about g({a s ) which is needed is the average value of the occupation
2
number a s of each phonon state s. For thermal equilibrium,
]

a s = [exp(co s /7 ) - l]"
7

since the phonons obey

1
,

Bose statistics. The result

of performing the

sum in

Eq. (11) is that

W(E) = 2/r Re f

dfx

expM# - E + zT/2) + gr(ju)],
Q

where
2

From now on, we will express frequencies and temperatures in energy units.

(12)

151

ABSORPTION OF GAMMAS BY CRYSTALS

=

g(fi)

Z ^^-

h**'*"*

201

+ (*. + D*"*"" " 2a - 1].
8

(13)

W(E) is proportional to the resonance absorption cross section of a nucleus in
a crystal for a monochromatic 7-ray of energy E.

a(E)

=L aoW (E),

(14)

(2/c + 1) x2 r 7
" = o2 (2f, + D ri r(To

is the

x

x

(15)

cross section at resonance for nuclear absorption of a gamma ray by a

free atom, r is the total width of the nuclear excited state, while T y is the partial
_1

+

width for y-emission; I\ = (1
«r) T, where a T is the total internal conversion coefficient. If we were considering resonance scattering, the factor T 7 /r in
Co would be squared.
W(E) for emission differs from (12) only in that g(fi) is replaced by g(— n).

Thus the self-absorption cross section is, for a thin absorber,

<T

=

f

<r(E)W E (E) dE

f
where

3

=
kr

We(E) dE

f
<r

°J

W *W W*( E dE
)

>

<

16 )

WE and W A are the Lamb integrals (12) for emission and absorption,

respectively.
If we

suppose now that our emitter is" moving relative to the absorber, then

the argument of

WE in (16) should be E + v/cE = E + S, where

v is the rela-

tive velocity. It is easy to show that

/

WA (E)WE {E + S) dE =^W'(S),

(17)

where W'(S) is given by Eq. (12), with E - E replaced by S, T by 2I\ and
g(n) by g A (fx) + ^(— /*)• g* is (13) with parameters appropriate to the absorbing crystal; g E with the parameters of the emitting crystal. Then a' becomes
(/(#)
IV.

= r*<r W'(S)/2.

NUMERICAL CALCULATIONS

If the assumption is made that the crystal is isotropic, p s

replaced by }^p
3

.

(18)

2

in Eq. (13) can be
Then, on replacing the sum by an integral, g(n) becomes

This can best be seen in Eq. (19) of Lamb's paper, where each of the p s 2 's occurs at most

linearly.

152

VISSCHER

202

^m) =

# f ""
r

—

*• [ae

t>tf

+ (a + 1)«"*" - 2a - 1],

(19)

where N(<a) do) is the number of phonon states in dm at co, and co max is the maxi-

mum phonon energy. The total number of states is equal to the number of degrees of freedom in the crystal;

r

AT(co) dco

= 3JV.

(20)

According to the Debye model, iV(co) = 9Nco /0 and co max = 0. With N(<a)
thus specified, g(p) can be evaluated quite accurately by making polynomial
approximations to the hyperbolic function which occurs in the integrand, and
W(E) can then be integrated on a digital computer. We have calculated <r(E)
191
129-kev 7-ray with parameters taken to be E = 129
and o-'(aS) for the Ir
2

3

= 46 millivolts, r = 4.6 microvolts, a K = 2.47, I c = 5/2, I A = 3/2,
and abundance = 38.5 percent. For simplicity we assumed that the crystal
kev, R

structure of the emitter is the same as that of the absorber, and found that to
fit the self -absorption cross section as measured by Mossbauer with both emitter
= 316°K. The caland absorber at 88°K one must use a Debye temperature
culated cross section is sensitive to the shape of the spectrum for moderate and
high phonon energies where the Debye spectrum is known to be a poor approximation therefore little significance should be attached to the difference between
this Debye temperature and that determined from specific heat, namely 285 °K.
The curves on Figs. 1 and 2, which respectively show Mossbauer's experimental points for the turntable effect and temperature effect, are some of the results
guarantees that the turntable effect
of this calculation. Our adjustment of
curve coincide with the experimental point at zero velocity, and that the temperature effect curve agree with experiment at 88°K. These two experimental
points really represent the same measurement.
The curve of Fig. 1, which is fitted to the bottom of the transmission dip,
agrees satisfactorily with the rest of the points even though the calculations are
21
2
for a thin absorber. A correction for the moderately thick (10 atoms/cm ) absorber which Mossbauer used would be in a direction such as to improve the fit
;

for large velocities.

The curve of Fig. 2 deviates noticeably from the experimental points at 148
and 175°K. This deviation could probably be corrected by using a phonon spectrum which is more realistic than the Debye spectrum.
Figure 3 shows the results of the calculation for <r(E), Eq. (14), for several
temperatures. The emission spectrum
E (E) has the same shape as <r(^) when
The pip in both <r(E) and E (E) has
it is reflected through the pip at E = E
width T = 4.6 fxv. It is interesting to notice that the pip has virtually disappeared
at T = 300°K, and that the rest of the curve has very nearly acquired the shape

W

.

W

1

153

ABSORPTION OF GAMMAS BY CRYSTALS

A

i

203

i

\

100
160°

292

4

120°

710

c
o

—

120 °K

;
/I

300°K

(i
/

1909

3

20

z
o
»o
UJ

/

2(515

/

4°

/
/

i

"N

i

/

i

r

<n
J,

4°K

,

88°
10

2 -

w
o

PIP HEIGHT-1

-

FOR 300°

(T
O

VV

<ri
i
i

i
i
i
....

i

J

1

-40

40

80

120

160

E-E (mv)
Fig. 3. The absorption cross section per nucleus in a crystal of natural iridium, for a

monochromatic 7 -ray beam and a Debye spectrum for the phonons. The lowest temperature
plotted is 4°K. 20°K would be indistinguishable from it except within 3 mv of E — E° = 0,
= 27.2 mv, where
where the 20° curve is up to }{ barn higher, and at the Debye energy
the corners are slightly rounded.

which one would expect for a gaseous absorber; namely, a Gaussian centered at
E - EQ = R = 46 mv with width 2 y/RT = 69 mv.

Some results of the calculation of cr'(S), the self -absorption cross section in
the thin-absorber approximation, are given in Fig. 4 as a function of Doppler
shift *S. The width of the pip in this curve is 2T

= 9.2 piv.

The variation of the self -absorption cross section cr'(O) is shown in Fig. 5 as
a function of the Debye temperature 6, for both source and absorber at 88°K.
The curve levels off below 6 = 200°K because here the no-recoil pip has essentially entirely disappeared.

Figure 6 shows o-'(O) as a function of source and absorber temperature. Mossbauer measured <r'(0) = 10.0
0.5 barns at T = 88°K; this point has, as we
stated above, been fit by taking 8 = 316°K. The calculation predicts that at
liquid helium temperature the self-absorption cross section will rise to 80 barns
and that it will decrease by only about 10% when the temperature is raised to
20°K.

±

154

VISSCHER

204

S(mv)

Same as Fig. 3 except in this case the 7-ray beam is that coming from an activated

Fig. 4.

iridium crystal at the same temperature as the absorber. The abscissa is here the Doppler
shift in the emitted gammas induced by mechanical motion of the source relative to the absorber. A speed of 2330 cm/sec is required for S = 10 mv.

APPLICATION TO THE STUDY OF LATTICE VIBRATIONS

V.

The behavior of the calculated absorption cross section <r(E)

(Fig. 3) at

liquid helium temperature, with a fairly linear rise from the pip at

E = E until

E — Eq = 0, then a vertical drop, strongly suggests that the cross section for
r < E — Eq < 6 is due mostly to absorption accompanied by emission of a
single phonon. The bumps at higher values of E — E might be identified with
Q

2, 3, 4,

•

•

•

phonon processes.

This conjecture can be easily expressed in analytical terms, in the limit of
zero temperature. g(n) for T

= 0(a = 0) becomes

g(v)

9o

+ 0i(m),

where

90

and

=

f
'mot

NM

do)

(21)

155

ABSORPTION OF GAMMAS BY CRYSTALS

205

Fig. 5. The variation of the self -absorption cross section as a function of Debye temperature 0, for both source and absorber at 88°K, and no mechanical motion. JBelow about 6 =

200°K the no-recoil pip disappears entirely for this temperature.

01

KTr
U) = 6l\
Jo

-

/

d °>>

e

Q)

gi(fx) is just the square of the single-phonon emission matrix element, integrated

over the phonon spectrum, and e 00 is the probability that no phonons will be
created in the 7-emission process. The term containing exp(+z'iua>) in Eq. (19)
is the

phonon absorption matrix element

;

since T

in the initial state, it does not occur in Eq. (21).

Mn)

e°°

1

=

and there are no phonons

We now expand

+ 0xU) + toi(/i)f
+
2!

156

VISSCHER

206

100

150

TCK)
Fig.

6.

The self-absorption cross section as a function of temperature of source and ab-

sorber. This curve has been fitted to Mossbauer's measurement of a' = 10 barns at T — 88

by taking

c

= 316°K.

and substitute into Eq. (12), which then becomes

W(E) = Wo(E) + Wi(E) + W2 (E) +

(22)

where

% Re

/•«

9,000

W.(B) ^

nil

[g^)W

/
Jo

iE ~ B '

+m) d

M

.

(23)

Wn (E) is the contribution to W(E) from n-phonon emission.
W(E) is not directly observable but W'(S) is, because it is proportional to

It is clear that

the absorption cross section <r'(S) in a thin absorber in a Mossbauer-type ex-

periment. If, for simplicity, we again assume that the structures of the absorber
and emitter crystals are the same, then W'(S) can be written, in the limit of
zero temperature,

W'(S) =

W '(S) + Wi'(8) +

•

(24)

where
Wo'(S)
is the

?H

=
S

2

+r

2

(25)

no-recoil pip, and

Wi(S) =

2ttR

3NT

2y r

N(S)
(26)

157

ABSORPTION OF GAMMAS BY CRYSTALS
is

207

the single-phonon contribution. In general

NM

»••<»- SKI)"/;

N(o> n )

[

dcoi

COi

(27)

doi n d(S

—

OJi

.).

If one could find a crystal which contains an isomer with parameters such that

Wn(S) for n ^ 2 could be neglected compared to W\

for

S ^ <o max

,

then a

measurement of the self -absorption cross section a'(S) for r < S ^ w max would
yield a result proportional to N(S)/S. This experiment would require a moder4
ately high-speed rotor (capable of speeds up to 10 cm/sec), and ideally would
be done with source and absorber both at absolute zero. At a finite temperature
which still is very small compared to the Debye temperature, the measured <r'(S)
would be proportional to N(S)/S smeared out over a range in S of the order
of the temperature; thus any structure oiN(S) with wavelength AS < T would
be lost.

In order to find criteria which indicate whether or not a given nucleus and a
given crystal could form a system with which the above experiment could profitably be performed, we will once again use the Debye model.

= —SR/26, and

For a Debye crystal g
-sine

Wo'(S)

s

2

+r

67r.R0

Wi'(S) =

2 '

— zr/b

0.^ S ^ 0,

T0 3
otherwise,

S

3

^ SS

6

6

-±^

s

se*-

WXS) « i (f) e- *" X I

6

$<a*»,

3

n!

Wn'(S) -

\

otherwise,

\03 / T (2n - 1 )!

^ S ^
s <
5 > 710.

;

(28)

,

158

VISSCHER

208

^jjn-oWn(S) always converges rapidly f or

^ S ^ 0, since in this range, for

n > 0,

W'n+1 (S) = 6R

W '(S)

S

n

2
(

2n(2n + l)(n + 1)'

3

"

^

y;

Equation (29) attains its maximum value at S = 0, so W2/W1 is at most R/2d,
Wz/Wi at most 72/100, etc. Therefore an ideal crystal would be one which has
a relatively high Debye temperature, while containing nuclei having an isomeric

E /2Mc = R is fairly small.
2

state such that

2

In choosing examples of nuclei which might be usable, the mechanisms by
which the isomeric state can be excited must be considered. The first possibility
191
which suggests itself is that used by Mossbauer, who used a source of Os which
This scheme, however, involves different
/3-decays to an isomeric state of Ir
crystals in the source and absorber; thus W\ would be a superposition of phonon
spectra for the two. If the source crystal were mostly constructed of the same
nuclei as the absorber, with only a small doping of the parent nucleus, then this
difficulty would be avoided, at the expense of intensity.
Another possibility is excitation by bremsstrahlung. One might think in this
case that one of the basic premises on which the theory rests, namely that the
initial state in the emission process is one of thermal equilibrium, is violated.
It can be shown, however, by using Eq. (5) rather than Eq. (7) as a starting
point, that as long as the incoming bremsstrahlung beam contains a range of
frequencies large compared to co max that the same result obtains for W(E),
provided that the relaxation time of the crystal is long compared to the isomer
.

,

lifetime. Excitation

by particle bombardment generally will leave the nucleus

with enough recoil energy to remove it from its lattice site.
For a system for which R/2B <<C 1, the absorption cross section per atom in
the absorber is given, in the Debye approximation, by

aAS ) = „NN +

„,*->«»

I

[_^ + 5^5]

(30)

^ S ^ 0. <r NN is the non-nuclear absorption cross section per atom; predominantly due to K-photoeffect for gammas near 100 kev, it varies from only
a few barns to many thousand barns, depending on Z and gamma energy. 4 The
one-phonon term in Eq. (30) can be rewritten as
for

,,
<ri

where R

Cv
(S)

= 6.19#

2

—

3Rie
S v in8
121 /300V 21 c + 1 e~
= —rX 10 barns,
[
or
A \ 6 ) 21 A + 1 Ty d

M °K,

= fi/Yy in units of 10"

Ty
4

if

,

.

-

)

,

Q1 v

(31)

E is expressed in kilovolts, 6 and S in °K, and

sec.

Tables of 7-absorption cross sections are given by Davisson (4).

159

ABSORPTION OF GAMMAS BY CRYSTALS
cri

will be large for a short-lived isomer of low excitation energy,

209

two condi-

As an example, if an isomer were
= 200, = 300 °K, then R/26 =

tions which are hard to satisfy simultaneously.
10

6

found with r y = 1CT sec, E = 80 kev, A
0.33, and <t\{8) — 2000 barns, much larger than o- NN if 80 kev is just below the
if -absorption edge. The listed isomers seem not to have properties this favorable;
125
5 barns, but at an energy (35 kev) where the nonTe for example has </(0)
nuclear absorption is several thousand barns. Since the background is nearly all
absorption by bound electrons, however, a resonance scattering measurement
would be better from the point of view of statistics and might be preferable to
a T )~
an absorption experiment. The scattering cross section is just T a /T = (1

»

+

l

times the self -absorption cross section a'(S).
VI.

SUMMARY

The technique of resonance absorption of gamma rays by nuclei bound in
crystals at low temperature has been shown by Mossbauer to be a valuable tool
in the measurement of natural level widths of nuclear isomers. In the present

paper we have shown that it can also be used to determine the frequency distribution of crystal lattice vibrations, in a different and perhaps easier manner than
the methods used previously. 6

The assumption has been made throughout the calculations that we are dealing with simple, isotropic crystals,

and the numerical estimates have all been

based on the Debye model. The theory describing more complicated situations
will of course be more involved, but its results should be proportionately richer
in interpretation. If, for example, one had anisotropic crystals as source and
absorber, a Mossbauer type experiment could separate the frequency distributions of the normal modes with different polarizations. If the nuclei were aligned,
still

more information would be obtainable, about the spins of the nuclear states

and possibly about the crystal structure, too.
Numerous and fruitful discussions of these problems with many colleagues at
Los Alamos are hereby appreciatively acknowledged. Nuclear gamma-ray resonance absorption experiments are currently in progress at this Laboratory.
Note added in proof: Some experiments have been completed both at this laboratory
(Craig, et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 3,221 (1959)), and at Argonne (Lee, et al., Phys. Rev. Letters
3, 223 (1959)). The results agree with and extend those of Mossbauer to lower temperatures.

Received: May 7, 1959
5

A table of short-lived isomeric states is given by Alburger (5). The half -life of Au 197

,

given there as 1.90 X 10" 10 should be 1.90 X 10~9 sec.
6
These methods involve scattering of slow neutrons or x-rays. The field of neutron inter,

actions with solids has recently been reviewed by Kothari and Singwi (6).

160

VISSCHER

210

REFERENCES
K. G. Malmfors, in "Beta- and Gamma-Ray Spectroscopy," K. Siegbahn, ed., p. 521.
Interscience, New York, 1955.
2. R. L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik 151, 124 (1958); Naturwiss. 22, 538 (1958); and Z. Natur/.

forsch. 14a, 211 (1959).

W. E. Lamb, Phys. Rev. 55, 190 (1939).
4. C. M. Davisson, in "Beta- and Gamma-Ray Spectroscopy," K. Siegbahn, ed., p. 857.
3.

Interscience, New York, 1955.

D. E. Alburger, in "Encyclopedia of Physics," Vol. 42, p. 83. Springer, Berlin, 1957.
6.
L. S. Kothari and K. S. Singwi, in "Solid State Physics," Seitz and Turnbull,
Eds., Vol. 8. Academic Press, New York, 1959.
5.

161

annals of physics: 9, 332-339 (1960)

Some Simple Features of the Mossbauer Effect*
Harry J. LiPKiNf
Department of Physics, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, and
Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois

A simple description is given of the change in the state of a crystal lattice
upon emission or absorption of a nuclear gamma ray. A sum rule is derived
for the average energy transfer to the lattice. The probability of zero energy

transfer is calculated. The results are general and do not assume a particular

model for the crystal. Conclusions are presented as simple principles which

may be useful as a guide to experimentalists.

INTRODUCTION
Recent experiments by Mossbauer (1) and others {2) have shown that it is
possible for nuclei bound in crystal lattices to emit or absorb gamma radiation

having an energy equal to that of the nuclear transition. The recoil momentum
is taken by the crystal as a whole, with negligible energy transfer, and there is an
appreciable probability, although small, that there is no energy transfer to or
from the lattice vibrations.

The theory of this Mossbauer effect is similar to that of other phenomena involving transitions in atoms or nuclei bound in lattices (3, 4) such as excitons
or neutron capture. Calculations based on the treatments of these other cases
have been made (5). These are rather complicated, involving the evaluation of
difficult integrals to

obtain detailed information in specific cases. Results can

only be obtained when certain simplifying assumptions are made regarding the

nature of the crystal.

Because the experimental effect is small, it is of interest to look for simple qualitative conclusions having a general validity (i.e., independent of the details of a

particular model of a crystal) which can serve as a guide to experimenters in

choosing experimental parameters. These can be obtained rather simply, avoiding
the complications of the other treatments, if we only consider the property of
greatest interest; namely, the change in the lattice state when a gamma ray is

emitted or absorbed. For this calculation, the line shape of the nuclear transition
is irrelevant, and the Breit-Wigner formula does not appear. All nuclear proper* This research was supported in part by the joint program of the U. S. Atomic Energy
Commission and the Office of Naval Research.
t On leave from the Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovoth, Israel.

332

162

MOSSBAUER EFFECT

333

ties drop out in the calculation except the momentum transfer in the transition
and the nuclear mass.

THE TRANSITION MATRIX ELEMENT
Let us first consider the emission or absorption of a gamma ray by a free nucleus which is not bound in a lattice. This transition can be described in terms of

M of some operator A between the

a matrix element

initial state i)

and the final

state /) of the nucleus:

M = {j\A{x

i

,

Vi ,a i )\l).

(1)

The operator A depends upon the coordinates, momenta and spins of the particles
in the nucleus. Let us now express the operator A in terms of the center-of-mass
coordinate of the nucleus, X, and a set of relative coordinates q which include
spins. The dependence of

A upon the center-of-mass coordinate X is determined

completely by the requirements of translational and Galilean in variance; i.e., by
the requirements that momentum should be conserved and that the transition
probability for a moving observer (nonrelativistic) should not depend upon the
velocity of the observer. For the emission of a gamma ray of momentum hK, the

above requirements are satisfied only if the operator A has the form

A = exp(iK -X)a(q),

(2)

where the operator a(q) depends only upon the relative variables and spins of the
particles and has an explicit form depending upon the nature of the transition
(electric, magnetic, dipole, quadrupole, etc.). The explicit form of a(q) is of no
interest for our present purposes.

Let us now consider the emission or absorption of a gamma ray by a nucleus
bound in a crystal. The operator describing the transition is the same operator A,
but we must now take the matrix element between initial and final states of the

whole lattice, rather than of the free nucleus. Because the crystal forces are very
weak compared to the internal nuclear forces, we can assume that the binding
forces act only upon the center-of-mass motion of the nucleus and do not perturb
the internal degrees of freedom. We can now write down an expression for the
matrix element describing the' transition in which a gamma-ray of momentum UK
while the lattice
is emitted by a nucleus whose center-of-mass coordinate is
L
goes from a state specified by quantum numbers n* to a state specified by quantum numbers rif and the internal state of the emitting nucleus changes from i)
to/). This is

X

,

,

M = (n |exp(zX.X
L

/

L)

|

n,-).(/

|

a(q) \i).

(3)

The matrix element thus separates into the product of a factor depending only
upon the lattice and a factor depending only upon the internal structure of the

.

163

LIPKIN

334

nucleus. The transition probability is proportional to the square of the matrix

element (3). 1 We are not interested in the absolute transition rate, but in the relative probability of different energy transfers to the lattice.

terested in the probability P(nf

,

That is, we are in-

n») that the lattice will be in a particular state

n f after the transition if it is initially in the state n,- The probability P{n f
.

is proportional to the square of the matrix element

,

n»)

(3), with the constant of pro-

portionality chosen to make the total probability of a transition from the state
Ui to any other state to be unity,

T,P(nf ,m) = 1.

(4)

nf

M

The dependence of the matrix element L upon the nuclear structure matrix element (/ a(q) \i) occurs as a common factor for all lattice states and can be
1

dropped in calculating the relative probability. We therefore have

P(nf m) =
,

I

(n f

|

exp^X-X L )

2
|

n«)

(5)

.
|

The proportionality constant turns out to be unity, as can be verified by substituting (5) into (4) and evaluating the sum by closure.

A SUM RULE

We can now derive a sum rule by making the following assumption; that the
interatomic forces in the crystal depend only upon the positions of the atoms and

H

for the lattice
not upon their velocities. The only term in the Hamiltonian
2
which does not commute with X L is the kinetic energy of that nucleus, P L /2M,

where

M

is the

mass of the nucleus and P L is the momentum. We therefore have
[H,X L ] = -iKP L /M

{[H,exp(iK-X L )], exp(-iK-X L )}

(6a)
2

= -(hK) /M

(6b)

Writing Eq. (6b) as a matrix equation and taking the diagonal element for the
state rii we obtain the sum rule

D {E(n - E(m)} (n exp^K-Xj m)
f)

I

f

|

|

=

2
I

Z \E(n - EMMn,,*) = ^-,
f)

where E(nf ) and E(rii) are the energies of the states n/ and n;
1
We neglect the dependence of the density of final states of the emitted 7-ray upon
the energy transfer to the lattice. This is justified since the 7-ray energy is greater than
lattice energies by a factor of at least 106 This approximation is not valid for neutron
capture.
.

164

MOSSBAUER EFFECT

335

The sum rule (7) says that the average energy transferred to the lattice is just
the energy which the individual nucleus would have if it recoiled freely. 2

Note that the Mossbauer transitions in which no energy is transferred to the
[E(n f ) = E(rii)] do not contribute to the sum rule. Thus if we want an

lattice

appreciable probability that there be no energy transfer to the lattice the sum rule
requires an appreciable probability for an energy transfer which is greater than

that which a freely recoiling nucleus would receive* We will tend to get an increased Mossbauer effect when the nucleus can transfer energy to high frequency

modes; i.e., in a crystal with a high Debye temperature. If the nucleus
under consideration is an impurity in a lattice, it should be strongly bound in a
lattice

localized position.

An ideal situation would occur if the nucleus were bound in a localized well and
could oscillate in this well without appreciably perturbing the other lattice modes.
If

the excitation energy of this mode were larger than the free recoil energy
2

(hK) /2M), the sum rule (7) would be exhausted by a probability less than unity
for exciting this mode. The remaining probability would all go into the Mossbauer effect.

A MORE DETAILED CALCULATION
Let us now attempt to calculate explicitly the probability P(w,- n») that the
remains in its initial state after the emission of the gamma ray, which
,

lattice

therefore carries the full energy of the nuclear transition.

We now need a more

detailed model of the lattice. Let us assume that the interatomic forces are har-

monic, so that a simple transformation to normal modes is possible. These modes
will be described by normal coordinates £ s The state of the lattice can be speci.

fied by the set of quantum numbers {n s j describing the state of excitation of each

normal mode.
Let us express the coordinate
duce this into Eq. (5). We have

XL in terms of the normal coordinates and intro-

ck'Xz,

= 22 a Ls

i;s

,

(8)

8

where ck is a unit vector in the direction of the vector K. We can choose the
normalization of the normal coordinates such that

E (<^) =
2

1-

(»)

8

2
This result has been derived for the emission process. The author is indebted to W.
M. Visscher for pointing out that it applies as well to absorption only if the incident 7-

radiation has a flat spectrum over the resonance region.

}

165

LIPKIN

336

We then have
P({n g },{n s }) =

({n s }

|

exp(iK

|

£ a**)

2

{n.})
|

|

= II

(n,

exp(z7fa L8 £ 8 )

|

|

2

n)
8

|

.
|

8

Elegant methods have been developed for the evaluation of expressions having
with the appropriate sta-

the form (10) including averaging over all states {n 8

|

tistical factor corresponding to thermal equilibrium at a given temperature (6).

We shall use a simple approximate method. We note that if we expand the exponentials in (10), only the even powers of £ s have non vanishing matrix elements.

We can therefore write

P(M,M) = [lid -h )]\

(11)

s

8

where
h s = (n,\ (Ka Ls £s)

ns )/2 -f- terms of order K ai (n
A

2
\

s

4
s

\

£

n8 ).

1

Let us expand

E h + E h h /2 +

II (1 - h8 ) = 1 -

s

8

t

•

•

•

(12)

.

We note that the expansion (12) is the same as that for exp(— E«M, except for
the exclusion of repeated indices.

each h s is small compared to unity, even

If

though E* h s may not be small, we can write

H

(1

— h

s)

= exp(—

E

+ terms of order E h

^«)

s

s

2
s

(13)

.

s

We therefore have
P({w.},{n.} )

= exp

E -K <*L(n &
2

s

{

I

1

n.)

+ terms of order K E als(£
4

(14)

4
s

).

s

The expectation value of £

2
s

in the state n s is easily evaluated by noting that the
2

potential energy for a harmonic oscillator }^ -Mco s £ 8

2
,

has an expectation value of

(n 8 -f- %)fto) s /2, where w 8 is the oscillator frequency for the s-mode. 3 We therefore obtain

P({n s \,{ns})

« exp E {~(2n + l)[(^) /2MMfll)
2

s

(15)

s

neglecting the higher order terms.

M

3
The mass
is the mass of the nucleus emitting the 7-ray. This relation is valid even if
the crystal consists of different types of atoms having different atomic masses.

.

166

MOSSBAUER EFFECT

337

2

The factor (%K) /2Mho) is just the ratio of the free recoil energy to the energy
s

of the sth lattice vibration normal mode. If the lattice is in its lowest state (at

0°K), every n s is zero and the exponent in (15) is just the ratio of the free recoil
energy to some average lattice vibration energy ho) Av denned by
-1
(/kd A v)

= z2 als/hus

(16)

.

8

This is a harmonic mean, in which each mode is given a statistical weight corresponding to the contribution of that mode in the expansion of X L in normal

modes (Eqs. 8, 9). We see that the probability of an effect (15) decreases very
rapidly if the free recoil energy increases above this average lattice energy.

The neglect of the higher order terms in (15) is justified in the region of interest, where the argument of the exponential is of the order of unity. If the number

of relevant normal modes is large, then each individual term is small. The sum

of the squares of these terms is therefore very small and can be neglected.

At finite temperatures the effect is reduced because of the presence of the factor
2n s + 1 in the exponent of Eq. (16). This reduction becomes serious at temperatures corresponding roughly to the mean lattice energy (16) where the factor
2n 8 + 1 is different from unity in a region which contributes appreciably to the

sum (16).
The results (15) and (16) are general in that they apply to any crystal in
which the forces are harmonic. The particular case of the Debye model has been
considered by Visscher (5). We can get his result by setting a Ls = constant and
2

taking a density of lattice modes which is proportional to w s

.

For this case

= %(fta> max = % /C0.

(foo Av ) De bye

(17a)

)

r=o°

Thus

P({n },K}) Deby e = exp
s

r=o°

- y2 (hK) /2Mke
2

{

}

(17b)

CONCLUSIONS
The expressions (15) and (17) lead to the same conclusions as the sum rule
that probability of gamma-ray emission without energy transfer to or from
the lattice increases with the average energy of the lattice modes which are
coupled to the recoiling nucleus and the effect becomes appreciable when this
average energy is of the same order of magnitude as the free recoil energy. From
(7)

;

the explicit form of the relations ( 15) and ( 17) with their exponential dependence
upon the parameters of interest, we see that the effect is very sensitive to the

experimental conditions. The experimental results (1, 2) indicate that

P(M,{n,})

;

167

LIPKIN

338
is of the order of a few per cent.

In this region, a change in the exponent in (15)

or (17) by a factor of two can change the effect by an order of magnitude.

The influence of the ambient temperature upon the effect [the factor (2n 8 -f- 1)
Eq. (15)] is easily understood as "stimulated emission and absorption" of
phonons: the probability of energy exchange between the lattice and the recoiling
nucleus increases with the degree of excitation of the lattice.
in

The results might be summarized crudely by the following simple statement
which could have been made in advance without any calculation The Mossbauer
experiment is described in terms of three characteristic temperatures or energies
(1) the energy of the free recoil, (2) a characteristic temperature for the lattice
(e.g., the Debye temperature), and (3) the ambient temperature. To obtain an
effect, the lattice temperature should be of the same order as the free recoil
energy, and the ambient temperature should be low compared to these. The explicit results add two further important features which are of considerable interest to the experimentalist trying to increase the effect by varying parameters.
First, there is the exponential dependence in Egs. (15) and (17), indicating that
a small change in these parameters can have a large effect on the experiment.
Second, there is the definition of the average lattice vibration energy (16), which
is clearly a different kind of an average from those used by solid state physicists to
compute properties such as specific heats. There is therefore no simple relation
between the characteristic lattice temperature for Mossbauer scattering and the
Debye temperature, except for very simple models which are generally not exactly valid. These two temperatures will be of the same order of magnitude, but
the effect of the difference is very much accentuated by the exponential dependence of (15).
It is therefore of interest for the experimentalist to look for transitions having a low free recoil energy, and for crystals having a high "effective Mossbauer
temperature," Eq. (16). More complicated crystals (compounds, alloys, or impurities) should be chosen for strong binding of the source or absorber atoms,
rather than for high Debye temperatures. The latter may be due to irrelevant
normal modes. This is particularly true in light elements where low mass,
rather than strong binding gives high Debye temperature (7).
The author would like to express his appreciation to F. Seitz, T. D. Schultz,
G. Rickayzen, and R. Knox for illuminating discussions on the solid-state aspects
of the problem; to D. R. Inglis for many stimulating discussions; to J. P. Schiffer
and L. Meyer-Schiitzmeister for discussions of experimental results; and to R.
M. Thaler and W. M. Visscher for information about the Los Alamos calculations.
:

Received: September 25, 1959

REFERENCES
1.

R. L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik 151, 124 (1958); Naturwiss. 45, 538 (1958); Z. Naturforsch.
14a, 211 (1959).

168

MOSSBAUER EFFECT
2.

339

L. L. Lee, Jr., L. Meyer-Schutzmeister, J. P. Schiffer, and D. Vincent, Phys. Rev.

Letters 3, 223 (1959); P. P. Craig, J. G. Dash, A. D. McGuire, D. Nagle, and R. R.
Reiswig, Phys. Rev. Letters 3, 221 (1959).
8. W. E. Lamb, Phys. Rev. 55, 190 (1939).
1. R. E. Peierls, Ann. Physik 13, 905 (1932).
5. W. M. Visscher, Annals of Physics 9, 194 (1960).
6. L. S. Kothari and K. S. Singwi, Solid State Phys. 9, 109 (1959).
7. J. P. Schiffer and W. Marshall (private communication).

RESONANCE RADIATION OF
NUCLEI BOUND IN A LATTICE
DAVID R. INGLIS
Argonne National Laboratory
Lemont, Illinois
The understanding of the processes involved in resonance radiation
emitted and absorbed by nuclei bound in crystal lattices has acquired
a new interest as a result of the recent revealing experiments of Moss1
bauer and others. In the literature the interpretation of these experiments has been based on analogy with a similar problem involving resonance absorption of neutrons by bound nuclei, a problem treated by
Lamb, 2 who took results from the earlier neutron resonance work of
Breit and Wigner, and of Bethe and Placzek, who, in turn, had based the
treatment of neutron resonances on analogy with radiation. For the
sake of a concise, qualitative understanding of the problem it seems
desirable to have a simple treatment of the electromagnetic radiation
problem itself, eliminating the detour via neutrons.
Some of the features of the problem may be presented most simply
in terms of the analogous one-dimensional problem, and this is the approach we shall use. We consider a nucleus as one bead of a string of
beads, connected by springs and vibrating longitudinally. The lattice
points are at l r = ra, where r = 1,2, ... N, and each has a longitudinal
displacement x r which may be Fourier -analyzed into normal coordinates q s
,

:

x r = (2/N)^/ 2 Z s q s sin (rS7r/N)

(1)

Here v is the number of dimensions; for the string of beads v = 1. The
exponent v /2 is introduced for the sake of a later discussion of a crystal in which these longitudinal modes are a subset of a much larger
number of modes, and where the coefficients for these modes accordingly become smaller (varying inversely as the square root of the number of atoms, which in a square or cube is N").
The Lagrangian of the mechanical lattice is

tWork performed under the auspices of the U.S. Atomic Energy
Commission.
*R. L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik, 151, 124 (1958); Naturwiss., 45, 538 (1958).
2
W. E. Lamb, Jr., Phys. Rev., 55, 190 (1939).
169

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

170

£ = (M/2) Zx 2, - (K/2a) 2 (x r+1 - x r ) 2
= (M/2)2q| - (K/a) 2q|[l - cos (tts/N)]

(2)

We consider N large, without detailed concern for the end conditions,
as we make the following approximation in this substitution:
2

I r sin (rs7r/N) = N/2

The integer

s

Z r sin (rs;r/N) cos (rs7r/N) =

(3)

here refers to a mode of vibration of the string, indi-

cating the number of nodes in what becomes a sine wave along the
string as the string becomes continuous with large N; (2/N)
q s is
the amplitude of such a wave, normalized to become small with large

M

is retained in the last line of (2), even
N so that a mass factor
though a total mass NM is involved in the vibration.
We first assume a monochromatic incident electromagnetic wave
described by the vector potential (or by its x component)

A(x,t) = ae

i(kx - Wt)
(4)

and consider the absorption by one nucleus in the string endowed with
an electric dipole x'e. In the real lattice, of course, each nucleus
has a charge Ze, and the elastic force constant K results from the
interaction of this charge with the charges of the electrons, as it
appears in the quantum-mechanical treatment of the whole electrostatic energy of the system unperturbed by (4). Thus, the absorbing
nucleus (which we call R) is endowed with a charge Ze, which is in
effect at the nuclear center of mass when averaged over the time of
lattice vibration, plus an electric dipole that shows how this nucleus
differs from the others in interacting with the electromagnetic field
(4). The dipole consists of a positive charge e on a proton of mass m
and the rest of the nucleus which we call a core (though it need not be
a closed shell), of mass (M - m). In order not to deviate from the
total charge Ze assumed in K, the core is given an equivalent charge
-e.
It is then fairly obvious that the coupling with the radiation comes
essentially through the acceleration of the proton, in the approxima^> m, but let us nevertheless formulate this point and see how
tion
the correct position coordinate enters in the vector-potential term.
The vector potential enters! the Lagrangian of a many-particle sys-

M

tem thus:
tThe simple proof of this consists in showing that the Lagrange
equations in cartesian coordinates then include, among other terms,
the deflecting force of the magnetic field, F mag = (e/c)v x H with
H =Vx A, as is shown for example in Van Vleck's book, "Electric and

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI
£ = (1/2) 2 n mv^ - V + Z n (e/c)v n

-

171

A

(5)

If we neglect the interaction of A with the nuclear charges Ze and
with the electrons, which would be of importance in problems of crys-

tal optics,

we have for our system

£ =(1/2)M2

(N " 1)

- (K/2a)Z(x

4+(1/2)(M- m)4 + (l/2)mx£

r +1

x [xpA(xp) - x

- x r ) 2 - V(x

p

- x c ) + (e/c)

c A(x c )]

(6)

The sum (N - 1) includes all N values of r except r = R. Here xp

and x c are the positions of the proton and core, and we of course reduce them to the center-of-mass and difference coordinates for the
R-th nucleus,

xr = [(M - m)x c + mXpJ/M

x' = x

p

- xc

(7)

and have

£ = £v + (l/2)/ix' 2 - V(x') + (e/c)[(x R + (/i/m)x')A(x R + (/x/m)x )
;

- (x R - (m/M)x')A(x R - (m/M)xO]

(8)

Here we have the usual reduced mass, n = m(M- m)/M, and the first

term in £ is a sum over N terms, not just Z
over (N - 1)
terms excluding x„ as in Eq. (6). The two cartesian momenta are

P R = 8£ /3x R = Mx R + f

f

= (e/c)[A(x

R + (/i/m)xO

- A(x R - (m/M)x')]
p = 3 £/dk' = \xk' + g

g = (e/c)[(M/m)A(x p ) - (m/M)A(x c )]
(9)

If,

neglecting the mass of the proton compared to the mass of the
m/M a 0, ju/m « 1, we have

core, we put
f

« (e/c)[3A/ax] x

x' +

-

g « (e/c)A(x

p

)

(90

Magnetic Susceptibilities, ,, Oxford University Press, New York,
1932, p. 19. The fact that the acceleration in the transverse direction is involved in the longitudinal radiation process means that the
problem is not truly one -dimensional, although the essential lattice
part of the formulation is.

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

172

The Hamiltonian contains for these two coordinates the terms
2

2

(P R - f) /2M + (p - g) /2M

(10)

and we may here first use the approximation (9') and further neglect
altogether, both because it appears as f/M, which is small compared to g/jLt from the mass disparity, and because the gamma- ray
wavelength of interest is rather large compared to nuclear dimensions.
2
With these approximations, and with neglect of g the Hamiltonian
JC= 2pq- £ is
f

,

JC = (1/2M)[2

(N_ 1]

P 2 + (P N - f) 2 + (K/2a)Z(x r +1 - x r 2
]

)

+ (p-g) 2/2ju + V(x')

« (1/2M) 2P 2. + (K/2a)Z(x r +1 - x r 2 + p 2/2p. + V(x')
)

- (e/mc)p.A(x

(11)

p)

as some readers would have considered obvious without all this talk.
One purpose of this detailed discussion has been to show why it is x p
that appears as the argument of A.
In the approximation f = 0, the lattice -point momenta are simply
P r = Mx r and the transformation to the normal coordinates and momenta p s and q s proceeds as in (2), 3C = 2 S 3C S + 3Cn + 3C
,

1

3C S

= p|/2M + (Mw|/2)Qs

p s = d£/dq s = Mq s

w s ~ (2K/Ma)(l - cos tts/N)

— (ft/i)3/8q s

2

JC

N = p /2^l + V(x')

3C'=-(e/mc)p-A(x p )

(12)

The lattice part of the Hamiltonian, I3C S is the sum of terms s referring to the normal modes separately, and so is separable into os,

cillator equations each of which involves one factor in the composite

wave function. The time -independent oscillator wave equation,
2

2

2

[-(1i /2M)8 /aq s

+ (Mu)|/2)q| - E s ] U s (q s ) =

(13)

expressed, as shown in Eq. (13'), in the usual convenient oscillator
coordinates ? s = (wsM/h^qgi

is

(-9 /9«s + *l -*s)U s (!s) =
2

A s =2EsAx) s = 2n s + 1 (130

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

173

The well-known solutions U s (| s ) have between them the following
2
matrix elements of £ which we shall need shortly:
,

<n|| |n+2> = (l/2)(n+l) /2 n +2)
2

1

1/2

(

<n || 2 |n>

= (n+1/2)

<n || 2 |n-2>=(l/2)n

1/2

(n-l) 1/2

<n|« |n + l>=[(n+lj/2].*

<n|| |n-l> = (n/2) V2

(14)

The nuclear part of the wave equation
(H n - e n )u n (x) =

(15)

need not be specified in any detail, as all we shall demand of the nuclear wave functions u n (x) is that there be an electric dipole transition between two of them, Ui and Uf, characterized by an energy dif-

ference ei - ef = hco
The interaction with the electromagnetic field (4) is of course
treated as the perturbation, and we shall be particularly interested in
the relative contributions made by various Fourier components that
enter here, without concern for the absolute strength factor C.
.

ac'

= (ine/mc)(a/ax')A[x R + (/x/mjx']

w Ce i[k(x R + x')
= Ce"

icjt

e

ikx '

- cot]
ibs * s
ne
s

= Ce iwt (l + ikx' + -.)

I

V

ib

e

N

s^s

1+ i

s= 1

N

s

Ms
L
=
n

^ 2

\s = n

C = ietefi/mc

C 1 =(2/Nf

/2

b g = C^g" 17 * sin (Rstt/N)

(t/M) 1/2 k

(16)

We see that the lattice Fourier components of the motion of the
nucleus R, on which the dipole rides, enter the coefficients b s which
,

- v/2

contain a factor N
and thus in general become small as N becomes large, but we shall see that they make a finite contribution because one obtains a sum of about N^ terms in b g
.

In the fourth line of Eq. (16) the terms in the product have been

§

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

174

separated into two classes and only those exponentials with s ^n
have been expanded in a power series. The others have been retained
as exponentials to avoid the "infrared catastrophe."! For the longwave lattice vibrations, s <^N, we have from Eq. (12)

w| = (2K/Ma)(l - cos 77s/N) *
b s < b s /sin (Rstt/N) = (2/N)^

= 2 3 / 4 (2/N)

- (l/4)2

1/2(l"

3/ 4

«2(2/N)

(2/N)

1/2(

"

X)

77

2

/2

Ks 2/N 2 Ma

= (ti/2) 2 (sw n /N) 2

(li/Mu> s ) 1/2 k

(h/7TMs) l/2 (Ma/K) 1/4 w/c

1/2(l' "

^ s-V2

(160

^(meAMs) ' 2 {m e c 2/^ 2 (a/v)V»
1

1)

Here we have introduced the velocity of sound, v = (Ka/M) 1/2 and in
,

the sample evaluation following the arrow we have used the typical
-1

(the frequency corresponding to the time
value v/a = 3x 10 13 sec
for sound to travel a lattice distance, or approximately the Debye
frequency) and we have used "no; = m e c 2 /4, since the gamma ray of
191
Ir
used in Mossbauer's first demonstration of the effect has the en=
= 200 x 1840 m
ergy 129 Kev. We have taken
e
Thus, the dividing line, which we have called n in Eq. (16), between
b s greater than and less than unity, is in the neighborhood of s « 4
for one dimension and there exists no such distinction for more dimensions (given the crystal constants and gamma energy of our example).! For considerably larger s one may expand the individual
exponentials, but there are so many terms in the sum of factors in
the product that the validity of the expansion must be further examined.

M Am

.

Formulation of the Transition Probabilities
In the usual time -dependent wave equation
[JC

- (VDO/at)]* =

(17)

one considers the approximate solution of interest to be a superposii and a growing admixture of the final state f,

tion of the initial state

tThe infrared catastrophe does not occur for three dimensions, as

we shall see. For that case, v = 3, one may set n = 1 and eliminate a
part of the following discussion, which applies explicitly to the onedimensional model and is presented in order to facilitate an understanding of the importance of the three dimensions of actual crystals
in determining the shape of the absorption spectrum.
jThe dividing integer n becomes greater as the crystal binding
becomes weaker and the limit of weak binding will be of interest.
§See page 187.

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI
^/

175

= a i (t)^ i +af (t)^ f

18)

where

^ = Ui(x')n s Ung

i(Ei/R)t

(? s )e

are solutions of Eq. (17) without 3C'. The coefficient ai is initially
unity and the initial rate of growth of af is
a f = (l/ffl)/*f ac'^i d|> ... d^ N dx' = De

i(2

sK - ns )c s +

u,

- c)t

= De iAa;t

D = (Ck/fi) < f x'| i > D^
|

ik <f |x'| i> w

/ u* e

lkx

'ui dx' =

n-1
D 1 = <nl

n n _i

•••

*

n

e

ib s ^s

/ u*(l + ikx' + •••)u i dx'

n i'" n n-l>

s=l

N
D2 - < nn

/

•

nN

• •

l + i

/

N

£ Vs-U/2) \s£= n

s=n

\

b s^s

n n --n N >

i

(19)

Here oj = (ef - ei)/h is the resonant frequency of the nucleus at rest
without recoil, Ef = ef + 2 s n s 'a;s i s the final energy of the system
and, similarly, E^ = ei + Z s n s oj s and Aco is the amount by which the
incoming wave is out of exact resonance with the energy change from
the initial to the final condition of the system as a whole, nucleus plus
lattice. In Eq. (19) we have selected the electric dipole term of the
nuclear transition as the usual case, but this is not essential. The
early values of af for small t, are
,

,

H

f De

iAwt

dt = (D/iAo>)(e

iAajt

- 1)

and thus the probability per unit time that the transition has been
made to the final state, for t small enough that a^ remains not far

from unity, is

J

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

176

^W

(l/t)|af p = (D/Aco) 2 |e

iAwt / 2

f |e

iAwt / 2

-e^^f
(20>

The last factor, the square of the square bracket, is clearly a funcand becomes zero
for Aco = 2ir/t. Thus it describes a resonant peak of half -width about
fl/t, becoming narrower as the time becomes longer, in keeping with
the uncertainty principle, and the factor t in Eq. (20) makes the peak
higher as the time becomes longer. For larger values of Au>t, the
tion which approaches unity for very small Au>t

function goes through a series of small maxima of rapidly decreasing
amplitudet which have no great importance compared to the central
sharp peak.
In the resonant absorption of gamma rays, the time t during which
the radiation causing the transition takes place is taken to be essentially the half- life of the emitting state (the same as the half- life of
the final state of the absorbing nucleus, the two nuclei being identical).

The shape of the resonant peak given by Eq. (20) is similar to, but
not the same as, the shape factor of the dispersion formula,
2
The latter is derived by treatment of the steady state
|(Ao>) - ir/2|*
resulting from the equilibrium between the absorption here treated
and the corresponding emission that is responsible for the half- life
of the final state f the nonresonant "tail" obtained does not display
the "beats" found in Eq. (20) for large Aw. To obtain a qualitative
understanding, it does not matter which resonant line shape is used.
As the half-life in a case of interest is known from experiment,
we consider t given. The structure of the theory is then as follows:
In exploring the shape of the absorption spectrum, we consider at
first a given o>. There is then a range of energies of cu within about
Aw = 2u/t, in which some final states f , n s may be found for which
.

;

r

the matrix elements in

D of Eq. (19) do not vanish. One could think

of searching out these states, and then computing their contributions

by means of Eq. (20), and adding the values obtained to get the absorption intensity at

oj.

Alternatively and more conveniently, we may first consider all the
final states to which matrix elements exist, and calculate for each
state, by means of (20), the contribution it can make to the absorption

tThe shape of this function, as well as the formulation of this simple (Dirac) approach to the radiation problem, is to be found conveniently in L.

I.

Schiff,

"Quantum Mechanics," McGraw-Hill, New York,

1949, pp. 189-193.
JG. Breit and E. Wigner, Phys. Rev., 49, 519 (1936).

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

177

at various a>'s within the range Aa; of its resonant frequency
+ 2(n s - n s )a> s , as its influence is spread out by the line shape.
i

u)

The various contributions at each a? must then be added to obtain
the absorption spectrum.

To do this we must examine the lattice matrix elements. When the
constant and nuclear elements which are the same for all terms are
left out, the lattice factor for the low frequencies, D x of Eq. (19) is a
product of (n- 1) factors of the type

<n

£

iM
sss
*S>=/U*

tt)U n ({)e

ib s
1D
**l

d{

(20')

-£ 2/2
'
The hermite polynomial H n is a sum of
where U n (|) = H n (£) e
about n/2 powers of £ in terms of alternating sign, giving about n/2
.

nodes on each side of zero, and about n/2 maxima of H n with amplitudes that increase until the wave function is cut off by the exponential
factor. The appearance of Uf is shown in Fig. 1, along with dotted
lines giving the classical probability distribution for a harmonic oscillator.

The faithfulness to the correspondence principle is clear, and

in the central region, where the parabolic potential curve is relatively
flat,

U n (£) is given approximately by the standing- wave wave function

of a free particle in a box,

Un « e

iA

^

1

iA

l/2

|

with A= 2n s + 1,

Fig. 1. Square of the oscillator wave function for n s = 10. The
broken lines show the probability distribution for a classical oscillator which slows down and stops at the end
of its swing.

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

178

satisfying Eq. (13') with £= 0. In the matrix elements (20'), with
b s ^>l, the exponential factor e^°s * varies rapidly in phase and
makes the integral very nearly vanish if the product of the two wave
functions varies much more slowly, as it does if n s /»n s For the integral (20') to have a value nearly unity, it is necessary for the product of the wave functions in the important central region to have the
.

s

If n = 0, as it would be at a very low
s
temperature, Uj varies slowly and has no periodicity; the periodicity,
therefore, comes from Uf and we have A 1/2 = (2n s + 1) 1/2 = ±b s if

same periodicity as e

.

>

s

keep the same phase through the important range
matrix element is thus to be large. With
v = 1 and with b s taken as an average over several adjacent modes
s (because the radiating nucleus R is in a position to have good "leverage" in interacting with some of the normal modes of vibration and
not with others), we may use (sin 2 ) av = 1/2 in Eq. (16) and then have
e

is to

of integration and if the

(2n's -

l)w s =fik2/NM

The contribution to Aw

of Eq. (19) by all terms of this type is

n-1

£ nJ3W ~nfik /2NM
2

S

s= 1
This is the recoil Doppler shift produced by the motion of the radiating
atom in phase with other atoms in the same region in these long-wave
vibrations. A large block consisting of about N/n atoms can move together without exciting too much photon energy and can recoil as a
unit. In the limit of very weak binding, all the b
values become
g
large, the sum extends to N, and we obtain the usual recoil Doppler
shift for a free atom initially at rest, 6oo = Hl^/^M.
If n
s and n's are both large, we may use the free-particle standing-wave approximation for both and have (2n^ + 1) - (2n s + 1) = ±b s
The contribution to Au> of a given normal- mode excitation n's is
.

K -n

s )co s

= (nfcVi + nV 2 )(n^/ 2 _ n ^) Ws «(2n^ ± b s /2 1/ 2 )( ± b s /2 1/ 2

Addition of these contributions from the various modes s would involve a combinatorial problem, such as taking account of the fact that
there are relatively many states with very small total contribution
because the ± sign is about equally divided between plus and minus.
This would amount to a treatment, by means of fourier analysis, of
the ordinary Doppler shift that results from the thermal motion of
that large block of atoms whose common motion may be described by
these long-wave modes. One sees that the same large block is again

)

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

179

involved by noting that the statistical problem may give a factor n 1/2
from summing over n terms with random sign, and one thus has a
factor (n/NM) where a factor (1/M) would appear in the Doppler shift
of a free atom.
In favorable cases, n is less than N by several orders of magnitude, a fact which both keeps the spike sharp and which means that the
great majority of normal modes fall in the category of s greater
than n.
Now let us consider the high-frequency end of the phonon spectrum.
We do so with the idealized approximation that the b s values are sufficiently small for us to use the expansion in D 2 of Eq. (19). There
we have made the expansion with the summation in the exponent, and
require the sum to be small. We could take instead a product of exponentials for the individual modes s, expand each, and require only
that the individual term b s £ s be small, a seemingly less stringent
requirement. Even in this case the expansion would be questionable
as s approaches the borderline n. We must thus leave some region
untreated, and consider the lower limit n somewhat larger than that
borderline n. After expanding the individual exponentials, one has a
product of (N- n) sums and, in any order above the first, one has an
enormous number of products which are not obviously negligible and
which yet do not appear when one expands as in (16). It will be shown
below that the two forms are equivalent, and thus the less stringent

requirement is sufficient.
With this limitation on the range s under consideration, the shortwave factor obtained by taking the square of D 2 in Eq. (19) is
|D2

2
|

~|<nn -Dfc|l+ i2 s b s | s - (l/2)2 s b||||nn - n N >| 2
2

npnj

U-(l/2)2 s b|<n s || s |n s >] 2

if

all

k| |<n s ± 1 || s |n s > 2

if

all nj=m

except ng=n s ±l

if

all nj=nj

except ng = n s ±2

|

{l/4)b||<n s ±2 ||||n s >

2
|

(21)

For a given initial state n x ,,, n N there is just one final state of the

first type, and its lattice factor may be written more explicitly,

|D2 2 ~{l-I s [n s + (l/2)]b2s +".}

if

|

all nj

= nj

(210

1

There are about N states with lattice factors of the following type,
one for each of the lattice modes s that may be excited:
|D 2 2 ~(l/2)(n s + l)b|
|

if

all nj = nj

except ng + 1

(21")

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

180

As long as most of the nj are not zero there are about N states with
factors of the type
|D 2

2
|

~ (l/2)n s b|

if

all nj = nj

except ng = n s - 1

(21'")

If we confine our attention to powers of b s no higher than b|, these
are all the transitions we need to consider. Transitions to the single
state of the type (21') give an absorption line having the natural width
except as slightly broadat the undisplaced resonant frequency u>
ened and displaced by the long-wave modes in D 1 The second type
(21 '0 gives the possibility that any one of the lattice modes may absorb one quantum of excitation, contributing to the spectrum in the
immediate neighborhood of (oj + w s )- Since there are many lattice
modes and thus many u> s these modes, through this term, can contribute a broad part of the spectrum. The last type (21'0 corresponds
to the nuclear excitation receiving most of its energy from the gamma
ray, but part of it from the crystal mode s, and the factor n s assures that this cannot happen unless mode s is excited. This process,
of course, contributes to the spectrum of the low -energy side of co
In the single term of type (210 there is subtracted a sum of n terms
in b s This compensates in the total intensity the absorption by the N
states of type (21") and of type (21'"), in this order, leaving the total
intensity unaffected by the influence of the lattice.
It is clear that the shape of the absorption spectrum depends on
the prevailing magnitude of the n s that is, on the degree of excitation of the crystal modes, and this, of course, depends on the temperature. At absolute zero, with all values of n s = 0, the "central spike,"
or almost undisplaced line, at u) is considerably weakened by a wing
covering the range of crystal-mode energies on the high-energy side.
At moderately low temperatures, n s will be fairly large for the lowfrequency modes with small s, and n s will be small for large s, as
s approaches N. The low-frequency modes will make their very
small contribution to the Doppler broadening of the spike, and the
high-frequency modes (as well as the untreated intermediate modes),
will start to develop a wing on the low-frequency (phonon de-excita,

.

,

.

.

,

tion) side, which further detracts from the intensity of the spike.

As

the temperature becomes higher, the central spike disappears and the

strong outer part of the wings is also much enhanced. The fact that
according to Eq. (22) the spike is even negative (and not only in the
limit of large n s ) shows that the simple approximation used is not
valid, particularly in its neglect of terms of order bj. An improved
approximation is discussed below.
As a simple extreme case, let us consider further the shape of the
spectrum in the limit of very low temperatures where few phonons
are present. Consider in particular the shape of the high- energy wing
given by (21") with all n s = 0. The energies of the lattice modes are

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

181

= (l/2)w|^(l - costts/N) and cu|g = 4K/Ma, according to
s with u>s
Eq. (12). This type of frequency spectrum as a function of a> s is illustrated vertically in Fig. 2, for the case N = 20. As a function of
u> s , or oscillator energy, it is plotted horizontally, the transfer being

fujO

Fig. 2. Distribution of frequencies of the normal modes of a
string of twenty beads (N = 20), showing graphically how
they bunch at the high-frequency end, in terms of the

The lower graph gives the corresponding density of states for a larger value of N.

first line of Eq. (12).

made by means of the parabola shown. For the large values of N that
are of interest, the lines crowd together in the extreme co s - u>n> to °
closely to permit drawing them. For a very large N, the spectrum is
almost a continuum of varying density and the number of modes per
unit

io

is

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

182

N(co s ) = (awg/as)"

1

= (2 3 / 2 N/nco N )(l - cos 77s/N) l/2 /sin (tts/N)

= (2N/ff« N )/[l - (co s /co N ) 2 ]

1/2

(22)

Here we have used the relation sin 7rs/N = 2(co s /con)[1 - (cos/con) 2 ] /
This is
in transforming from a function of s to a function of co s
plotted to show the comparison with the horizontal spectrum in the
.

lower part of Fig. 2.
In practice the natural line width w of the gamma line will be
greater than the spacing of the levels, particularly at the crowded
upper end of the spectrum, because N is very large, and the intensity
of absorption is given by the integral of (21 ") multiplied by (22), or of
multiplied further by the line shape
b|N(co s ) -WsVtl - (co s /con) 2 ]
and integrated over the entire width of the line. For qualitative purposes it suffices to square off the line shape and let it have a constant
height over the width w (on the scale of co s ). The number of states
involved, or the integral of (22) is then indicated by the shaded areas
given as examples in the lower part of Fig. 2, and these are to be
multiplied by the median Wg 1 to obtain the relative intensity of absorption (since, again with an average sin 2 = 1/2, we have b| = (l/2)Cf/co s
and C\ is a common factor).
The line width thus blunts the singular peak of the function N(co s )
at the upper limit of the spectrum, con- The area of the shaded region
under this peak is
,

co

w/co N

N

/

2

dw/[l - (co/co N ) ]

V2 «

co

oV(2e) 1/2 = (2co Nw) 1/2

N !

(23)

con~w

The intensity at the peak is thus approximately given by (2w) 1/2 wjJ
The corresponding intensity, that is, the intensity with the common
factor (NC?/7tcon) again omitted from /b|N(co s N(co s dco s in the non)

,

w

singular part of the spectrum is w/co s [l - (co s /con) 2 ]
of this to the intensity at the peak is
Kco s )/I(co N ) = (w/2w N )

1/2
(

WN /a; s )/[l - (u> s /w N 2
)

and the ratio

1/2
]

(24)

Here we have considered w<^Ccon> and nave called the peak intensity
I(con)> although in this treatment the peak is reached more exactly at
con ~ U/2)w and the intensity falls to zero again at con + (1/2 )w.
These points are used in the sketch of the ratio (24) shown in Fig. 3
for the case in which w = (1/10)con is rather large. For a smaller w
the peak is obviously narrower and higher, relative to the rest of the
spectrum. The peculiar shape of the peak is artificial, arising from

,

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

Fig. 3.

183

Rough sketch of absorption spectrum of a gamma ray
with assumed square intrinsic line shape having a width
w = wn/10) of a nucleus in a one- dimensional lattice. The
broken curve indicates that the rise toward a cusp at the
undisplaced line is steeper at finite temperatures than at
T = 0.

our use of a rectangular line shape. With the realistic line shape given
by Eq. (20) it would of course be rounded off nicely.
For small cj s much less than co^, the spectrum is linear in
u>n/ws' This ma Y still apply in the low end of the high-frequency reN. When we introduce a small but finite temperature,
gion n < s
T, with kT<fiu>N, there is a region of small oj s with 'ha; s <kT
wherein there is a Boltzmann distribution of excitation of the phonon
quantum numbers n s and, for our qualitative discussion, we may insert the average excitation n s = kT/nco s Equation (21") with n s =
was used as a factor in obtaining (24), and in the region of (24) where
w s <a)jj, reintroduction of n s has the effect of multiplying by n s + 1
«n s For small u> s Eq. (24) then becomes
,

«

,

.

.

Kw s )/I(w N * (kT/Ha4)(wa> N/2) 1/2
)

This gives a steep approach to a singularity at cos =

and for

w = (l/10)w£j, and kT/hu; N = 1/2 suggests a curve about like that
shown by the dotted line in Fig. 2a, the peak at s = N being practically
unaffected. In the region s«n we expect (21") and thus also this dotted curve to be an upper limit. For a higher temperature, kT>nu>N,

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

184

(23) is also to be multiplied by a factor n^-kT/ftoJN and thus (24) is
multiplied by u; N /a> s giving
,

It(w S )At(wn) = (w/2co N )

1/2

(co

N /u> s

2
)

/[l- (u> s /u N ) 2 ]

^

(25)

s < (o>n~ w )* Tnis curve is similar to the previous one indicated
by the dotted line but with the low frequencies further enhanced.
This gives us an idea of the shape of the absorption spectrum for
the one-dimensional problem on the high-energy side, gamma-ray energy having been absorbed by the lattice vibrations as well as by the
nucleus. In the last step we have considered the temperature high
enough for us to consider n + 1 «n s In this approximation the emission strength (21 '") is the same as the absorption strength (21"), and
we have on the low -energy side a distribution of approximately the
same shape, part of the energy for the nuclear transition being supplied by the lattice vibrations. Thus, we expect the spectrum to consist of two wings, each with something like a peak near its outer extremity, and both flanking a central 'spike. " The peak at the highfrequency end of each wing is probably not to be expected to be so
sharp in nature, because it comes at the frequency where one cuts
off the idealized "Debye" spectrum of the crystal, and the actual cutoff at high frequencies is doubtless somewhat different, depending on

for

(jo

.

'

details of the crystal structure.

As co s decreases below about (1/2)o>n, the intensity rises seemingly toward a cusp at the center, but the approximation becomes unreliable as the cusp is approached. If we take w/w^ < 0.07, let us say
w/ojn = 1/20 rather than 1/10 as above, then the line width would
pick out individual lines in Fig. 2 for small values of w s and for each
of them would contribute a peak to the absorption spectrum, with a
small energy shift corresponding to a one-phonon jump at that frequency co s If w spans the undisplaced position w s = on the scale
of Fig. 2, it gives rise to the undisplaced peak in the spectrum corresponding to no phonon jump for any s. For this no-phonon transition,
the intensity at zero temperature is given by the term unity from Eq.
(210 for all s, rather than to have (l/2)b| from Eq. (21") for one of
the s values. Thus, the intensity of the peak of the wing relative to
that of the central peak [according to both Eq. (23) and the remark
,

.

following it] is
2

[(l/2)(2w/co N ) 1/2 (NC /7io) N )] = (2w/u) N ) /2-hk /7r WN
* = Ey/fic, this

1

2

M

becomes

[(2w/w N ) 1/2A](E /hwN)( E /
r
r

Mc )«(l/2)(w/wN )V x 104 x 10" 4
2

2

«(l/2)(w/u)

N

1/2
)

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

185

we use, for example, E y ~ 10 5 ev and "Rc^n ~ 10 ev Thus the
central peak becomes relatively rather high as the line becomes narif

-

row. The suppression of this peak at higher temperatures is discussed in the next section. The line is undisplaced by recoil. This is
possible (despite the physical expectation that the crystal should recoil as a whole) because in the Fourier analysis (1) it is assumed that
the ends of the string are fixed.
This simple remark about the height of the central peak only applies, however, if the springs are stiff enough so the zero-phonon
transition may be evaluated by Eq. (21') for all s values down to
s = 1, that is, that the dividing line between D x and D2 becomes n = 1
and that none of the factors fall into D x This requires that b\ be
considerably less than unity. For a string of beads Nws = soj^, and
b| may accordingly be written in two ways, b| =1ik2/sMwj j or
2
b| = nk2/NMu> s The requirement b = "nk2/Ma>N < 1 * s ver Y nearly
satisfied by the sample numbers (10 4 x 10" 4 ) given above. If it is not
satisfied for s = 1 but the corresponding requirement is satisfied for
s = 2, that is, if
1, or only slightly less, and b 2 is well below
unity, then D x contains a factor for s = 1 and D 2 contains no-phonontransition factors about equal to unity for all values of s.
This provides a simple illustration with small quantum numbers,
similar to the more general discussion above of Eq. (20') for large
quantum numbers. Even here in this simple case we have the complication that D x can have a value not only for the one-phonon jump but
also for the sever al-phonon jumps of n lf from
to several values of
n x We may simply evaluate the first few transition probabilities D 2
by explicit use of the normalized Hermite polynomials.
.

s

.

b^

.

Ho =

V V*

H^) = 2 1/2 iT

H2 (|) = 2 1/ 2
1 / <l

I

7r

-V4(|2 _ 1/2)

HgU) = 3" V2 ^-1/4(2^2 -3|)

From Eq. (20') we have
IDjI

= e -U/2)b? i/h^, [, . (i/2) ibl ] e""

2

dr?|

2

and find that the successive transition probabilities for the zero-,
_(1 /2)b21
one-, two-, and three-phonon jumps are e
multiplied by
2
2
2
2
3
This is again
(l/3)(b
respectively.
(l/2)b
(l/2)(b
and
/2)
1,
/2) ,
a question of obtaining an approximate match between the peri,

,

s

and of H ng ,(£) so as to destroy as effectively as
possible the orthogonality between the latter and H
For b x = 1, we
see that the strongest peak of the spectrum is still at the undisplaced
position; then, half as strong as that, there is the one-phonon peaK at
the s = 1 position in the sequence of Fig. 2, and then, one- eighth as

odicity of e

.

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

186

strong, there is the two-phonon peak, which happens to be near the
line in Fig. 2 because the lines are almost equally spaced. With
h\ = 2, the zero-phonon peak is reduced to equality with the one-phonon peak and, as b x increases, the highest intensity moves further out
s = 2

through several phonons. As the spring grows weaker and b x increases
further, the other modes s = 2, 3, etc., start to contribute to the inten-

_(l/2)b2

s
"wings" in a similar fashion and their factors e
for the no-s-phonon jump further detract from the intensity of the

sity of the

zero-phonon peak.
Thus, in this very simple system we see with especial clarity that
we first start to get phonon excitation to detract from the intensity of
the central peak when the originally very stiff springs become weak
enough to satisfy the condition b^» 1. The momentum carried away
by the y-ray is fik, and this condition (see previous page) may be
written either as
(tik)

2

/2NM = (1/2)110)!

or in the form
(fik)

2

/2M = (l/2)fico N

The first form suggests that we have the proper "impedance
match" when the kinetic energy of the recoil (provided the recoil momentum is divided among all the N atoms which move in phase with
each other in the first vibrational mode) is about equal to the kinetic
energy involved in the one-quantum excitation of this mode. (The
specification of kinetic energy is here not essential, for there are
still factors 2 floating around depending on such details as whether

R is at the middle of the string, R = (1/2)N, to give it
maximum "leverage" for this and other odd modes.) This is perhaps

or not nucleus

the most graphic physical explanation of the sharp central peak:

when

y-ray momentum is less than enough to supply this collective motion of the atoms in the middle relative to the ends of the string, there
is apt to be no phonon excitation.

the

In our simple model, with the ends of the string fixed, the central
peak is undisplaced by recoil. In a more realistic model, we could
merely constrain the end atoms (by a light frame) to remain a fixed
distance apart and to conserve total momentum. The central peak
would then be slightly displaced by recoil of the whole system and the
s = 1 line would be further displaced by this additional recoil [if
R^ (1/2)N] arising from excitation of the first one-phonon jump.
The second form of the condition shows that the recoil momentum
of the free nucleus, not shared with any others, corresponds to an energy about great enough to excite even the highest-frequency mode of
vibration. The interesting fact is that high-frequency modes are nevertheless not excited. One might say that there is an impedance mis-

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

187

match, or that there is no way for a gradual transfer of momentum to
R to excite the various nuclei in
their high-frequency motions with contrary phases. If nucleus R
should shoot off a bullet with this much momentum at a given time,
classically, for any finite stiffness of spring, the nucleus and bullet
act as an isolated system with no time for transfer of momentum to
them during the instant of ejection. The full free recoil of the nucleus
would be detracted from the energy of the bullet, and the energy of recoil would first excite a localized traveling wave packet which could
then be expanded in terms of various fairly high frequency vibrational
modes with specified phases. If the y ray we have discussed were
emitted at a given instant, this energy would be sufficient to excite a
localized wave of much higher amplitude than the one -quantum amplitude of o>n- Corresponding to the expansion of the localized wave,
there should be perhaps a one- or several-quantum excitation of a
few of the moderately high frequency waves. Such excitation does not
occur with y-ray emission because the emission does not take place
at a given time. Instead, it takes place at an unknown time with a probability which builds up very gradually in a coherent manner as we have
seen in Eqs. (19) and (20), and, in the case discussed, it may either
excite a low-frequency phonon or none at all.
the vibratory system via nucleus

Discussion of the Approximation in Expanding the Exponentials

The insufficiency of the approximation in expanding exponentials
apparent in the possibility that the diagonal element, Eq. (210, may
go negative even with all the n s = 0, and a fortiori at a higher temperature. In one dimension, if we use the approximation and constants of
Eq. (160, we have
is

N
(1/2)7] b| « (3/4) /(ds/s) = (3/4) In N > 1

(26)

s

Here we have used a factor 1/2 from a mean value of sin2 (Rs/N) of
Eq. (16). In three dimensions the corresponding sum is

N
(1/2)

£ b| tu « (3/4N

2

)(tt/2)

/

2

(p

dp/p) = Sir/16

stu
2
2
2
2
p = g + t + u

(

26 /)

which is still of order unity, although the importance of the long
waves has been suppressed. We should therefore examine the expansion of the exponentials more carefully.
In place of the square bracket representing the high-frequency
modes toward the end of Eq. (16), we may write a product of expo-

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

188

nentials and for its matrix element in place of Eq. (21) we may write

|D2 2 ~<n n -4j|e

lbs ^ s

|n n ...n

|

lbs
N >| 2 =| n <n^| e ^

s^n

|

n s >| 2

* |n<n's |1 + ib s | s - (l/2)b2s || - |n s >| 2
= |n[l+ib s <n's |£ s |n s >- (l/2)b|<n^|| 2 ns >-]| 2
|

Considering now only the diagonal element, ng = n s
elements of only the even powers of £, as follows:
2

|n s [l-(l/2)b s

,

(27)

we have matrix

<n s |4||n s >+ (l/4!)<ns ||||ns >+ -]| 2

(28)

This product is of the form

n s (l + e s = 1 + ^s + £s*t e s£t/ 2! + ^r* s* t e r E s et/3! '"
)

which differs from the exponential

£e s = 1 +

e

Lz s + (Le s 2/2\ + (Ee s 3/3! •••
)

)

2
only by about N of the N2 terms in e| and by about N of the terms
in s|, etc., leaving us one order better off than one might otherwise
expect. We can now in this approximation put

|D2 = e

-Z]b2s<ns|l 2s|n s > + (2/4!)Z:b4s <ns|l||ns>+ •

|

„

-£b2s <n s |4 s |n s >_ -£(n s + l/2)b|
2

(29)

This replaces Eq. (21') and is clearly more satisfactory in that it indicates a gradual reduction of the intensity of the central peak to zero
as the sum increases.

Shape of the Wings in One and Three Dimensions

The derivation is slightly modified for two or three dimensions.

We are of course interested in three, but shall write the equations in
two dimensions for the sake of economy of symbols. Each component
of the vector displacement of atom qr can be described in normal coordinates, but we shall write only the x component of such a displacement. (The Lagrangian also contains the other components independently.) The force constant between adjacent atoms, owing to a relative
displacement in the x direction, is a longitudinal force constant, K,
if they are neighbors in the x direction, a transverse one, K
transv

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI
= fK,

if

189

they are neighbors in the y direction. The Lagrangian is

£ = (M/2) L*?qr - (K/2a) L [(x q+ 1§ r - xq>r 2 + i(xq>r + 1 - x q>r ) 2
)

= (M/2) £q| t - (K/a)Z!q 2 t {[l - cos(tts/N)] +f[l - cosfrt/N)]}
(20

where
x qr = (2/N) ^ ]T q s t sin (qsir/N) sin (rtir/N)
1

2

v = 2

st

Taken for all lattice points qr, this is a wave of x displacement havThe
frequency of a normal mode is given by
ing q nodes in the x dimension and r nodes in the y dimension.

w| t = (2K/Ma){[l - cos (tts/N)] + f[l - cos (?rt/N)]}

« (K/Ma)(7r/N) 2 (s 2 + ft 2
The perturbation term
e

ikx QR =

n st e

b st = (2/N)*^

2

3C'

)

contains a factor [see Eq. (16)]

ib st*st

(VMw st )V 2 k sin(qs7r/N) sin (rt7r/N)

(16")

or, averaged over the factors sin2 « (1/2), in the neighborhood of a

given

st,

-

Wt = N " (ii/Mw st k2 » (3/2N^ " V(s 2 + ft 2 1/2
)

)

or, in three dimensions,

b| tu = (3/2N2 )/[s 2 + f (t 2 + u 2 )]

1/2

In three dimensions, the number of modes with
it)

(16"')

cu s t

between wand

+ doois N(co) dw, with

N(w) = (N3/27r 2 )(Ma/K)

3/2

for the simple extreme case

co

f

2

(30)

= 1. For the other extreme, f =

(no

shear strength), we have instead

N(w) = (NA)(Ma/K)
independent of

u>,

1/2

just as in the one-dimensional case.

(220

For f = I, the

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

190

shape of the wings (in the lower-frequency part of the spectrum) is
given by
to).

ns = °

const.,

n s + l/2«n s = kT/nw s

2

[n s + (l/2)]b s N(w s )
(24')

as indicated by the broken line and the solid line, respectively, in
Fig. 4.

Fig. 4. Spectrum for a three-dimensional lattice. The outer peak
corresponds to the upper limit of the (oversimplified Debye)

spectrum for compression waves, the peak at fcojsj similarly
corresponds to the upper limit for shear waves.

Here we see the real source of the difference between the behavior
in one and in three dimensions.

In one dimension, there is a lowfrequency divergence in the shape of the absorption wing. The same is
true in three dimensions without a consideration of shear strength. In
the latter case one has justification for the intuitive feeling that the
problem is mainly one-dimensional in its essence, because the photon
excites vibratory motion along its direction of incidence. However, in
three dimensions with shear strength taken into account, the frequency
of this longitudinal vibration of the absorbing atom is affected by the
transverse variation of the wave amplitude. There are so many possible wave numbers in the two transverse dimensions that there are
many more high-frequency than low-frequency modes. Thus, the low
frequencies are effectively suppressed, and the shape of the wing,

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

191

rather than going up as Wg 1 as the central spike is approached, is
linear in w s at zero temperature. For finite temperature, it is constant over the low -frequency part of the spectrum for three dimen2
sions with shear strength, as compared with the w s dependence for
one dimension.

Meaning of the Sharp Peak
Perhaps the greatest surprise that one encounters when thinking
intuitively about the dynamics of the crystal motion is that there can
exist such a very sharply defined component of the absorption as the

central spike, so nearly exactly at its undisplaced position, in spite
complexity of the motion of the absorbing nucleus and in spite
of the normal process of recoil, which for a free atom gives a very
appreciable Doppler shift. Between free nuclei the recoil Doppler
shift is quite enough to throw them out of resonance, unless they have
an initial velocity toward each other to compensate, whereas between
the nuclei in solids of Mossbauer's experiments the resonance is
quite exact when the solid bodies are at rest, and is destroyed by a
relative velocity of a few centimeters per second in either direction.
In this analysis we see how it is possible, in principle, for the central line to be quite sharp and almost undisplaced, even in the presence of a considerable amount of excitation of the lattice vibrations.
The sharpness is a typical quantum effect, like the sharpness of
atomic spectral lines that was not expected classically. It arises
from the fact that the crystal vibrations are quantized and that they
may not receive an arbitrarily small amount of excitation energy except in arbitrarily large wavelength. There is indeed a small broadening and shift due to the long waves. If the process of gamma absorption or emission were to be thought of as a completely sudden
process, giving the nucleus a sudden kick in a time much shorter than
a lattice vibration, one would expect this impulsive initial motion to
show up as a recoil Doppler shift, as it does in a free atom, and subsequently to have its energy divided between the various lattice modes
in a manner equivalent to a Fourier analysis of the impulsive velocity.
Actually, as we see in the theory, the possibility of transition is not
determined merely by the energy and instantaneous momentum balance, but rather the probability of transition is built up by integration
over the mean life of the nuclear state involved. This is time enough
for ample transfer of momentum between the nucleus and the lattice
by way of the forces involved in the lattice vibrations. In some cases,
the recoil momentum is divided equally between all the atoms of the
crystal, with no phonon excitation, and the corresponding contribution
to the sharp line is practically undisplaced by recoil. With phonons
initially excited and the radiating nucleus thus in a vibrational motion,
the transition involving no additional phonon excitation continues to
of the

192

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

occur. For this transition, the to-and-fro motion of the radiating nucleus does not make any Doppler contribution to the character of the
radiation, even though it would classically. f This is exactly analogous
to the fact that the to-and-fro motion on the charge on an electron in
a Bohr orbit does not contribute to the radiation without a quantum
jump, even though it would contribute classically. For high phonon

quantum numbers, the one-phonon transition between states of the vibrational motion should correspond to a classical result, just as the
An = 1 quantum jump does in the more familiar correspondenceprinciple discussion of the radiation from large Bohr orbits. As the
temperature is raised well above zero, the wings we have described
thus have a close correspondence to the classical "side bands" from
a moving source. As in the classical case, the wings merely detract
f The classical Doppler contribution due to a sinusoidal motion
x = a sin co m t of a radiating source is in the form of weak "side
bands." These one obtains analytically from the Doppler -shifted frequency co(t) = co [l + (act) m /c) cos co m t] in the expression exp (i / o> dt)
by simply treating act> m /c as small in expanding the exponential and
by expressing sin u> m t in terms of exponentials. In physical terms,
the appearance of a strong central line o> flanked by weak lines at
u) Q ± co m may be understood by thinking of the effect of this slightly
varying co(t) on a tuned detector. At the end of a swing, co(t) becomes
instantaneously stationary at co ± oj m and comes back in phase at this
frequency at the end of the following swing, so that a detector will respond to these frequencies. Now consider a detector tuned to oj
If it
is in phase with the signal just when co(t) = cu and if co(t)> co for the
next half- cycle, then the signal will gradually get ahead of the detector in phase during this half- cycle. If the cycle is short enough so that
the phase lead remains less than tt/4, there will be no destructive interference (and, if less than tt/2, there will still be a preponderance
.

The unique feature of w is that for it
alone this advance in phase will be exactly compensated for by the retardation in the following half-cycle, so that the response will continue to build up, being fed by most of each later cycle and giving a
strong line. The condition that the phase lead remain less than 7r/4 is
a<7rc/4w = A/2. The y-ray wavelength A = (h/mc 2 )(mc 2/137E is
much smaller than the atomic unit of distance h/mc 2 and the intensity of the central line dies away as the vibrations of the atoms in the
crystal attain an amplitude larger than A. The corresponding condition for zigzag motion over a distance a is a < A/4. This may be understood from the picture used in the usual graphic explanation of the
Doppler shift, showing an original wave train and one compressed into
a shorter space by the motion of the source. The detector tuned to receive the uncompressed wave receives the compressed wave instead.
of constructive interference).

J

,

RESONANCE RADIATION OF NUCLEI

193

from the intensity of the central line and do not widen it except, eventually, by making it disappear in the wider background as the probabilities of phonon transitions

increase with the pre -excitation of many

modes.

Acknowledgments
I

am indebted to Dr. Maria G. Mayer and Dr. H. J. Lipkin, partic-

ularly for discussion of the situation with three dimensions and of the
improved expansion of the exponentials, also to Dr. John Schiffer for
informing me of the experimental phenomenon.

;

:

194

Resonance Absorption of Nuclear Gamma Rays and the Dynamics
of Atomic Motions*
K. S. SlNGWI AND A. SjOLANDER
Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois
(Received June 13, 1960)

The theory of resonance absorption of nuclear y rays is generalized for an arbitrary system of interacting
particles by expressing the relevant transition probability in terms of a space-time self-correlation function
and thus relating the resonance line shape to the incoherent differential scattering cross section for slow neutrons. Two limiting cases (i) a gas and (ii) a solid have been considered. Discussion regarding the justification of the use of a classical self -diffusion function for a liquid is given and expressions for the broadening of
the resonance line due to diffusive motions of the atoms of the interacting system are derived. It is suggested
how Mdssbauer-type experiment could be used to give information regarding the diffusive motions of atoms
in a solid and also, under more favorable circumstances, in a liquid.
:

INTRODUCTION

THE

observation by Mossbauer

generalized formula
1

that nuclear

y
rays can be resonantly absorbed or scattered by
nuclei bound in a crystal lattice has recently led to some
very interesting applications2 and holds promise for
more applications particularly in the field of solid-state
physics. Mossbauer's observation rests on the fact that
in the case of a nucleus bound in a crystal, a y ray can

be emitted or absorbed without any energy transfer to
and from the lattice. The probability of such a recoilless
transition is, in most cases, small and is governed by the
usual Debye- Waller factor, familiar in the theory of
x ray and neutron scattering. Mossbauer explained his
experimental results on the basis of a theory due to
Lamb 3 for the Doppler broadening of neutron absorption resonance. Both in the theory of neutron and yray resonance absorption the relevant matrix element
corresponding to a transition of the crystal lattice from
one state to the other is the same.
The purpose of this paper is two-fold one is to generalize the theory for an arbitrary system of interacting
:

particles

by

expressing the transition probability in

terms of a space-time self-correlation function, which as
well known, determines the incoherent scattering for
slow neutrons; and the second is to show how Mossbauer technique can be used to gain information concerning the nature of diffusive motions of atoms in a
solid and also, under more favorable circumstances, in
a liquid. The cross section for 7-ray resonance absorp-

is

tion in the case of a gas (Bethe Placzek formula in the

case of neutrons) and in the case of a solid, in the limit

both weak and strong binding (two limiting cases

of

of Lamb's theory in the case of neutrons), follows very

simply from one general formula. Furthermore, the
* Based on work performed under the auspices of the U. S.
Atomic Energy Commission.
R. L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik 151, 124 (1958): Naturwissen-

schaften 45, 538 (1958); Z. Naturforsch 14a, 211 (1959).
2
During the last year and this year a number of communications concerning the Mossbauer effect and its various applications
have appeared in the Physical Review Letters to which the reader
is referred.
»

W. E. Lamb, Phys. Rev. 55, 190 (1939).

can be of great help in more
complicated systems as for instance liquids, where it is
difficult

to treat the

dynamics of atomic motions in

detail.

MATHEMATICAL FORMULATION

We are interested in calculating the probability of
absorption or emission of a 7 ray of momentum p by a
single nucleus of

an interacting system (say solid or

liquid) such that the nucleus makes a transition from a

state A to a state

B and at the same time the interacting

system makes a transition from a state, say nO) to a
state n). Since the interaction within a nucleus is much
stronger than that between two nuclei, the total wave
function can be written as a product of wave functions
one of which depends only on the coordinates of the
centers of masses of different nuclei and the other depends on the coordinates of the nucleons relative to the
centers of masses of their respective nuclei. The transition matrix element, corresponding to the absorption of
a photon, can be written as (Bn\H'\nOAp), where H'
represents the interaction between the radiation field
and the nucleus and has the following form
|

I

H'=Y,ica 9 exp (ip ti/h)
•

= exp(z'p- Ra/h) H« ca p exppp- (r,— R a )/A].
a constant depending on p, a v is the annihilation
operator for a photon with momentum p, r, is the coc is

ordinate of a nucleon of the nucleus a, and

R a is the

coordinate of the center of mass of the nucleus.

The

interaction operator H' is thus a product of two terms,

one of which depends only on the coordinates of the
nucleons relative to their center of mass and the other
depends only on the coordinates of the center of mass.
Thus the matrix element of the transition is a product
of two matrix elements, one of which corresponds to the
change in the internal state of the nucleus and the
other is («|exp(ip-R o/Ai)|«0), corresponding to a
change in the state of the collective motions of the
centers of masses. The first matrix element is just a
constant for our purpose, and it is the second one with
which we shall be mainly concerned here. It then follows

1093

\

195

K.

1094

S.

SINGWI AND

from the usual dispersion theory4 that the absorption
cross section per nucleus for a

SJOLANDER

A.

and |»0) of the interacting system, T is the natural
width of the excited state of the nucleus and g n0 is the

y ray of energy E is

given by

weight factor for the state |«0). In Eq.

statistical

a a {E) =

<r

r2

E gno
4

n.Tto

(1)

tne nuclear width T has been assumed to be independent

(n exp (ip R/h) \n0)\ 2
•

I

I

(E — E+e n — e n o) 2 +r 2/4

0I tne state

(1)

,

|

n). Also the suffix a in

R has been omitted.

The constant before the summation sign has been so
chosen that a a (E) goes over to the familiar Breit-

where Eo is the energy difference between the final and

Wigner formula for a fixed nucleus, a being the reso-

the initial nuclear states of the absorbing nucleus,

nance absorption cross section.
Now Eq. (1) can be written as follows:

t„

and e„o are, respectively, the energies of the states \n)
r

r2

«[>-(e»-e»o)/ft]

E g„o|<n|exp(ip-R/ft) «0)| f (E-E -h y+T*/4:dp
2

<Ta(E)-

4
cr

P

r2

— f dt{Z ^o|<n|exp(i P -RA)KO>| expP/(6 -e o)/^]}
i

2

4

n

n

exp(-i*p)
-dp

J_. (E-E -hp) 2 +T*/4

=

—

txpl~U(E-Eo)/h- (T/2h) \t\Jdt

I

X[ E gno(nO\ exp(-ip- H/h+itH/h) n)(n\exp(ip-R/h-itH/h) «0>]
\

n,n0

=

r /•*

—
<r

exp[-t7(£-£o)/*-r/2*| /| ]<exp[-*p- R(0)/»] exppp- R(/)/*]>t*,

I

(2)

4A •/ _

For t=Q, G,(r,0) = 5(r). G,(t,t) describes the correlation
between the position of one and the same particle at

where R(*) is the Heisenberg operator denned by

R(0 = exp(afl/ft)R exp(-UH/h).

different times. It gives, in the classical case, the proba-

H being the Hamiltonian of the interacting system, and
<• • -) T

means both the quantum mechanical and the

average at temperature T. We shall here
restrict ourselves to a system for which Boltzmann
statistics is applicable. In the above derivation the
Fourier representation of the 8 function and the identity
En|»)(»| =1 have been used. We now define a funcstatistical

bility of finding a particle at time / at position r, if the

same

particle

was at the

time t=0. The
not quite clear in a

origin at

interpretation of this function

is

quantum mechanical treatment and is discussed in the
Appendix. Van Hove 6 has discussed the G,(r,t) function in detail and we shall refer to his original paper.

From (2) and (3) we have

tion G,(x,t) through the following equation

—J

cor r

,(£)

(expd-ip- R(0)/ft] exppp- R(fl/*]> r

=

I

expp(K-r-c *)-(T/2ft)|*|]

4h

XG,(i,t)dTdt,

/

exp(tp-r/ft)G,(r,/)<Zr.

(3)

(5)

where hw=E—Eo, #tc= p.
As shown by Van Hove, 5 the incoherent differential
scattering cross section for slow neutrons

is proporwith T=0. In Lamb's
theory, 3 the probability of resonance absorption of
neutrons of energy E is also given by Eq. (1) besides a
constant factor and is, therefore, proportional to the

The inversion then gives

tional to

G,{tfy- (It)-3 f exp(-tp-r/ft)

the integral in

(5)

integral in (5). Thus the relevant term in the cross sec-

X(exp[-ip- R(0)/*] exppp- R{t)/K]) Td(?/h)

tion for

all

the three processes

—resonance absorption

of neutron and y rays by nuclei and neutron scattering

= ^Jjr'5[r+R(0)-r']5[r'-R(/)])

.

(4)

4
W. Heitler, The Quantum Theory of Radiation (Oxford University Press, New York, 1944), 2nd ed., p. 110.

(with T = 0) is given by an expression of the type

(5).

We shall see in the sequel that the cross section for the
'L. Van Hove, Phys. Rev. 95, 249
Glauber, Phys. Rev. 98, 1092 (1955).

(1954).

See also R.

J.

=

196

RESONANCE ABSORPTION OF NUCLEAR GAMMA RAYS

1095

resonance absorption of y rays by nuclei whether in a

extended to — °o without any appreciable error,

gas or bound in a solid or a liquid will follow from (5)
depending on the explicit form of G e (r,t). It is possible
to calculate the function G,(T,i) rigorously in the case
of a Maxwellian gas and in the case of a solid in the

is)

=—r Jr exp(\/
(7

its

T

h

h
k

I

1*|)

4h

/

harmonic approximation but it is not possible to do so

Xexp

in the case of a liquid. Nevertheless, in the latter case

-Ct.(0+t.(0]*2

(9)

J

one could use in an approximate way the classical form
of G,(r,t) e.g., the solution of the usual diffusion equation or better the solution of Langevin's equation for
Brownian motion. The behavior of G,(r,t) for very
small and very large times is known and for intermediate values of the time one could try different forms
of G,(r,t) so as to fit the experimental data. Thus, a

y(t) replaced by 2y(l). Before we proceed to calculate

general formulation of the absorption probability (the

<t(s) for a nucleus

same holds for emission) in terms of the self-correlation
function G,{x,t) as expressed by Eq. (5), has a definite

absorption cross section a a {E) for a nucleus in a perfect

advantage.
It has been shown by Van Hove 6 that the selfcorrelation function in the case of a gas or a solid (cubic
symmetric crystals) has the general form

ABSORPTION OF A y RAY BY AN ATOM
IN A PERFECT GAS

;

becomes

«r.(*)=W),

bound in a solid, we shall evaluate the

gas.

It has been

shown by Van Hove 6 that for a perfect

gas the quantum mechanical form of G,{r,t) is the one

(6)

a

There is no obvious reason to believe that in the case
of a liquid G a (r,t) has also the above general form. It
seems, however, reasonable to assume that (6) is a
good approximation for a liquid too. We know that it is
correct for small as well as large times.

The probability w e {E) for the emission of a y ray is
also given by Eq. (1) except that the signs of e„ and e„o

and the constant is different. 4 Pro-

ceeding as before, it is easy to show that w e {E) is given

M

ht

2irhJ

It is normalized such that Jl

(7)

e

where p is the momentum operator of an atom. This

the

R(0 in powers of t and define y(t) by the relation
self-

absorption cross section <x which for a thin absorber is
defined by

o= f

<r a

(E)w e (E)dE I f

f a a (E)w (E)dE.
e

y(t)=-fr*G.(r,t)dT,

and assume that the system is isotropic.
Substituting (11) in (6) and using the resulting G 8 (r,t)
and after performing integration over r we have

w e (E)dE

=

(12)
2

result easily follows from (3) if we expand the operator

xw {E)dE=\.

The quantity of experimental interest is

1

M 3M

XG,(t, -t)dtdt.

(11)

where
is the mass of the atom and ks is the Boltzmann's constant, and T is the temperature of the gas.
The term linear in t is purely of quantum mechanical
origin and the term quadratic in t survives in the classical limit. Vineyard 6 has shown that for very small times
for an arbitrary interacting system described by a timeindependent Hamiltonian y{t) is given by

f exp[i(K-r-wt)-(T/2h)\tn

t

k B TP

ht

•^-V-TT

by

w (E)=

(10)

where <r a (s) is given by (5) with T replaced by 2T and

given by (6) with

G {r,t) = [2m{t)-]- % exp[-rV2 T (/)].

are interchanged

And if the emitter and the absorber are identical (9)

in (5)
(8)

Va{E)

In a y-ray resonance absorption experiment if the

<r

absorber, the emitted
shift

— (E-Eo-R)
it

r

h

2h

A¥i
1/|

k

(13)

4#J

hW/2M=E 2/2Mc\

A = 2(Rk B T)*.

that the self-absorption cross section is

E can be

L

R (the recoil energy)

s-\-E. If we do this and make use of (5), (6), and (7) in

given by, noticing that the integration over

exp

where we have put

that case the argument of a a {E) should be replaced by

(8), it follows

r

'

J_

y ray gets an energy Doppler

s=(v/c)Eo, c being the velocity of light, and in

r /•«
-

emitter is made to move with velocity v relative to the

•

G. H. Vineyard, Phys. Rev. 110, 999 (1958).

(14)

197

K.

1096

SINGWI AND

S.

Putting y=tT/2h and making use of the convolution
formula for the Fourier transform of a product, we have

SJOLANDER

A.

atomic cubic crystal y(t) is given by
>o

w

*

zt
"T/W
\( 1 — cos\
I— sin-

z

!=— r r cothli

&

*.(£}<— I

»

..

X

34V

f

I

r

(F—E —R)

A2 n
r2— \dy

r/2

Pj

exp -iyz-iy

1(2t)»J_

L

<r a

(£)=<r

<fe,

z

/(z ) is zer0 beyond 2=2^.
Equation (5)
with the help of (6) can be written after
,-,---1—--

az

.

exp[-^(8+x) 8 ],

I

2v^

k]

f(z)dz=l.

I

]

,

ot,
/«-

k/

I

which gives
,.

\2k B T/\

L

where f(z) is the distribution of energy levels of the
phonons and such that

l

fir"
f

i

J I

I

(15)

integration over r as

1+z*
°^

where

E-E -R
x=

T
|=-.

;

'
<T

U3p[-i**y(«)]J exp(-*orf-—

rt

(16)

A

T/2

1/|)<«

4AI

Formula (15) is the same as given by Bethe and
in the case of resonance capture of neutrons
forming a Maxwellian gas.

+e*p[-i«M»)]£e*p(-^|,|)

"'r.;

X{exp[J««(7(co)-7(0)]-l}*l,

RESONANCE ABSORPTION OF y RAYS BY
ATOMS IN A CRYSTAL

'

Again Van Hove has shown that for a mono6

—
<t

(T a

t

{E) = 2ir

rftr

- (««/2)»

1

exp(-2W0
l27r(£-£o) +rV4
2

4»

=

+I>
«=i

.

in a power series, and we have

r»

1

j

»!

m
the value of y(t) at t= ». The exponen, .

,

,

,

within the square brackets can now be expanded

tial

2»J_

WTr

/

r

expl -tut

l/l

V

2A

'

\
jDyC 00 )-^)]"*

/

. (2in»

1

L2tt (£-£o)»+P/4

2

.

where 7(00) is

We shall here restrict ourselves to cubic Bravais
lattices.

.

,

+L
tx

i

gn(E-E
n

\

,

exp(-2W0,

T)

*

(18)

J

since T can be neglected in the integrand in Eq. (18),

tive to

and where

herent differential scattering cross section for neutrons

s (E T)=

i

cothl

2EF{T)Y

I

— ll

\2/&b7V

/in\

compare formula

m solids. The first term inside the curly brackets gives
a sharp absorption peak of width T and represents the

J'

recoilless
f

F(T)=

,

>

function). The other terms give a broad peak extending

,

f — coth(—)dz,
z

(where it is a delta

C20")

at least over an energy z max and corresponds to phonon

f

J

absorption of 7 rays, and corresponds to

elastic scattering in the neutron case

(ET)= f e (E—E' Tie n- (E T)dE'
/_,

(18) with that for the inco-

exchange.
(21)

_
_

In the Debye approximation,

\2&fl7/

and
ftV

2^=|^(=o)=—F(T).

/(z)
(22)

2W is the usual Debye-Waller factor. The above formulation

is

the same as that used by Sjolander 8 in con-

= 3z2/(/b0)
=0

3

for

z<£ B

for

z>/feB e,

,„.
(23)

@ bein S the Deb y e temperature of the solid. Using
(

23 ) in ( 21 ) ll 1S easy to show that

nection with neutron scattering by solids. It is instruc-

6
J

8

H. Bethe and G. Placzek, Phys. Rev. 51, 462 (1937).
A. Sjolander, Arkiv Fysik 14, 315 (1958).

F{T)=
Jfe

B

rl

H
0L4

T /0\-j
01

—

J

V T/ J

,

(24a)

198

RESONANCE ABSORPTION OF NUCLEAR GAMMA RAYS
where

The first term in

(27) gives a sharp resonance peak
having a full width 2I\ For s=0, the first term is

—

r* ydy

1

to—zJ

I

ev

-l

er'(0)

The function <f>(z) has been tabulated by Zener. 9 Now
F(T) = 3/(2k B ®)
= 6T/(k B @ 2 )

for

T«0

for

7»0.

Experimentally we are interested in the self-absorption
cross section; i.e., in a(s) given by (9). Here the emitter

and the absorber are assumed to be of the same material but at different temperatures, say T e and T a
,

respectively. Let v be the relative velocity of the emitter

move
s= (v/c)Eo
towards each other and negative if they move away
is

positive

f

(28)

The resonance

self-absorption cross section is thus
diminished by a factor e~iW where 2W, in the Debye
approximation, is given by Eqs. (22) and (24). From

the expression for 2W, it is clear that to have a large
Mossbauer effect the recoil energy R of the nucleus
must be small; i.e., the y ray should have a low energy
and the Debye temperature
of the solid should be
large and the temperature as low as possible. Recently

UE)dE=:

and absorber.

= §o-o<r

,

(24b)

We also notice that

/;

1097

the two

from each other. Proceeding as before, it follows from
(9) that

Lipkin 11 has derived the expression for 2W in a simple
manner and has also come to the same conclusions. In
the original Mossbauer experiment in which Ir 191 129kev gamma rays were used (R = 0.046 ev, &s0 = 0.025
ev, r=88°K), 2W was nearly equal to 3; and hence the
resonance effect was very small. For a large resonance
effect <r'(0) has to be greater than the non-nuclear
cross section such as the cross section for the photoelectric effect. Unfortunately for isotopes so far investigated, the Mossbauer effect is very small except in
the case of Fe 67 where because of the low 7-ray energy
(£o=14.4 kev), 2W is nearly 0.1 at T=0*K, and this
is the reason why it is possible to observe the Mossbauer effect even at very high temperatures. Because
of this comparatively large effect and the extreme sharpness of the resonance line (r~5XlO- 9 ev), the Mossbauer effect in Fe 57 nucleus has found recently so many
,

t<tqT

2

rr

X

-

1

UyH-r

2

+E
—l

(2W 4 +2W a ) n
Sn(s)\,
Us)\

(25)

«!

where

interesting applications.

The second term in (27), corresponding to phonon

2W = (hW/2M)F(Te),
e

2W a = (hW/2Af)F(Ta

exchange, gives the shape of the wings of the sharp
resonance absorption line the wings extending at least
;

),

up to an energy of the order k B Q. If 2W/«1, all terms
1

except the first in the sum are negligible. In that case

gi(s)=

the shape of the wings is related in a very simple way

F(T e )+F(Ta )

through Eq. (19) to the energy spectrum f(E) of the

XZF(T.)gi(s,T.)+F(Ta ) gl (s,Ta )],
9n(s)=

I

(26)

crystal vibrations. It is thus at least in principle possible
to measure the energy distribution function of the
phonons as has been pointed out earlier by Visscher. 12

Siis—^g^-iWdY.

In this connection it is important to realize that if the
nucleus emitting the y rays constitutes a foreign atom
It should be borne in mind that the energy distribution

of the phonons changes with temperature and hence the

Debye temperature also changes. There will be a very
slight shift of the resonance absorption peak due to the

fact that when a y ray is emitted or absorbed the mass
of the emitting or the absorbing nucleus changes. This

second order Doppler effect 10 has not been considered

tional

emitting nucleus. In addition to this, the one-phonon
cross section is very small and this limits the possibility
of using the

Mossbauer effect to investigate the vibra-

tional spectra of solids.

here.
If

a host lattice, what one measures is not the vibraspectrum of the host lattice but a spectrum
which is characteristic of the local surroundings of the
in

the emitter and the absorber are both identical

and are at the same temperature, Eq. (25) simplifies to

scattering.
If

(4W0"
2

l7T5 2

+r

2

n=i

—g„(*,DJ

C. Zener, Phys. Rev. 49, 122 (1936).
°B. D. Josephson, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 341 (1960).

2H/ »1, then we have what is called the weak-

binding case. For example in the original Mossbauer

1

n!

A better way to study the real

vibrational spectra is through the use of slow neutron

(27)

experiment 2W~3 and it falls under this category.
H. Lipkin, Ann. Phys. 9, 332 (1960V
W. M. Visscher, Ann. Phys. 9, 194 (1960).

199

K.

1098

SINGWI AND

S.

A.

SJOLANDER

Doppler width A Eq. (33) for ^ =

From (17) it follows that

«r.W-hr.<0]

simplifies to

«r(0)=— exp(-2W.-2W.)
2

= -i2R-+2A —+'
2

h

t«

for

W

(29a)

kB %

R\_F(T e)+F(Ta )~\

/»

for

(29b)

,

kB

S

where

A2 = (8/3)22 (£ kin «+£kin a ).

(30)

)

f(z)dz

\2k B T/

Forr>0,£ kin «|* B r.
Now Eq. (9) can be written as

"(*)'
'

4h

\i«v
Xexpl -i-

—

h

h

where T~fi/k B <d.
In (31) the exponent

(A.2 +A, 2 )»

is

the

— exp

same

^

r
L

A«2

i

+A J

(35)

2

as the formula

(19)

of

DIFFUSION BROADENING OF THE
RESONANCE LINE
In this section we shall show how Mossbauer technique could be used to investigate the nature of diffusive motions in solids and probably under more
favorable circumstances in a liquid too. In a solid the
slow jumping movement of an atom from one lattice
site to another gives rise to a broadening of the resonance line. At ordinary temperatures the broadening
due to such a diffusive motion is small compared to the

3

4J Q

r

2

Equation (35)
Mossbauer. 13

£ kin is the mean kinetic energy per atom and is given by
£kin=-f scothf

ao\/ir

\l\--[ye(t)+y a m\,

(31)

2

^ [7«(0+7a(0] in the
2

first

integral can be replaced by (29a), and in the second and

natural linewidth but at elevated temperatures the
former can become of the same order of magnitude as
the latter and even greater. In liquids the diffusive
broadening is, however, many orders of magnitude
greater than the linewidth but, unfortunately, the
resonance absorption cross section is in most cases small
compared to non-nuclear absorption cross section. This
makes it difficult to distinguish the resonance line from
the background.

The self-correlation function Gs (T,t) as defined by
a complex quantity and cannot, therefore,

third integrals by (29b), without introducing appreci-

Eq.

able error. It is then easy to show that

easily be interpreted as a self-diffusion function except

(3) is

imaginary part is negligible. The
imaginary part, as we know, is quantum mechanical in
origin. It is, however, possible as Schofield 14 has done to
define a real function which in the classical case goes
over to the classical self-diffusion function and which is
in the case that its

*(*) =

aoTl

r 00

tt

L 1

(s-2R)

exp

I

2A2 1

T

it

f

J

fildt

l/l

h

4ft

2

J

2ftr

+

l

exp(-2W -2W a )\.
e

52

+r

(32)

2
I

related to the absorption cross section in a similar way

as is Van Hove's G„(r,t) function. The transformation

suggested by Schofield and the question of using the

The integral in (32) is the same as the one which occurs

real part of the

Van Hove's G,(r,t) function are dis-

cussed in detail in the Appendix of this paper. Such a

in (13) and can be evaluated as before. Hence

discussion besides being relevant to the context of this
<r

paper

r 2 exp- (2W e +2Wa)

*(*)
i2

2

+r

2

_Lr _l_ eXp _i
W* J-« 1+2

r! ( a;+2 )2 ]

(33)

A = (S/3)R(E^+Evm a ) = Ae2 +A a2
*= (s- 2R)/T, R= E<?/2Mc

(34)

+(ro

|:

2

where we have defined

£=2r/A,

is

of

importance in connection with neutron

scattering by liquids.

2

,

2

Following the suggestion of Schofield, if we replace /
by t+(ih/2kB T),G,(T,t) goes over to F s (t,t), which is
given by (8A) of the Appendix and y(t) goes over to
p(t), where pit) is given by Eqs. (9A) and (10A) of the
Appendix in the case of a gas and a solid, respectively.
In the Appendix we have derived the expression for the
resonance absorption cross section a a iE) and for the
emission probability w e iE), which are, respectively,
given by Eqs. (HA) and (12A). We shall rewrite them

.

13

If

K<1; i-e., the linewidth T is much smaller than the

R. L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik 151, 124 (1958).

" P. Schofield, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 239 (1960).

—

—

£

200

RESONANCE ABSORPTION OF NUCLEAR GAMMA RAYS

analogous to the Debye- Waller factor in the case of a

here

—
r

exp ——
fko

hV

4A

l2k B T

SMk B T

o-

<r a

(E)=

r

solid.

From (39) it is evident that the broadening Ae of the
resonance line due to diffusion is given by
Ae=2b<?D

x£exp[

•i-"l)--\t\]
2h

i

c

ica

ftV

2£ s r

8Af* fl r

(36)

=

<J

exp t(«.*-«0

—

-|*|

where £0 is the energy of the 7 ray and c is the velocity
of fight. As an example let us take iron for which
D~W~* cm2/sec in the molten state, and £ =14 kev
(for Fe 57 ). Equation (40) gives Ae~6XlO~* ev which is
several orders of magnitude greater than the natural
width T.
Experimentally what one measures is the selfabsorption cross section

XFS(T,t)dTdt,

(37)
<r(s)=

where F, c {x,t)

and^=£—

is

the classical self-diffusion function

-

We shall consider two simple cases

:

(i)

in which the

diffusive motion of an atom in the absorber is governed

by the simple diffusion equation, and (ii) in which the
atom jumps from one lattice site to another. Diffusion
in normal liquids probably comes under case (i) whereas
in solids it comes under case (ii). These two cases are
considered here more as illustrations rather than to give
a precise relationship between the resonance line shape

e

r

1

T+hJD
exn(-2W.-2Wm)

(38)

I

where D is the diffusion coefficient. This function has
the right limiting form for large t but not for / —» 0.
One should rather use for F, c (T,t) the solution of
Langevin's equation for the Brownian motion with p(t)
as given by (13A). p{t) varies as P for t —» 0. We shall
not use the latter form of p(t) since the change in the
linewidth as a result of this refinement is negligible (see

Singwi and Sjolander 15 in connection with neutron
scattering).

Let us suppose that the absorber is in the liquid state.

The cross section for the absorption of a 7 ray of energy
E is obtained by substituting (38) in (36) and after
performing the integrations we have

(-2W a {T+2h?D)f
[(£-£o) +Kr+2^c Z)) ]
2

(42)

Recently a cold-neutron scattering method has been
used to measure the diffusive broadening of the "quasi16-18
elastic" scattering in liquids.
This method, unfortunately, suffers from the disadvantage of having a
poor energy resolution. But if we were to study the
diffusive broadening by Mossbauer technique, such a
disadvantage does not exist since the natural width of
the line is negligible compared to the diffusive broadening. However, this method seems at present to be hardly
practicable because of the smallness of a(s) compared
to the other non-nuclear cross section such as the photoelectric effect. But under very favorable circumstances
such that r/Ae is not too small this method could be
used to investigate the shape of the resonance line and
determine the diffusion coefficient from the measurement of line broadening.

Case (ii)

)

2

.

5 +(r-r-^Z?) J
2

2

F/(r,/)=(4xZ)|/|)-*exp(-r2/4Z)|/|)

(41)

.

Using (39) and (41) in the expression for <r(s), we get
o-oT

In this case F, c {x,t) is given by

2

)

(39)

where in deducing (39) we have replaced

expi-(E-E )/2k B T2
by unity, since E—Ea<^2kBT in the resonance peak
and where we have put h2 ic /SMkBT=2W a 2W a is
i

.

li

w (E)a a (E+s)dE.

w,{E) =—e~* w '
(£-£ ) 2 +r 2/4
2t

r(i)«

Case (i)

(£) = (aoT/4) exp

i

Here w e (E) is the emission probability in the case of a
solid, since the emitter is in the form of a solid. If we
neglect the phonon part, the expression for w e (E) is

and diffusive motions.

<r

(40)

= 2Eo D/kc*,

J

XF, (i,t)dTdt,
.(£)

1099

K. S. Singwi and A. Sjolander, Phys. Rev. 119, 863 (1960).

Let to be the mean time for which an atom stays on
a given lattice site before jumping to a new lattice
position. If we now assume that there is no correlation
in motion between one jump and the next, it is possible
11
B. N. Brockhouse, Phys. Rev. Letters 2, 287 (1959).
17
D. J. Hughes, H. Palevsky, W. Kiev, and E. Tunkelo, Phys.
Rev. Letters 3, 91 (1959).
18
1. Pelah, W. L. Whittemore, and A. W. McReynolds, Phys.
Rev. 113, 767 (1959).

—
201

K.

1100

S.

SINGWI AND A. SJOLANDER

c

to calculate F, (t,1) or rather its Fourier transform as
has been done earlier by Singwi and Sjolander18 in connection with diffusive motions in water and coldneutron scattering. The problem under consideration
is in fact a special case of the more general formula of

Singwi and Sjolander. The present case consists in
is the mean time for which the
taking ri > 0, where

—

n

particle diffuses between its two oscillatory states and
in taking the function h(r,l) to be independent of time.

It is then easy to show by the use of formula (36) that

* a (E)=— exp(-2P*g

— —— —
:

,

;

(43)

(44)

h{t) gives the probability of finding the particle at the

position r after a single jump, if the particle was at the
origin before the jump. Using (43) and (41) we have for

the self-absorption cross section
<r

t

would correspond to a broadening (A6) mAX~2X 10
ev,
whereas r=4.6Xl0~ 9 ev. However, at higher temperatures, say 1000°C and above, it should be possible to
detect the diffusive broadening by a Mossbauer-type
experiment. At such high temperatures the DebyeWaller factor (T2W ° (since 2W,«2W„) would no doubt
decrease but it is still not too small (~c-a ) as to preclude the possibility of observing the resonance effect.
It has been reported 19 that the rate of self-diffusion
in iron at 757°C,

under plastic deformation, increases

by as much as a factor of thousand. 20 And if it is true,
the line broadening due to diffusion would

r

txp(-2W

*(*)=

r^iP/6D I being the interatomic spacing. This
-11

where
a*? f exp(tK-r)A(r)rfr,

broadening due to diffusive motion is negligible
compared to the natural width T. For example even
at 760°C, the diffusion coefficient is only 1.5X10-"
cm2/sec, which would give a value of 6X 10^ 6 sec for r
line

since

r+(2A/ro)(l-a)

X(£- £o) 2 +[r+ (2*/t ) (1 -a) J/i

should increase. At the same time the magnitude of the
resonance absorption would decrease due to the anisotropy of the Debye- Waller factor (our formulas can
easily be extended for an anisotropic solid).
Let us consider self-diffusion in iron. The emitter is
at low temperature and the resonance absorption is
studied as a function of the velocity of the emitter for
various temperatures of the absorber. At ordinary temperatures, the self-diffusion in iron is so small that the

e

2Wa

now be

nearly 2X 10"~* ev which is greater than the natural line-

)

2

width and it might, therefore, be possible to detect it
by a Mossbauer-type experiment. It would be valuable

r+(*/ro)(l-«)
(45)

^+Cr+(ft/ro)(l-a)?

to perform such an experiment in view of the fact that

there exists a controversy between different experi-

mental workers regarding the enhancement of the self

The diffusion coefficient D is denned by

diffusion and the range of temperature for which it is

=— [r*h(r)di
6to«/

From formula (43) it is clear that the broadening A«
of the resonance peak due to diffusive motions is

Ae=2ft/ro| 1- fexp(«e-r) h(t)dt\

Besides a Mossbauer-type experiment is
from the usual diffusion experiments using
tracers and should, therefore, provide an independent

significant.

(46)

different

check. One could also study the impurity diffusion of
iron in other metals like copper and silver. Such an
experiment would give a direct measure of the mean
time to and its temperature variation.

(47)

APPENDIX

We thus see that the maximum value of the broadening
2h/ro and the broadening depends on the angle between the direction of motion of the diffusing atom and
the direction of the 7-ray quantum. Consider a Fe 87
nucleus sandwiched between two layers of a graphite
lattice (it is possible to introduce iron atoms between
the layer planes of a graphite single crystal). The Fe 87
nucleus finds it hard to move in the direction of the
c-axis but can diffuse with ease in the basal plane. If
the 7 ray from the emitter falls on the absorber parallel
is

The function G,(t,t) as defined by Eq. (3) could only
in the classical limit be interpreted as the self-diffusion

function. For small times when the particle under con-

sideration has moved only a distance of the order of the

de Broglie wavelength, quantum effects are important

and G,{t,t) is complex. In fact, according to Van Hove 8
it is only the real part of G,{t,t) which has the above
physical interpretation. It is, however, possible to express the emission or the absorption probability in

terms of the real part of G.(T,t).

to the c axis and the counter is also pointing along the
c axis, the diffusive broadening Ae in this case will be

negligible and the resonance line will have its natural

width. If we now rotate the absorber relative to the
direction of the incident 7 ray, the diffusive broadening

u N. Ujiive, B. Averbach, M. Cohen, and V. Griffiths, Acta
Met. 6, 68 (1958).
M For a general discussion see the review article by D. Lazarus,
Solid State Physics, edited by F. Seitz and D. Turnbull (Academic
Press, Inc., New York, 1960), Vol. 8, p. 71.

=

:

202

RESONANCE ABSORPTION OF NUCLEAR GAMMA RAYS
Now
1

—

Schofield's result is easily obtained by noting that

rI

1101

»

1

— r exp(-t«0(exp[-tie- R(0)]

exp(—*u/)<exp[— tie- R(0)] expftie- R(/)])tA

I

expftie- R(0]>t*

2-n-J^

= En.»og»oK»|exp(iK-R)|no}|

2

=L».»og»o|<»| exp(«- R) |nO)| S|>- (e»-«„o)/ft]
2

XS|>-(e»- €„„)/*],

(1A)

= exp(/3fta /2)Ln,no(^„o) Kn|exp(iK-R)|«0>| 2
i

J

which follows from the definition of (
)? and g nn o
= exp(—E n0/k B T)/Y, n exp(—E n/k B T). Further
•

•

1

•

/•»

—

I

X«[>-(«»- «„„)/*],

(5A)

and introducing a function
exp(-ia>/)<exp[-iie- R(/)] expftie- R(0)]) r <#

2irJ- n

F.(r,0=(27r)-3 Jexp(-iie-r)

=E« »«g»o K»|exp(tK-R)|«0)p8[a)+(«n -€B o)/^]
(

!

= L»,no^o|<«0|exp(iK-R)|»)|25[a,-(e„-6»o)A]
= e-**"> L».»og»o|<»| exp(iK- R) »0>|

X{Z».»o(g»f»o)»<«0|exp[-iK-R(0)]|»)

X<n|exppK-R(0]|nO»rfie.

2

(6A)

|

We then have for the absorption cross section

X*[«- (•»-•,*)/*]
1

—

=e-^ft<-

/•-

exp(— tarf)

I

—

r

<roT

a.(£)=

2ir«L«

expC8&o/2) I expp(ieT- «fl-(r/2ft)|*|]

J

4ft

X(exp[-iie- R(0)] expftie- R(0]>j<ft.

XF,(r,t)drdt.

(2A)

The last step in (2A) follows from (1A). The relation

F (r,t) is real and is an even function of

g n =exp[— /?(«»— e„o)]gno has been used in the second
step in (2A) 0= l/*j,7\

integral in (7A)

;

Introducing the real part of G,(r,t), which is defined

by

s

t

(7 A)

and thus the

is an even function of co. It is easily
shown by using the definition (3) of G,{r,t) that F,{x,t)

= G,(i,t+ih/2k B T).

If

one uses the

diffusion function instead of F,(t,t)

classical

in

self-

(7A) or for

Re[G„(r,0] in (4A), the two expressions are identical

Re[G.(r,0]= (2tt)-3 f exp(-«e- r)

to the first order in tiw/k B T.
If

we make the transformation

as suggested

by

Schofield, we have

Xi{<exp[-«K- R(0)] expftie- R(/)]

+exp[- »k- R(0] expftie- R(0)]> r }rfK,

F.(r,/)=[2Tp(0]-»exp[-fV2p(0],

(3A)

(8A)

where

and using (1A) and (2 A) in Eq. (5) of the text we get

&/4MkB T+ (k B T/M)P,

P (0

the following expression for the absorption cross section

(9A)

for a free gas, and

a T exp(/3fto>/2)
<r a

{E)-

P (/) = (h*/M)

coshG8&o/2)

4ft

X

J

expft (k- T-af)

- (r/2A)

|

/

1

tanh (z/U B T)dz

J

2

/(a) l-cos(2//ft)

]

+ /M)f
(ft

XRe[G,(r,fl]</r<ft

f

(4A)

2

dz,

z

(10A)

smh(z/2k B T)

considering that T<&k B T.

Recently Schofield 14 has also suggested in connection
with neutron scattering that G,(r, t+ih/2k B T) rather
than G,(x,t) should be considered as a self-diffusion
function. He points out that if, for instance, G,(r,t)

is

for a solid. Equations (9A) and (10A) follow from Eqs.
(11) and (17) of the text, respectively.

We notice from (9A) that even at /=0, the particle
is

distributed over a finite region. The finite extension

by the first term in (9A) and is consistent with

replaced by its classical equivalent obtained from the

is given

simple diffusion equation, as suggested by Vineyard, 6

Heisenberg's uncertainty principle for a particle with
mean velocity (k B T/M)l. The real part of G,(r,t) on the

the scattering cross section will not satisfy the condition
of detailed balance.

replaced

by the

If,

however, G s (r, t+ih/2k B T)

classical

self-diffusion

is

function the

principle of detailed balance will be satisfied. The same
is

also true

if

we replace Re[G,(r,t)~] in (4A) by its

classical equivalent.

other hand, goes over to a S function around the origin
at / = 0. It, therefore, appears that F,(r,t) as given by

(8A) is more directly connected with self-diffusion.
Schofield's suggestion, in the case of a liquid, is to
replace F,(T,t) in the first approximation by a classical

203

K.

S.

SINGWI AND

obtained,

for

instance,

1102

A.

SJOLANDER

from

D being the diffusion coefficient. Of course, this is

Langevin's equation. In that case p(t) will go to zero
as /2 for small times and will approach 2D\t\ for large
times. If we, however, add a constant to p(t) corresponding to a finite extension of the probability cloud
at /=0, the resulting formula for the cross section will

possible only if the diffusion can really be described by

function

self-diffusion

be valid to some extent also for large

momentum

transfers.

For a liquid it seems reasonable to take the same constant as that for a gas, since we know that for large

momentum transfers corresponding to small times the
scattering cross section approximately goes over to a
free gas formula.

Adding of this constant to p(t) will

simply amount to multiplying the right-hand side of
(7A) by exp(-n2K2/SMk B T). In the case of neutron
scattering by liquids this factor is often nearly equal to
unity except for large incident neutron energy, whereas
in the case of 7-ray resonance absorption it could be
quite small depending on the recoil energy of the
nucleus.

As a result of the foregoing discussion it seems plausible to write (7A) in the form

a a (E)

=— exp(ho/2kB T-hV/BMk B T)
4#

Langevin's equation.
Note added in proof. Recent measurements of the
specific heat of indium by Bryant and Keesom [Phys.
Rev. Letters 4, 460 (1959)] and of niobium by Broose
et al. [Phys. Rev. Letters 5, 246 (I960)] both in the
superconducting and normal phases seem to show that
the lattice part of the specific heat is different in the two
phases, thus indicating that perhaps the phonon spectrum in the two phases is not the same. Broose etal., in

an attempt to explain their measurements on niobium
have suggested in the superconducting phase an altered
value of the Debye temperature as 243°K, which value
in the normal state they arrive at is 231°K. Thus, there
is a change of five percent in the value of BoHere we wish to suggest an alternative and perhaps
more direct experiment to decide whether there is any
appreciable change in the value of 6 D in going from the
normal to the superconducting phase. The experiment
consists in studying the intensity of the Mossbauer line
both in the normal and superconducting phases. The
choice for such an experiment is very severely limited to
only a few isotopes. The intensity of the Mossbauer line
iw and in
is determined by the Debye- Waller factor e~
the limit T<K8 D 4w is equal to 3R/k Bd D where R is the
recoil energy. In order to have an appreciable change
,

,

,

X f expp(K-r-u0-(r/2ft)|f|]
XF. e (r,t)drdt,

(11 A)

and similarly,

in the intensity of resonance absorption for a very small

change in the value of 6 D one would demand a large
value of 4a> i.e., a large recoil energy and a small doRe 187 is such an example. It becomes superconducting
and the values of R and d D are, respectively, 0.051 ev
and 417°K. An almost trivial calculation will show that
a ten percent increase in the value of Od will give a 35%
,

;

w.(E) =

—

exp(-ha>/2k B T-hW/SMk B T)

2wh

X

J expP(KT-«0-(r/2fc)|/|]
XFS(t,t)didt,

increase in the intensity of the resonance absorption,

(12A)

where for F, e (r,t) we take the expression (8A) with
p(t) as given from Langevin's equation, and is21

p(0= (2Zy/3')D3'/-l+exp(-/3'/)].

(13A)

The characteristic time 1//3' is given by

P'=kB T/DM,

(14A)

B See for instance S. Chandrasekhar, Revs. Modern Phys. 15,
1

(1943).

which should be easy to observe. Other isotopes which
one could study are Ta 181 and Hf
The authors have been informed privately by MeyerSchuetzmeister and Hanna that their very preliminary
experiment on the Mossbauer effect in Sn, both in the
normal and superconducting phases, indicates that there
is an increase of a few percent in the intensity of resonance absorption in the latter phase. A five percent
increase in the value of do would, in this case, give nearly

m

.

three percent increase in the intensity.

}

}

204

LE

JOURNAL DE PHYSIQUE ET LE RADIUM

TOME 22, MAI 1961, PAGE 303.

DIFFUSION DES PHOTONS SUB LES ATOMES ET LES NOYAUX DANS LES CRISTAUX
Par C. TZARA,
Section de Physique Nucleaire a

Moyenne Energie, C. E. N., Saclay.

—

R6sum6.
On etudie la diffusion des photons par les atomes et les noyaux lies dans un solide
avec ou sans cession de phonons. Selon la largeur de l'etat excite (atomique ou nucleaire), relativement au spectre de vibration du cristal, la proportion de diffusion « sans recul » varie entre deux
limites, l'une etant le facteur de Debye-Waller, l'autre le carre du facteur de Mossbauer-Lamb.
L'interference entre les processus atomique et nucleaire est examinee. En fin remission sans recul
d'un photon nucleaire a la suite d'une cascade de transitions est calcnlee sans faire appel a un
phenomene de rearrangement des etats cristallins.
Abstract.

— Photon 'scattering by atoms and nuclei

in solids is investigated.

Depending on

the excited (nuclear or atomic) state width compared to the crystal vibration spectrum, the proportion of recoilless scattering varies between two limits the Debye-Waller factor on one side,
the square of the M6ssbauer-Lamb on the other.
Interference between the two processes is
examined. Finally the recoilless emission of a nuclear photon following a sequence of transitions
is calculated without requiring a rearrangement phenomenon in the solid.
:

L'interaction des photons avec les atomes ou les
noyaux lies dans un solide peut se produire sans
cession de phonons au cristal. La diffraction des
rayons X est un exemple de ce phenomene. Recemment Mossbauer a decouvert remission et l'absorption sans recul de photons par les noyaux dans un
solide [1]. Dans le present travail, nous examinons

entre autres les diffusions atomique et nucleaire
dans les solides et leur interference eventuelle en
utilisant la theorie de Lamb [2].

Le cristal est compose d'atomes de masse M,
a Z electrons. Les etats et energies propres du systeme electronique sont <Jn et E{, ceux du noyaux
sont 9j et W\. L'etat du cristal est defini par l'ensemble a.B ) des nombres d'occupation dans chaque

E\ a,

est

)

= S a, hta,. A l'etat d'equilibre, a

M

temperature T,
etat

|

«, } est

g

poids statistique de chaque
Dans le cas ou une espece

le

a, }.

{

atomique est inseree dans un reseau d'un autre
constituant, ce ne sont pas les degres de liberte de
l'ensemble qui sont a considerer, mais ceux des
atomes interesses.
1.

Diffusion Rayleigh atomique.

— La section

efficace de diffusion d'un photon d'energie k t impul-

K

sion
et polarisation € en un photon d'energie k',
impulsion K' et polarisation e', le cristal 6tant
initialement et finalement dans les etats purs { a,

j

mode de vibration s. L' energie propre de l'etat

^f

j
(

«.}{ p.} JHTm')

= <
I

{

P.}|e^«/«

|

j

a,

{

|

a,

et { p, j, l'atome etant laiss6 dans l'etat initial, est,

en approximation non relativiste

> < fc ^,W«|fc > €€

:

'

|

iK r
iK
S <\t.]\e- '«l*\[n,]> <|n.}le'*"/»l{«.j> < ^ \I> e~ ^ p'Mn >< j>n\l> e ^f" Pi U >
+1
m
'

EP — E - k + £|»# — £| a< + if

{».}•

|

£„

—E +

k'

|

+ fj^j — ^j^j + iY

X [*fm*)*k'lk

ici

(i)

q = K — K' transfert d'impulsion
k'

+ ei*\ = k + m,\

u coordonnee du centre de gravite de l'atome
consider^ dans le cristal
rj : coordonnees des electrons atomiques dans
un systeme lie a l'atome.
:

Le premier terme d6crit la diffusion Thomson par
les

Z electrons arranges selon la configuration

Le facteur de forme
ZF[q) =

tj»

.

:

< +„|Se^/*|+,>

;

(dans le cas d'un atome sphenque) suffit generalement a rendre compte de la diffusion cohe>ente si

:

;

205

N°5

JOURNAL DE PHYSIQUE
l'energie du photon est superieure aux energies des

nous obtenons evidemment

E —E

les plus, fortes.
discontinuites d' absorption n
Nous ne nous limiterons pas pour l'instant a ce

terme.

—

—

E^
E 0) E«t
k est tres different de En
peut §tre neglige dans les denominateurs des termes
si k
E% E cette
dispersifs du premier type
approximation reste valable car la partie imaginaire
Si

~

;

de l'etat

la largeur

Y c± k r„,

—

est,

ty n

,

pour les

et

:

do?/dfl= S g(« j|<{|a.}|e i«tt/' |{a.)>| 2 daE/dn.
l

Ei

les

— Ei

i

plus

superieure

tres

fortes,

Pour un cristal isotrope, on trouve le facteur de
Debye-Waller par un calcul immediat calqu6 sur
celui de Lamb

a

s'effectue alors aisement puisque

S

||

B

,}><

I

:

».)|-1

et il vient :

£f{|a.}{M)KK'ec')
dQ

= |<|p.||eW|j«.}>|
\ZF[q) €.€'

+ M+ + ilf-| (e*lmcy^.
2

(2)

sation n'a plus lieu. C'est le cas des resonances de
reaction (rey) [2], avec, ici, la complication supplementaire des termes dispersifs.
Deux quantites facilement observables sont deduites de (1) la section efficace de diffusion totale,
integree sur tous les etats finals possibles du cris:

-r^ (KK'ee') et la section efficace de diffusion

sans recul, -tt? (KK'et').

En nous placant dans les conditions de validite
de (2)

:

3

j

q-

l

fi

r

kv du 1 ) d«E
dl2

d

(3)

X=

IT.

—

2. Diffusion nucleaire resonnante.
La diffusion resonnante est un phenomene a un seul quantum ou encore coherent, lorsque l'etat du diffuseur
pendant le processus n'est pas observe [4]. C'est le
cas de toutes les diffusions et reactions, ou le temps
de vie de l'etat excite etant tres court, le faisceau
incident (la perturbation) et le faisceau diffuse
sont pratiquement etablis en permanence. Gependant les experiences ou un delai est introduit entre
l'onde incidente et l'observation d'une particule
reemise [5] detruisent cette coherence. Notons aussi

que les transformations a ou (3 et les cascades de y
des noyaux peuvent etre envisagees sous cet aspect
coherence peut etre detruite simplement en
isolant l'etat intermediaire s'il a une vie assez
longue ou bien par une interaction exterieure telle
que le couplaga entre le moment quadrupolaire de
l'etat intermediaire et le champ cristallin.
Puisque la coherence et l'absence d'information
sur l'etat du diffuseur pendant la diffusion sont
liees, on s'attendrait a ce que la proportion de
diffusion sans recul soit donnee par
la

Dans ce cas, le plus repandu, la section efficace
dans un cristal est simplement le produit d'un facteur o cristallin » par la section efficace atomique.
Si la section efficace varie rapidement dans des
intervalles d'energie de l'ordre de kQ, cette factori-

tal,

b
E

etant la temperature de

a i cz kQ,

Debye du solide.
Dans les termes dispersifs du deuxieme type,
l'approximation est evidemment meilleure. La sommation 2

t

M

d_af

transitions

:

dok/dO = da E /dO

exp
2

W*

2MKG

ou figure le transfert global d'impulsion q et non
par
exp {

K*
— 2Mk&
F[x) =
1

3

/»

ou figure le transfert d'impulsion lors de i'absorption ou de remission. En realite le r6sultat varie
entre ces deux extremes selon la largeur de l'etat
excite. En effet, en appelant

:

MIKK'et')

do

! = JS
dQ

WN
1

*l*li<IMi«w«i|«.|>i'*?.

Si nous negligeons la variation de

tion de k\

'

= k + E>

\

— Ei

&

i

d^B
—?
en foncd 12

en utilisant

W —W —k + tT/2
l

l'amplitude de diffusion resonnante, la section efficace de diffusion sans recul est

:

|2 <{«||e«'«/»|{»,}> <j
2||f.!><|P.)l = l

et

^Ka/*l{«.|>| 2

2 f|«}-l
|M(KK'€€')|»,

(4)

«

!

'

206

DIFFUSION DES PHOTONS

No 5

Les deux cas limites sont 1° Largeur de l'etat
deja examine plus
<p x grande devant A;0
haut
:

excite

;

type de Bragg ne peut avoir lieu que si le cristal
est laisse dans l'etat initial). Dans le premier cas
:

:

i« ..j

-B

\w,

|..|i

- w.- * +

ra

i-A

305

(

=

y.

^ - = ^q + ^

N

s

-

d<JB

et on obtient

da?/dO = 9 da r /da

—W - ~

<

^

}

- £| a » T.

Ei n i

lK u

i

11

«,}><{ a,

^\\

ne pourrait y avoir de con-

aunou

tribution que de la part de transitions
quelques phonons tres mous *«.. -* 0. Mais leur
on peut done
densite diV(o))/ato varie en to 2 /© 3
:

;

les negliger, d'autant mieux que la temperature

de

j

«, j

{

n3

j

egale a 172.

=

{

:

|{

«s j

>

2

<

'

*j

^ if <

li

~s-i

,

pf

+1

,„

2 2M7Vsg>»

l

N

doR

exn

2M/r0

v

'

>

,

*

J

a'

>

'\

:

da_r

dQ

'

L_^_,

+ C.C.l
+ 9^ w _ w — k — T
ir/2a
x

—

K 1
„, Vl
— FIX)
3

:

,

,

|<|«.}|e**/«||«.}>|»d« r /dn
l

e*//«c- a

C.Cj x

,

*

'

'

dft~ 9 dft +

a
[

-

,

>

da _

|

\

...

.

sont reels, done
/ fl

lh

— _ £* _^*_ r/2 +

>

a, }|

u e ipu/h,i aj >
*

<

x

S g{ «,}|<{ a. ||e- iKM

da?/dQ =

— lKu

j

au P remier ordre les elements de matrice

a 3 ), la partie imaginaire y est

On a done

e

]|

><

S

,

Debye est elevee. La somme dans (5) se reduit au
terme

«. )|.W»|j a. )

|

'

e

)

!

da r

+ S g{ a, j|<

2° Largeur T
k\
V.
k&. Alors |Wi
Les transitions par des etats intermediaires du
as
ne contribueroht pas si
cristal { ns
{

l

'

j2
/

?

:

l(

!

**'"''

—
= „—
dQ
da r

/

2

da

,

-^k ^* est reel. Le terme d'interference varie done

avec l'energie comme

Dans le cas intermediate d'une largeur nucleaire
assez importante, le resultat est plus complique,
car la factorisation en termes dependant du cristal
Pt
sp fait
iait nlns
et du
au novan
noyau nP
ne se
pms.

W,
l

-

— W, — k

w

Wl

°

k^

+ r2 /*

„t,„x„„
j „+„„„„„•
c
+ ., „„„„..
Sl les„ P hotonsb incidents proviennent
d une source
dg mgme nature 6mettant sans recul? integration
.

,

1

Interference entre diffusion atomique et diffusion nucleaire r&onnante.
Dans le cas le plus
frequent, la diffusion Rayleigh est monotone, et la
diffusion nucleaire a lieu sur un niveau tres etroit.
Nous avons dans ces conditions
3.

—

:

—

(i

sur le s P eGtre
raitre le

^y^—Wo — k) + r/4
2

dispa "

que si la raie incidente est dissymetrique par rappar exemple si la source est aniport a
x

W —W
•

,

mee d'une vitesse qui decale l'energie de (v/c)k.
La diffusion totale a pour section efficace, en
admettant 1' approximation k'

a, } I $, } KK'ce')

fait

terme d'interference. Celui-ci ne subsiste

=k

:

1

= |<| P .!|e^|( as |>^(^) %B(KK 'ec')

+ <

{

P. ||e-*'«/*|[

M(KK'zt')

«,)><[«. )le^«/«,j „ >

W — w —k + iF/2

)

SrNW l*iS^)l->
f

- |£ + / Jg
2(Wl

|«

— W -k)

^

x

ou

a quoi s'applique la

meme discussion que

pour

:

da 2 /dO.
AR(HK'ee') = ZF(q) e.e'+

•••

—

L'interference entre les deux amplitudes a lieu
quel que soit l'etat final du cristal (l'interference du

Conclusion.
La diffusion atomique et la diffusion r&sonnante nucleaire sont des processus coherents. Les facteurs de Debye-Waller pour ces deux

—

207

JOURNAL DE PHYSIQUE

e- K'"/«|
'

S <
n

)

fc-o \ s\

l

I

P. ||

{

n,
J

><

\

i

comporte une sommation implicite sur des 6tats
intermediaires. En effet l'expression rigoureuse de
la diffusion Thomson fait apparaitre des termes dispersifs de la forme

n, j| e

—

± Vm2 c4 + c2 p' 2

v

iKM/*|{ a

]>< pj.il>, > < Vi\aA\v >

2

APPENDICE

sont de la forme
2

+ c p' — mc + EU\ — Ei*A
2

2

2

-+

Ei n

>

j

L'auteur tient a remercier MM. Abragam, Barloutaud, Cotton, Picou pour les discussions qu'il a
eues avec eux.

=

c

:

— mc ± k + EisJ — £(»

les etats intermediaires s'ont a energie positive ou
negative et l'ordre d'absorption et d'emission est
inverse. Lorsque k
0, les termes relatifs aux etats
d' energie positive s'annulent.Seuls les etats d'6nergie negative contribuent, et leurs denominateurs

— Vm*

— Ei^

ce qui

correspond au melange statistique d' etats a l'6quilibre. Pour des raies larges, ou des temps caracteristiques tres courts, la moyenne n'a pas le temps
de se faire, la diffusion a lieu sur une configuration
instantanee. Notons que le premier terme dans la
diffusion Rayleigh decrivant la diffusion Thomson,

:

lim. <

N°5

le cristal pendant la diffusion est moyennee,

processus dependent essentiellement de la largeur
des niveaux vis-a-vis du spectre de vibration dti
cristal. Pour des raies tres etroites, la diffusion procede par un etat intermediate du cristal bien defini
identique a l'etat initial. Pour des raies tres larges,
ou une section efficace monotone, l'etat inter mediaire du cristal n'est pas defini le processus passe
par tous les etats intermediaires possibles du cristal.
En d'autres termes, dans le cas de raies tres
etroites, le temps caracteristique de diffusion est
long, la configuration des positions de l'atome dans

—

Le
Emission d'une cascade de deux photons.
noyau est initialement dans l'etat excite d'ener-

— 2mc + £UI — £(«!
2

W de largeur infiniment

gie

peut etre neglige, d'ou la possibilite

2,

fine, et

en equilibre

thermique dans le reseau. II emet un photon k 2
K2 (ou un electron de conversion E z p 2 ) par trande largeur T puis un
sition a l'etat y x d'energie
photon au fondamental. Le probleme est de calculer la probability d'emission sans recul du photon k v Elle est proportionnelle a

j

,

de sommer sur les etats intermediaires n3 ].
L'interference entre la diffusion resonnante et la
diffusion atomique est a rapprocher de Tinterference entre photoelectrons et electrons de conver{

,

W

sion [6].

:

g\ *s

Z<\V,\\e

iKL uI h \\n

s

JK,«/*\\ a, I >

]> <

W — W + k + £j» - £ja,} +
2

1

h+k +
1

2?|f»

2

i

L'emission du photon k x sans recul signifie que

(1)

iy

s|

= W + Elai.

(2)

,

tallin intermediaire subsiste plus

longtemps que

l'etat du cristal ne change pas au cours de la deu-

%/F autrement dit qu'il n'y a pas de rearrangement

= (S„ }. En meme temps
rig
xieme transition
nous nous placons dans l'hypothese que l'etat cris-

spontane pendant le temps de vie de l'etat intermediaire. Alors (1) devient, avec l'aide de (2)

:

{

\

{

<
«l*l

|

P. ]\e

iK

^\\ p.
[Wx

>< }|e«««/*|{
— +T
|

j

ki)

2

Ps

2

/4

a, \

>

2
|

208

DIFFUSION DES PHOTONS

N°5

La raie k x est done emise avec sa largeur naturelle. Le terme cristallin s'evalue

comme suit

:

qui est Pexpression du facteur d'emission sans
recul d'un photon k x egal, pour un cristal de Debye

a

n
*- x

rll •)
|<

|

P« jll

M

ex P

(2^* + 1)

+

+ **{«. + «.

)l|

(3)

Kl c(2MiV*w,)-'/s
3tf

n

+
+

{

j

1
1

—
—

*«,(2a,

-Ar|,[2(a,

}

a, A«,

+ 1) 1 — A| (2a, + 1)
+ 1) + 1] («, + 1) *t,]
}

*f.[2(a,

+ 1) + 1]
s

|

|

}

2

Geci demontre le fait experimental reconnu que
remission d'un photon Mbssbauer a lieu independamment de 1'histoire anterieure du systeme, sans
qu'il soit utile pour l'expliquer de faire appel a un
rearrangement du cristal apres les emissions precedentes. Les etats intermediates du cristal se cornportent comme un etat d'equilibre pratiquement
identique a l'etat d'equilibre initial g oc, {.
L'expUcation par le rearrangement cristallin se
j

(3)

revele necessaire si le recul X|/23f est considerable
et d6truit localement le reseau.

au premier ordre en Af, il ne reste que

S{k|n[l — Wa, +

— o51S
2Mk@ F(X)

*.

en posant

g{ *.

:

?.)H-*5.(2iV, + l)||p.}>|

i<

—^

307

1)]

N

Manuscrit recu

le

5 Janvier 1961.

REFERENCES
[1] Mossbauer (R. L.), Z. Physik, 1958, 151, 124.
[2] Lamb (W. E.), Phys. Rev., 1939, 55, 190.
[4] Heitler (W.), Quantum Theory of radiation, Oxford,

University Press.

[5]

Holland (R. E.), Lynch (F. J.), Perlow (G. J.) et

Hanna (S. S.), Phys. Rev., Letters, 1960, 4, 181.
[6]

Cf. LiPKiN.dans "Mossbauer Effect >, ed.
site d'Dlinois, TN, 60.698.

de 1'Univer-

209

SEANCE DU 11 AVRIL 1960.

i^o5

—

NUGLEAIRE.
Diffusion resonnante du rayonnement v de
il9
Sn* emis sans recul. Note (*) de MM. Roland Barloutaud,
Jean-Loup Picou et Ciiristopue Tzara, presentee par M. Francis Perrin.

PHYSIQUE

23,8 keV de

Nousavons observe les photons reemis par 119 Sn apres absorption resonnante de
photons 6mis sans recul par l1 "Sn*. La valeur du facteur de Debye-Waller, a
environ 90 K, mesur^e par cette m£thode, est en bon accord avec celle mesur^e
par transmission.

De recentes experiences ont mis en evidence l'emission et l'absorption
sans recul de photons par des noyaux lies dans un cristal. Cet effet decouvert

par Mossbauer (*) a ete jusqu'a maintenant observe au moyen d'experiences
de transmission a differentes temperatures. Nous avons etudie les rayon-

nements y reemis apres une absorption resonnante sans recul. Une telle
experience est en principe plus sensible qu'une experience de transmission;

en effet, les photons emis sans recul ne sont diffuses notablement que par
interaction avec les electrons atomiques, les sections efhcaces correspon-

dantes etant generalement beaucoup plus petites que celles de la diffusion

par resonance nucleaire.
Les meilleures conditions d'observation de ce processus sont obtenues
lorsque
i°

:

La diffusion non resonnante est peu intense, c'est-a-dire aux grands

angles ou les divers facteurs de forme de la diffusion atomique sont petits.

La section efficace de diffusion resonnante, proportionnelle a i/E 2 (i+ a )

2

est elevee

(E etant l'energie de la transition et a le coefficient de conver-

sion).

3° Les facteurs de Debye-Waller, donnant la proportion des processus

sans recul, sont grands.
le rayonnement y de 23,8 keV de
n * pj dont le schema de disintegration est represente sur la figure 1.

Cette experience a ete faite avec
iiog

Ce noyau remplit assez bien les conditions ci-dessus et presente en outre
l'avantage den'emettre, a part le rayonnement y interessant, que les raies

de

l'etain.

X

Un ecran de palladium dont la discontinuity K est situee

a 24,36 keV, absorbe selectivement

les

X K de l'etain sans attenuer for-

tement le rayonnement y.
Le dispositif experimental est schematise sur la figure 2. Les photons
5° par un cylindre d'etain enrichi en ii9 Sn (71,5 %)
sont diffuses a 70
maintenu a l'interieur d'un cylindre en mylar de 0,07
d'epaisseur.
Un ecran de plomb masque completement la source vue du cristal. L' ensemble source diffuseur se trouve a l'interieur d'une boite en polyethylene
expanse et peut etre porte a une temperature voisine de celle de l'azote

±

mm

liquide.

Les mesures d'intensite des photons diffuses ont ete effectuees a la
temperature ambiante et a environ 90 K. La diffusion due a la matiere

210

ACADEMIE DES SCIENCES.

2706

environnante a ete determinee par une experience temoin faite sans diffuseur de 119 Sn. Les taux de comptage obtenus, corriges de l'effet d'emission

X K du palladium, sont respectivement
= i3,9 ± par minute,
N

des

:

1

90 »r

N oo<>r=

4,65 ±0,7 par minute;

:J

d'ou
o,5.

N 3n o
Ces intensites peuvent s'exprimer

de

differentielles

diffusion

T. 270 j

11

en fonction des sections efficaces
resonnante et non resonnante (da/dco)
et
r

89 UaV

I

£

3

T. 1,85 10* 3

grand

i

-

2J8 WoV

I

M.
1

«.f.

6,3 10>

Soure*
Dlffu»aur

2>.

Ecran

k.

Ccron

5.

5clnrllloraur

'

1

Fig.

(da/d(i)) n T
.

et

W 5n (SO ma/em')

1.

2.

w 5n (5mg/em«)
da plamb
de R* (120 mg/o^1)
da

Fig.

1.

Nat (Tt)

2.

de la proportion f du rayonnement y emis ou absorbe sans
L

recul a la temperature t en supposant que / 300 est negligeable

N 90 ~(i — f90 )nl -^
m

est

le

nombre d'atomes

a n .+ (/««
.

r

:

— £90) S,

J

d'etain par centimetre carre

du diffuseur a

resonnante de la source a 90 K.
S est la probability pour qu'un photon sans recul soit diffuse par resonance dans la direction du cristal

l'incidence 35°,

£9o

est l'autoabsorption

:

s=M^-* + (-^)<-->](
>

ctto

J,.

t etant la transmission des photons sans recul a travers l'ecran a

l'inci-

dence de 35°; a r et a nr sont les absorptions electroniques moyennes des
photons diffuses dans les processus resonnants et non resonnants.
La section efficace des processus non resonnants (do/dw) B a ete determinee a l'aide des facteurs de formes donnes dans ('); elle est egale a
.r.

211

SEANCE DU 11 AVRIL 1960.

2707

19 barns/srad. La section eflicace resonnante {dajd<si) a ete calculee en
supposant que la distribution angulaire des photons correspondait a une
transition dipolaire magnetique pure et n'etait pas attenuee par intert

action quadrupolaire, une recente mesure
rieure de io~

8

eV a Q d 2 Y/dz 2

des resultats experimentaux

(*)

donnant une limite supe-

Elle est egale a 6 000 barns/srad. On deduit

.

:

/00 =o,3o± 0,07.
Cette valeur est en bon accord avec celle obtenue par des mesures de

transmission

= o,32 ± 0,01 5)

(/ 90

(*).

d'augmenter le rapport N 9 o/N 3 oo et d'ameliorer ainsi la
precision en operant avec un diffuseur plus mince (/^ 1 mg) et un angle
de diffusion plus grand de facon a rendre pratiquement negligeable la
diffusion non resonnante.
II

est possible

Cette methode presente d'autres aspects interessants.

La distribution

angulaire des photons diffuses est une source d'information sur le caractere de la transition et l'importance de l'interaction quadrupolaire; de

plus F etude des interferences entre les processus sans recul resonnants et

non resonnants

6

5
(

),

(

)

peut apporter une verification de la coherence dans
Enfin, la raie de photons sans recul absorbes

la

diffusion resonnante.

et

reemis sans perte d'energie est sensiblement plus etroite que la raie

emise initialement par la source, la distribution en energie est par exemple,
pour une source et un diffuseur minces, de la forme i/[(E
E ) 2 + F 2 /4] 2
conduisant a une raie de largeur a mi-hauteur 0,64 fois celle de la raie des
photons avant diffusion.

—

>

(*) Seance du 4 avril i960.
(0 R. L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik, 151, 1958, p. 124.
2
Quidort, Comptes rendus, 250,
( ) R. Barloutaud, E. Cotton, J.-L. Picou et J.

i960, p. 319.
(')

p.

A. K.

Compton et S. K. Allison, X-rays and experiment, Van Nostrand, i e €d.

781.

Sous presse.
A. Kastler, Comptes rendus, 250, i960, p. 509.
(°) G. Tzara et R. Barloutaud (sous presse).

(*)
8

( )

(Centre d'Etudes nucliaires de Saclay.)

212

Volume 4, Number 11

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

June

1,

I960

ZEEMAN EFFECT IN THE RECOILLESS y-RAY RESONANCE OF Zn OT t
P. P. Craig, D. E. Nagle, and D. R. F. Cochran
Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, University of California, Los Alamos, New Mexico
(Received May 4, 1960)

Recoil-free resonance emission and absorption
(Mossbauer effect) 1 of the 93-kev y ray in Zn 67
gives rise to the most precise energy definition
thus far reported. 2 Despite the numerous difficulties which beset the experimenter searching
for the resonance, 3 a small but definite Moss-

bauer effect has been found. 2 This Letter reports
measurements on the influence of the nuclear
Zeeman effect and other perturbing factors upon
the Mossbauer effect in Zn 87 embedded in an enriched ZnO absorber lattice.
The relatively high energy of this y ray makes
it necessary to embed the source and the absorber atoms in rigid crystalline lattices, and
to perform the experiments at low temperatures.
The first of these requirements was met by using
ZnO for both the source and the absorber lattices.
The second requirement was more than satisfied
by using temperatures below the helium lambda
transition (2.175°K).

In addition to these basic

requirements, several experimental difficulties

are consequences of the extreme narrowness of
the line (4.84 xl0~ u ev).

It is accordingly necessary to take into account the effect of various
perturbing influences. Here we list the more
important of these perturbations, and in the following paragraphs indicate how they enter into
the design of the experiment.
One class of shifts arises from the change of
nuclear mass upon y-ray emission or absorption,
with a resultant change in the phonon spectrum
of the lattice. The change in energy of the emitted y ray is given by4

AE = -(E/Mc 2 )<T>,

(1)

where E is the y-ray energy, M is the mass of
the emitting nucleus, and < T) is the expectation
value for the kinetic energy per atom of the lattice. If any parameter x should differ between
source and absorber lattice, the recoil -free
peaks will occur at different energies in the
emission spectrum and in the absorption spec561

=

"

213

Volume 4, Number 11

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

tram. The shift is given by
5(A£) =

— (AE)6x.

(2)

This expression predicts that a difference in
Debye temperature between source and absorber
of only about 1.3°K would cause a shift of one
linewidth. Thus a change in the average isotopic mass number of 2% would, through the
mechanism of the Debye temperature (taking
= 300°K), result in a shift of about four linewidths.
5
Similarly, differences in chemical constitution
or lattice defects may be expected to produce
significant shifts. We shall refer to a shift due
to difference in isotopic mass between source

and absorber as the isotopic mass effect.
In order for the emitted gamma radiation to
remain unshifted by the recoil of the emitting
nuclei,

it is

essential that the recoil momentum

be absorbed by entire crystallites. For all previously observed resonances the minimum size
of the crystallites was quite small.

In the pre-

sent situation this is no longer true. The recoil
momentum must be taken up by at least 2 x 10 9
nuclei, so that the

ZnO crystallites must be
Since commercial ZnO

larger than 0.4 micron.

would normally possess average grain sizes
smaller than one micron, 8 care must be exercised to ensure a grain size much larger than
the above nominal requirement. A sintering process assured that this requirement was met for
the source. A sample of the enriched absorber
was studied under an oil immersion microscope.
No grains smaller than 0.5 micron were observed, and the majority of the grains were in
the range of 1 to 2 microns.
5
cm/sec
Mechanical vibrations of only 10
would produce a Doppler broadening of about one
linewidth. Since the vibration level in our building was nearly 5x10"* cm/sec, the helium cryostat was shock- mounted and the pumping lines
carefully decoupled. The source and the absorber were clamped rigidly in a single package,
which was suspended by threads in the helium
bath. The helium bath was pumped below the
lambda transition and the nitrogen radiation

June

1,

I960

ground state into six components and the excited
state into four components. Selection rules permit twelve component gamma transitions, as is
shown in Fig. 1(a). Here/ =5/2, /g = 3/2, and
the ground-state gyromagnetic ratio #=0.35. 7
For the excited state no g value has been measured;

we adopt arbitrarily the value -1. (The

negative sign is predicted by the shell model.)

The source is shielded from the magnetic field
and hence the emission spectrum is not split.
For simplicity, the effect of quadrupole interactions has been omitted. Assuming a shift bE between source and absorber, resonance can occur
for six values of magnetic field. Each component
has a width which is compounded of the natural
linewidth and the widths due to residual mechanical vibrations, quadrupole broadening, etc.
Even if this width is the same for all components,
the present method of studying the resonances as
a function of an external magnetic field will
cause the apparent or magnetic width of each resonance peak to be proportional to the field re quired to establish the resonance. Thus resonances occurring at low values of the applied
field will appear narrower than those established
at high fields, and the observed spectrum will
appear distorted.
The magnetic field was produced by a small

--'———-=

SE

(a)

\»o>
1

(b)

z

o
a.
ac

o
<r>

a>

shield was frozen to prevent vibrations from
boiling liquids and also to place source and ab-

sorber in an isothermal bath.
In place of the velocity drive usually used in

this type of experiment, the resonance was

shifted by means of the nuclear Zeeman effect.
The magnetic moment of the Zn 67 nucleus inter-

acting with an applied magnetic field splits the
562

FIG. 1. (a) Zeeman splittings of the gamma ray vs
an applied magnetic field. The gyromagnetic ratio of
the ground state is 0. 35, and a value of -1.0 has been
arbitrarily chosen for the excited state, (b) Resonance
pattern expected from the splittings in (a) in the presence of an energy shift 6E between source and absorber. In actuality, line broadening would be expected to merge closely spaced lines into single peaks.

214

Volume 4, Number 11

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS
Fields of up

solenoid surrounding the absorber.

to 700 gauss could be applied to the absorber,

while the source was entirely shielded (at operating temperatures) by superconducting lead
foil.

Stray fields at the absorber were measured
Fields from the sole-

to be less than 2 gauss.

noid were prevented from reaching the photo multiplier by a superconducting ring placed in
the cryostat bottom through which the gamma
rays emerged. Changes in counting rate due to

changing fields at the photo multiplier were found,
even without the superconducting shield, to be
less than ±0.02%.

The absorber used in all experiments was
1.231 g of enriched ZnO (92.4% Zn

87

enrichment)

pressed with 0.036 g of polyethylene glycol binder into a button 1.11 cm in diameter. Sources
were prepared in the Los Alamos cyclotron by
87
the reaction Zn^d.njGa on normal sintered
ZnO. Other reaction products were accounted
for by a background correction. After bombardment, the sources were annealed for about one
hour in air at about 1000°C in order to anneal
67
radiation damage and to assure that the Ga
atoms were correctly placed in the ZnO lattice.
Such a procedure is essential, and lower temperatures or shorter times yielded erratic results, or no resonance whatever.
Measurements were made of the transmission
of the absorber vs the applied magnetic field.
Because of the extremely small change in counting rate and the large number of counts required
8
(typically 10 per point), automation of the counting system and extreme system stability were
imperative. The 93-kev gamma rays passed
through thin windows in the cryostat bottom, and
were detected by a Nal(Tl) scintillation crystal.
The pulses were amplified and analyzed by a
single -channel analyzer followed by a scaler
equipped with a digital recorder. In order to
eliminate the effect of source decay, all measurements were taken relative to the counting
rate when one applied a magnetic field sufficient
to destroy the resonance entirely. The magnetic
field sequencing and the scaler were controlled
by an automatic programmer. Timing was controlled by a thermostatted quartz crystal frequency standard with a stated accuracy of 3 parts
7
in 10 per week. The programming was such as
to make the measurements insensitive to linear
drifts.

Instrument checks were performed by cycling
the magnetic field (a) at room temperature, (b)
at low temperature using a nonresonant gamma

June

1,

I960

ray, and (c) at low temperature using as an absorber a zinc -containing material (gahnite) in
which no resonance exists. 2 In each case the
change in counting rate upon application of the
magnetic field was found to be zero to within
±0.02%.
Figure 2 shows the resonance curve obtained.
The points include corrections for background
and unresolved nonresonant gamma rays of
typically 30%. The central features of the data
are the remarkably large total area under the
resonance, and the structure and total breadth
present. The total area is sufficiently large that,
were there no line broadening, one would estimate the resonance absorption to be several percent. Such a value implies a Debye temperature
for ZnO of about 300°K, which is consistent with

the results obtained from specific heats.

The
major structural feature of the curve lies in the

fact that the maximum resonance does not occur
at zero field, but is shifted to about 10 gauss.
This result indicates the presence of shifts such
as the isotopic mass effect mentioned above.
However, the displacement of the maximum (to
10 gauss) is smaller than one would predict from
this effect alone unless an unreasonably large

value is assumed for the excited state g value.

A

plausible explanation is that chemical shifts 5 are

superimposed upon the isotopic effect. The presence of such shifts is implied by the small resonance found at zero field using an unenriched
absorber. 2 Since in tbat case no isotope effects
were present, only chemical shifts or quadrupole
broadening can explain the small resonance ob-

T

¥
100

SO

1

150

r/ Mn

200

__,

250

l_

300

350

400

FIELD AT ABSORBER (GAUSS)

FIG.

2.

Experimental resonance absorption pattern

for the 93-kev line of Zn6T vs the magnetic field applied

ZnO absorber. The source is in zero
magnetic field. T/p n is the natural level width (in
ergs) divided by a nuclear magneton (in ergs per
to an enriched

gauss).

563

-

.

215

Volume 4, Number 11
served.

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

In the present experiments two peaks

J.

June

1,

I960

G. Dash each contributed a number of ideas to

are found separated by only about 40 gauss so
that it seems unlikely that the broadening is extreme. The tail of the resonance extends to

the experiment.

about 400 gauss with no additional structure.
This may be related to the characteristic of the
magnetic method that even unbroadened lines
possess apparent magnetic widths which are proportional to the applied magnetic field.
Although the interpretation is admittedly incomplete, the extreme sharpness of the resonance is apparent. In further study, involving
the development of a Doppler shift drive, we
hope to measure a number of the energy shifts
and level splittings mentioned in previous paragraphs.
We wish to thank S, D. Stoddard and R. E.
Cowan for preparation of the ZnO source buttons
and for compacting the enriched ZnO absorber.
The generous cooperation of the cyclotron group
is gratefully acknowledged. W. E. Keller and

'Work done under the auspices of the U. S. Atomic
Energy Commission.
R. L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik 151, 124(1958);

564

l

Naturwissenschaften 45, 538(1958); Z. Naturforsch.
14a, 211 (1959).
~~*D. E. Nagle, P. P. Craig, and W. E. Keller, Nature (to be published)
3
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Phys. Rev. Letters
4, 397 (1960).
4
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Phys. Rev. Letters
4, 337 (1960); B. D. Josephson, Phys. Rev. Letters
4, 341 (1960).
s
O. C. Kistner and A. W. Sunyar, Phys. Rev.
Letters 4, 412 (1960).
8
G. Heiland, E. Mollwo, and F. Stockmann, Solid
State Physics edited by F. Seitz and D. Turnbull
(Academic Press, New York, 1959), Vol. 8, p. 191.
,

T

H. Kopfermann,

Kernmomente (Akademische Ver-

lagsgesellschaft, Frankfurt am Main, 1956).

I

216

Mdssbauer Effect in Ferrocyanide
S. L.

Ruby, L. M. Epstein, and K. H. Sun

Radiation and Nucleonics Laboratory of the Materials Laboratories,

Westinghouse Electric Corporation, East Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
(Received Match 18, 1960)

order to utilize the Mossbauer effect more convenINiently,
would be desirable to have either a source or
it

an absorber which is monoenergetic. To date, the detailed
work 1,2 using Fe 87 has employed soft iron sources and absorbers here, the inner magnetic field creates a hyperfine
splitting which is disadvantageous for some work.
During a discussion with the group at the Argonne
National Laboratories, ferrocyanide was pointed out as a
possible material with no hyperfine splitting. This follows
from the fact that potassium ferrocyanide has no magnetic
moment. 3 Roughly speaking, the electrons from the cyanogen groups completely fill the d-shell of the iron atom and
;

eliminate the magnetic behavior.

utilizing the results of

Hanna et al.,

1

if

there

is

no inner

Our present knowledge of instrumental line shape is incomplete, and consequently,- the
problem of assigning an upper bound to the inner magnetic
field

in ferrocyanide.

field in ferrocyanide will not be considered here. However,
if

not zero, it is less than 10% of the field in soft iron.

The foregoing results indicate that in a ferrocyanide
mono-

source the emission from excited Fe 67 would be

would be convenient to have such a source,
and particularly so if it were effective at room temperature.
Accordingly, a run using the ferrocyanide absorber was
made at room temperature. The same peaks are observed
energetic. It

but with their amplitudes reduced to 60 (±10)% of their

The apparatus employs a loud speaker to vibrate the

value at 80°K. An effect of this magnitude can be calcu-

Co" source at 25 cps, and a coil in an auxiliary magnetic

lated from the formula for the resonant fraction given by

field rigidly

attached to the source is used to measure its

Pound, 5

instantaneous velocity. The 14.4-kev y ray is detected con-

3

ventionally using a thin Nal(Tl) crystal and a single

£,

/=exp-

channel analyzer. Its output is used to initiate a multi-

2 2Mc2 kd\1

3\ e / J

channel analyzer which has been modified to accept the

output of the velocity transducer. Thus the complete
velocity spectrum

with a Debye 6 of 340 (±40) °K. This suggests that a

scanned every 20 msec, while each

ferrocyanide source will emit about 40% of the 14.4-kev

y ray detected is stored in the appropriate velocity channel.
The source was made by plating about 300 i*c of Co 57 onto

y rays without energy change as compared to 60% for

and annealing as suggested by Pound. 4
Na<Fe(CN) 6 -10H 2O at 80°K was used as an absorber
during the measurements reported here. The thickness of
the absorber is about 100 mg/cm2 which corresponds to

Fe 67 (produced from Co 57 present as a substitutional im-

soft

is

soft iron.

iron

0.25 mg/cm of Fe
2

57

However, there is the question of whether the excited
purity) would be present in the proper chemical state. One
possibility is that cobalt in cyanide complexes tends to go

.

The result of the experiment is given in Fig. 1. For comparison purposes, a spectrum obtained in this apparatus
using a soft iron absorber at

room temperature is also

shown. Also plotted in'the figure are bars showing the position and relative size of the absorption peaks to be expected

to the trivalent oxidation state, whereas the divalent state
is

required for transmutation to ferrocyanide. In addition,

there

is

evidence 6 that the cobalto-cyanide complex con-

tains only five cyanide groups instead of six.

We would like to thank the members of the Argonne

'

217

LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

1

•

i

1

Fe at
-

2

#fAWv }A*
I
u
V

V
i

4

1

1

1

1

1

i

300°K vs Na 4 Fe(CN) 6

-

10 H 2

at

80°K

1

1

1

i

i

i

i

i

1

4
6
VELOCITY,

8

10

12

16

MILLIMETERS/ SECOND

67
Fig. 1. Percent change in transmission of a Co" (Fe *) source vs velocity of an iron absorber at room temperature and a
sodium ferrocyanide absorber at 80°K.

group for their helpful advice, and also Dr. Sergio

De

Benedetti who first suggested the use of a multichannel
analyzer as a velocity measuring device.

Hanna et al., Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 177 (1960).

1

S. S.

1

G. DePasquali et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 71 (1960).

8
L. Pauling, Nature of the Chemical Bond (Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, New York, 1960), third ed., p. 166.
* R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev. Letters 3, 554

(1959).
5

R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev. Letters 3, 440

(1959).
• A.

W. Adamson, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 73, 5710 (1951).

;

218

NUCLEAR INSTRUMENTS AND M E TH O D S 12 (1961) 131-137; NORTH-HOLLAND PUBLISHING CO.

TRANSMISSION AND LINE BROADENING OF RESONANCE RADIATION INCIDENT

ON A RESONANCE ABSORBER t
S.

MARGULIES and J. R. EHRMAN

University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois

Received 13 February 1961

The transmission of resonance radiation emitted from a source
of finite thickness and passing through an external resonance

absorber is discussed. The transmission integral is examined for
both a linear and a Gaussian distribution of radioactive atoms
and the
general case is evaluated by numerical integration. Over the
in the source. Several special cases axe presented,

1.

range of values considered, the transmitted line shape closely
approximates a Breit-Wigner curve whose width is greater than
the natural width of the transition. This line broadening,
caused by resonance absorption in the source and in the external
absorber, is presented graphically as a function of source and
absorber thickness.

Introduction

R. L. Mossbauer's discovery that recoilless emission and absorption of nuclear gamma radiation can
occur1 ) has stimulated a host of recent investigations2 ). Interest in this process has grown rapidly because
the Mossbauer effect allows the direct observation of many phenomena formerly thought unmeasurable.

A terrestial measurement of the gravitational red-shift3

),

a test of the equivalence principle for rotating

systems4 ), and the observation of the Zeeman splitting of excited nuclear levels5 ), are but a few of the
experiments made possible by the Mossbauer effect. In addition, the effect is finding many applications in
the measurement of the internal fields in solids.

When recoilless emission and absorption of gamma radiation occurs, the conditions for nuclear resonance fluorescence are inherently satisfied. The numerous applications of the Mossbauer effect follow from

the fact that, in such cases, the very narrow lines resulting from transitions from metastable nuclear levels
can actually be observed: resonance lines with widths in the range 10 -10 to 10 -5 eV, which correspond
respectively to gamma transitions from levels whose half-lives vary between 10 -5 and 10~ 10 sec, have been

measured.

Although experiments involving the Mossbauer effect can be performed with either a transmission or a
scattering geometry, most of the work done so far has employed the former approach6 ).

A typical trans-

mission experiment consists of measuring the resonance radiation passing through a resonance absorber,
as a function of the relative velocity between source and absorber. In this manner, a resonance line shape
is traced out. Since the great utility of the Mossbauer effect depends upon the measurement of such lines,

a consideration of the line shape is of interest. In what follows, we will be concerned with the transmission
4

f This work has been supported in part by the joint program

of the U.S. Office of

)

Naval Research and the U.S. Atomic

staff,

Energy Commission.

s
)

H. J. Hay, J'. P. Schiffer, T. E. Cranshaw and P. A. EgelPhys. Rev. Letters 4 (1960) 165.
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev. Letters 3

R. L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik 151 (1958) 124.
For a listing of recent experiments, see the bibliography
contained in Proceedings of the Allerton Park Conference on
Mdssbauer Effect, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, June

(1959) 554;
G. DePasquali, H. Frauenfelder, S. Margulies and R. N.
Peacock, Phys. Rev. Letters 4 (1960) 71
S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J. Perlow, R. S.
Preston and D. H. Vincent, Phys. Rev. Letters 4 (1960)

5-7, 1960 (unpublished).

177.

x

)

8

)

3
)

R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev. Letters 4

*)

H. Frauenfelder, D. R. F. Cochran, D. E. Nagle and R. D.

Taylor, Nuovo Cim. 19 (1961) 183.

(1960) 337.
131

219

132

S.

of resonant

MARGULIES AND J. R. EHRMAN

gamma radiation emitted from a source of finite thicknessf, and passing through a finite

resonance absorber. In particular, we will consider two types of sources; one in which the radioactive

atoms are distributed uniformly and one which has a Gaussian distribution of emitting nuclei.
RESONANCE
ABSORBER

General Formulation

2.

In our calculation of the transmitted intensity,

we will assume that a fraction / of

all

decays

occur without recoil energy loss 7 ). The resonance
radiation resulting from these decays will be taken
to have an emission and absorption spectrum of

Breit-Wigner shape. The remaining fraction of the

l«-jr-JdJ«-

radiation is non-resonant, and is subject only to or-

dinary electronic absorption.

We will consider a

Fig.
Geometry used to calculate the transmission of y-radiaand extending in
tion through a resonance absorber moving with a velocity v
to x — oo. The distribution of
depth from x =
relative to the source.
emitting atoms along the #-axis will be denoted by
p(x). We will deal only with the radiation emitted normal to the area of the source, as shown in fig. 1.
The distribution of the absorbing atoms in both the source and absorber will be taken to be uniform.

source having arbitrary area,

1 .

Under these circumstances, the transmission through a resonance absorber of thickness t A moving
,

with a velocity v relative to the source, is given by
sX

P(y) = e

(1

/)

'dx p{x)e"

J"

+ / — f d£ exp [ — /'a«a«a<7o*a

T2/4

(E— £ 2 +r a /4J
)

x/;

T2/4

dxp(x)

(E

—E +
Q

Sf)*

+ T2/4

exp

(E—Eo + f) 2 + T2/4

+ (*s

M)

(i)

In this equation, r is the full width at half-height of both the emission and absorption lines which are
centered about E

,

and oq is the absorption cross-section at resonancett. The subscripts S and A identify

the following source and absorber quantities:
/'

— probability of resonance absorption without recoil,

n = number of atoms per cubic centimeter of volume,
a = fractional abundance of the atoms which can absorb resonantly,
fi = ordinary mass attenuation coefficient, evaluated at Eq.

The quantity^ = {vjc)Eq characterizes the Doppler shift between the source and absorber.
The first term in (1) represents the transmission of the non-resonant fraction of the radiation, and is
independent of the Doppler shift Sf. In the second term, which is the resonant contribution, the x-integral
represents the emission and self-absorption in the source.

We will neglect the fi% appearing in the ex-

ponential of this integral, since the mass absorption is usually much smaller than the resonance absorption. The remaining factors in the second term represent the absorption in the external resonance ab-

sorber. The lower limit on the energy integral has been taken as
7
)

W. Marshall and J. P. Schiffer, The Debye-Waller Factor in

— oo instead of zero for convenience.

tf The absorption cross-section at resonance is given by

the Mossbauer Effect, A.E.R.E., Harwell (1960), (unpublished).
t The case of a beam of y-radiation, having a Breit-Wigner
energy spectrum, passing through a resonance absorber, has
been considered by W. M. Visscher in The Evaluation of the
Transmission Integral, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory (1959)
(unpublished) This corresponds, in effect, to the non-resonant
absorbing source described in Section 5.
.

21*

2»* a

+

1

2/ + 1

1

+a

where % is the wavelength of the y-ray, 7* and / are the nuclear
spins of the initial and final states, respectively, and a is the

conversion coefficient for the transition.

:

:

220

TRANSMISSION AND LINE BROADENING

133

Equation (1) can be seen to be independent of the sign of theDoppler shifts. Since only relative motion
between source and absorber is pertinent, £f can be included in the absorber part of the transmission
integral instead of the source part, if desired.

Equation (1) can easily be generalized for the case when the emission and absorption lines consist of
more than one component (as when electric or magnetic splitting exists) by forming appropriate sums.
In this paper we will limit ourselves to the overlap of a single emission line with a single absorption line,
each centered about Eq. For convenience, we will translate the energy axis so that both lines are centered

about E ==

— Eq) will be replaced by E.

in the absence of any Doppler shift ; that is, (E

Sources for Mossbauer experiments are generally prepared in either of two wayst
1.

The activity is electroplated or otherwise deposited on a source backing. The activity is then diffused

into the host lattice by heating8 ).
2. The activity and the host atoms are co-plated on a backing, thereby building up a lattice containing

the radioactive atoms as integral parts 9 ).

The second method produces a source in which the emitting atoms are uniformly distributed in depth.
The same type of distribution results from the first method if the backing is very thin and the diffusion
time is very long. On the other hand, if either the backing is thick or the diffusion time is short, then the
first

method produces an activity distribution which is approximately Gaussian. Both types of distribu-

tion will be discussed below.
3.

Uniform Source Distribution

We first consider a source of thickness fe, having N radioactive atoms per unit length
N atoms/cm, s ^ x 2:
/

i

x > t3

10

Since Nt s is the total number of radioactive atoms and e

.

- *'* represents the non-resonant electronic
'1

absorption in the external absorber, we will deal with a normalized transmission ~P{Sf) defined by

P(^)=£(^)/(e~"

M

A'A

s ).

(3)

For the distribution given in (2) the x part of the transmission integral can easily be evaluated, and

we find
(4)

Here, Ts — /'s^s^s^s and TA =/'aWa«a^a are effective source and absorber thicknesses, respectively. The first

term in this equation is the non-resonant transmission, and will henceforth be denoted by

—f)P (uniform). As /isf s approaches zero, this quantity approaches (1 — f). The second term in (4),

(1

non-res.

containing an integral over energy, represents the resonant contribution. Before discussing the general
evaluation of the integral, we will first consider two special cases.

THIN SOURCE AND ABSORBER
When both source and absorber are thin in the sense that Ts « 1, TA « 1, we can expand both ex-

3.1.

ponentials in the second term of (4) and keep only lowest -order terms in effective thickness. Integrating

over energy, we obtain
t

8

Occasionally the target foil, which has been irradiated in a

pile or in

isotope,

an accelerator beam to produce the desired radio-

)

R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev. Letters 3

(1959) 554.

may serve directly as a source. In such a case, the

9
)

S. S.

distribution of emitting atoms can be quite complex, and will

R.

not be treated here.

(1960) 28.

S.

Hanna, J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J. Perlow,
and D. H. Vincent, Phys. Rev. Letters 4

Preston

:

221

134

S.

MARGULIES AND J. R. EHRMAN

P(r) = f (1 -/)P(uniform) + / (l
\

non-res.

I

TA

-~)
4

/ ]J

(yin 2

y

(5)

the relative Doppler shift
The bracketed term in this equation represents the transmission when
between source and absorber, is large. This asymptotic value is less than unity because of the self-absorption in the source. The second term represents the dip in the transmission due to resonance absorption in
the external absorber. It is seen that the transmitted line, in the case of thin source and absorber, has a
Breit-Wigner shape, but has an apparent width ra which is twice that of either the emission or absorption
spectrum. This broadening results from the overlap of the emission and absorption lines.
3.2.

,

THIN SOURCE - TRANSMISSION AT ZERO DOPPLER SHIFT

When the effective source thickness Ts approaches zero (as, for example, in a source which has little
resonance absorption because as -> 0), the transmission at zero Doppler shift can be found in terms of Ta,
the effective absorber thickness. Expanding the term containing Ts in

(4)

and keeping only the lowest-

order term leads to
P(0) « (1 -/)P(uniform)

+ / e"^* Jo(iiTA

Ts -*

)

,

(6)

non-res.

where Jo is the Bessel function of zero order. Because of the nature of resonance absorption, the resonant
contribution to the transmission does not decrease exponentially with absorber thickness, but instead,

shows a saturation behavior.
3.3.

UNIFORM SOURCE - GENERAL CASE

Attempts to evaluate (4) analytically for arbitrary source and absorber thicknesses have been unsuccessful. Consequently, we have performed a numerical integration on the University of Illinois digital
computer ILLIAC for values of Ts and 7" a between zero and ten. It has been found empirically that over
this range the transmitted line is, to a very good degree of approximation, a Breit-Wigner curve whose full
width at half-height fa, depends upon the value of Ts and Ta. The general variation of transmission with
Doppler shift
is shown in fig. 2. The results of our numerical integration, in the form of the variation of
fa/fas a function of Ta with Ts as parameter, are shown in fig. 3. Note that as Ts and Ta both approach

&

zero, /"a/f approaches the value two, since the conditions described in section 3.1 are applicable.
4. Gaussian Source Distribution

For the case of a Gaussian distribution of radioactive atoms, we will use
p(x)

= (2N/Vn) e'*'"*' atoms/cm,

x>

.

(7)

Here ts represents a characteristic diffusion depth whose value depends upon the details of the source
preparation. The above distribution is normalized so that Nts once again represents the total number of
radioactive atoms.

Substitution of this Gaussian distribution into (1 ) leads to the following expression, which is normalized
in the sense defined by (3)

r r°°

d£

P(r) = (1 -/) e*** [ 1 -<*Ws/2) ] + t^j

where

(E + srf + P2/4

T3T2/4

—

/ -

exp (

n exp

r

/

L

\2[(E + ^) 2 + P2/4],/ J

represents the error function,
*(y)

= (2/v^) fV'dw

rAp2/4 \

\£2 + P2/4/
\*
Ts n/4
/
\2[(E + #>)* + n/4]J

(8)

222

TRANSMISSION AND LINE BROADENING
— NON~ RESONANT
a —
~k
"

§

RESONANT

|

RADIATION LOST

I

BY SELF

'

™°*™»
IN

SOURCE

f.£

6.0

r^

—

s^jZ*

5.0

4.0

—

RELATIVE DOPPLER

SHIFT

+

? '-j-f,

l$P

^P
<^<

SOURCE DISTRIBUTION:

Fig. 2. Normalized transmission of y-radiation through a
resonance absorber as a function of the relative Doppler shift
between source and absorber. The apparent full width at halfheight of the transmitted line is denoted by .Ta
.

Fig. 3. Broadening of the transmitted line for a source having a

\N ATOMS /CM

""'jo

/^\
EFFECTIVE

ABSORBER

uniform distribution of emitting atoms.

1

1

1

THICKNESS

1

7".

Fig. 3.

The first term in (8) corresponds to the transmission of the non-resonant fraction of the radiation, and
will be denoted by

approaches (1

(1

—f)P (Gaussian). Again, as fi^s approaches zero, the non-resonant contribution

— /). The resonant contribution to the transmission

is contained in the second term of (8).

Before discussing the general evaluation of this equation, we will consider two special cases.
4.1.

THIN SOURCE AND ABSORBER

« 1 TA « 1 we can expand
and keep only first-order terms in

If both source and absorber effective thicknesses satisfy the conditions T$

the exponentials and the error function in the second term of

(8),

,

,

thickness. After integrating over energy, one obtains
P(s>)

(1

I±
— /)P(Gaussian) +/(1 l±-)]21+ (5»/r)«
2vVJ
f

!

.

(9)

In this equation the bracketed term represents the asymptotic transmission as &*-> oo, and differs from
unity because of self-absorption in the source. The second term results from resonance absorption in the
external absorber. The transmitted line shape has the Breit-Wigner form, but is twice as wide as either

the emission or the absorption line. Note that (9) differs from (5) only in that the Gaussian source results
in more self-absorption than the uniform source. This conclusion follows from the choice of normalization
for the Gaussian distribution and is subject to the thin source approximation used to derive both equations.
4.2.

THIN SOURCE - TRANSMISSION AT ZERO DOPPLER SHIFT

Expansion of the appropriate terms to lowest order when Ts -> allows (8) to be evaluated at the point
!? = 0. Since both the Gaussian distribution of (7) and the uniform distribution described by (2) are
normalized in the same way, it is not surprising that (6) once again follows for this special case, but with

P (uniform) replaced by P (Gaussian).

223

136

S.

MARGULIES AND J. R. EHRMAN
4.3.

GAUSSIAN SOURCE - GENERAL CASE

Equation (8), representing the transmission from
a source which has a Gaussian distribution of radioactive atoms, couJd not be evaluated analytically
for arbitrary values of T$ and Ta- Again, we have
performed a numerical integration on ILLIAC for
the range 10 ^ (Ts, Ta) ^ 0. As in the uniform case,
it has been found empirically that the resulting
transmitted lines differ but little from Breit-Wigner
curves whose full widths at half-height vary with

^

source and absorber thicknesses (see

fig. 2).

The

calculated broadening of the transmitted line as a

s\/\/

function of Ts and TA is shown in fig. 4. As 7 s and

Ta approach zero, the conditions of section 4.1

fl

#

apply,

//'

EFFECTIVE
Fig. 4.

and T^T approaches the value two.

5. Non-Resonant Absorbing Sources

SOURCE DISTRIBUTE

As has been shown, the width of the transmission

:

cm

;

curve obtained from a resonantly absorbing source

reo

of finite thickness is always greater than twice the

ABSORBER THICKNESS

natural width of the transition. The way to obtain

1

1

the narrowest lines with any given radioisotope is

''a"*'*^'*

Broadening of the transmitted line for a source having
a Gaussian distribution of emitting atoms.

to use a source backing which has zero

abundance
way,

of atoms that can absorb resonantly. In this

only the external resonance absorber contributes
to the line broadening. When this is the case, the ordinary electronic absorption, neglected so far for

the resonant fraction of the radiation, must be considered. The transmission under these circumstances
is given

by

W= e-M(1 -4>W e-+ ^jr ^(-jgg^xj;
yir„,;
(E-E
+
+
+
-£„) 2

r*/4/

Jo

,.

)

!?f

T2/4

-)

.

00)

The ^-integral is the same in both the non-resonant and the resonant terms of this equation, and can be
evaluated for the uniform distribution of (2) and the Gaussian distribution of (7). The transmission,
normalized according to (3), is found to be

P{s?)

—

= [{\-i) +//(y)]
L

uniform source

fists

(11)

= [(1 — /) + //(*) ]P(uniform)
non-res.

and
P(-

-

+ fl(y)
[(1 -/) + fl(sr)
[ (1

/)

e

i " S ' s) '

(1

- 0(u S

]

[

]

P(Gaussian)

s t /2)) ]

Gaussian source

(12)

where

HD

d£
2nJ-

(E + sef + T2/4

'

exp

- TA n/i \

>£2

+ r 2/4 j

(13)

In either case, the shape of the transmitted line is the same, only the amplitude being affected by the
electronic absorption. This behavior follows from the fact that the ordinary mass attenuation coefficients

:

;

224

TRANSMISSION AND LINE BROADENING

137

are energy independent over the width of the emission and absorption lines. The shape of the transmitted
line is determined by the energy integral of (13). Since this integral corresponds to the

Ts —

case for

either a uniform or a Gaussian source it has, in effect, already been considered. In the results presented

below, it should be remembered that I{£f) must be substituted into either (1 1 ) or (12) to obtain the transmission, P(ST).

When the resonance absorber satisfies the condition T&« 1, the integral of (13) reduces to
l(y)
2

(14)

+ (^//y

i

again representing a Breit-Wigner curve whose width at half-height is 2T.

For arbitrary values of Ta, the transmission also approximates a Breit-Wigner curve, but the apparent
width ra varies with the absorber thickness in the manner described by the Ts = curve in either fig. 3
or fig. 4.

When there exists no Doppler shift between source and absorber, the energy integral of (13) can be
evaluated
Jo(iTA/2)

1(0)

(15)

In section 3.2 and 4.2, where very thin sources were considered, the evaluation of the energy integral
led to the approximation given in (6). In the case of a non-resonantly absorbing source, no approximations
are needed, and the result of (15) is exact. Since I{oo)

= 1, we can combine (15) with either (11) or (12)

to get the useful result

P(oo)-P(0)
/[I
P(oo)

Note added in proof: Equation (16), firxt applied to the analysis of
Mossbauer experiments by the Los Alamos group, is often being
usedwhenitisnotapplicable.lt must be remembered that (16) is
1) exact only for non-resonantly absorbing sources; it is a
good approximation for sources where T$« 1
2) derived on the assumption that the emission and absorption lines overlap exactly at zero relative velocity between
source and absorber. If, as is often the case, there exists an
energy shift between emission and absorption spectra, P(0)
must be replaced by P(Sf ), where Sf is the Doppler shift required to produce coincidence;

•jrA

Jo(«V2)]

3)

(16)

•

valid for source and absorber half-widths equal to P, the

natural width of the transition. It is still correct if these widths
are not the natural width, provided that they are equal:

Ps = -Ta.-

Iq

cross-section a

this case,

however, the

maximum absorption

must be multiplied by the factor P/Pg to keep

the total absorption constant.
We wish to emphasize that (16) can be used to extract / and
/' from absorption measurements only if the conditions assumed
in the derivation are at least approximately satisfied.

Acknowledgement

We wish to thank Professor H. Frauenfelder as well as Dr. E. Liischer, Dr. P. Debrunner, and Mr. J. H.
Hetherington for many interesting discussions.

225

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 4, Number 4

February

15,

I960

POLARIZED SPECTRA AND HYPERFINE STRUCTURE IN Fe 57 *
S. S.

Hanna,

J.

Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J. Perlow, R. S. Preston, and D. H. Vincent
Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois
(Received January 26, 1960)
1

The observation in this laboratory

of the

polarization of the resonance radiation2

by the 14-kev level of Fe

57

"5

emitted

has led to a study of
polarization in the hyperfine spectrum of the
resonant absorption. The apparatus and the
method of producing and detecting polarization
were the same as used in reference 1 except that
the source and the absorber were mounted on
separate Alnico magnets. The magnet carrying

the absorber was attached firmly to the bed of
the lathe used in our previous work. 4

The other
magnet holding the source was fastened securely
to the carriage of the lathe. The detector of
radiation (40 -mil Nal) was mounted on the axis
determined by the source and absorber and it
was well shielded from magnetic fields.
The motion of the carriage provided uniform
velocities of the source, and the polarized spec177

t

—

.

.

226

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 4, Number 4

tra were obtained by measuring the transmission,

with crossed or parallel magnetizations in source
and absorber, as a function of the velocity of the

source. The operation of the lathe was made
automatic so that the carriage (source) moved
to and fro at a predetermined speed. During the
"to" motions the pulses from the detector were
recorded in the lower channels of a 2 56 -channel
analyzer; and during the "fro" motions they
were accumulated in the upper channels of the
analyzer. In a single run, therefore, the transmission was measured for a positive and for an

February

15,

I960

magnetized perpendicular to each other differs
markedly from that obtained with parallel magnetizations. For comparison, a spectrum is
shown for an unmagnetized source and absorber.
It is seen that the hyperfine spectrum consists
of six prominent lines instead of the four previously reported. 3 5

'
It is clear therefore that the
earlier interpretation based on the existence of

only four lines is incorrect.

The level diagram of Fe 57 which seems to provide a satisfactory explanation of the spectra in
Fig. 1 is shown on the left in Fig.

In the upper

2.

right are given the hyperfine components for Ml

equal negative velocity.

The spectra obtained in this way are shown in
1.
Since no significant differences were

(We have found little need to introduce

radiation.

The intensities of

Fig.

a significant amount of £2.)

observed for positive and negative velocities,
the spectra have been folded about zero velocity.
The spectrum obtained with source and absorber

the components are those appropriate to a ran-

dom orientation of the internal magnetic fields at
At the lower right are shown the
components for the case in which the internal
fields have been aligned. The intensities given
the nuclei.

are for radiations emitted perpendicular to the
aligned field.

The direction of polarization of

each component relative to the direction of the
aligned field is indicated by the symbol
or ±
If one takes a hyperfine pattern and moves it
over itself, one obtains the hyperfine spectrum,
II

-3/2
*

•

1/2

—

1/2

3/2

Li
UN POL.

II

I

_Li
6 - 90*. POL.
*

f

1/2

1/2
.57

5

10

15

SPEED IN mm/sec
Top: unpolarized.
Hyperfine spectra of Fe5T
Middle: magnetization in source and absorber parallel.
Bottom: magnetization in source and absorber perpendicular. The ordinate is in units of 2000.

FIG.

178

1.

.

FIG. 2. Level diagram of Fe" on which the discussion is based. Upper right: unpolarized hyperfine

The numbers give the relative intensities.
Lower right: polarized hyperfine pattern {9 = 90°)
The symbols and x stand for polarization parallel

pattern.

II

or perpendicular to the aligned field.

227

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 4, Number 4

each line in the spectrum arising from the coincidence of hyperfine components in emission and
absorption. At the top in Fig. 3 is shown the
predicted spectrum of unpolarized radiation. In
the middle is given the spectrum for the case in
which the internal fields in source and absorber
are aligned parallel to each other. In this case
a line in the absorption spectrum will appear
only if the respective hyperfine components have
the same polarization. If, on the other hand,
these polarizations are perpendicular, then the
line will appear in the absorption spectrum only
if the internal fields in source and absorber are
aligned at right angles. The spectrum predicted
for this case is shown at the bottom in Fig. 3.
The intensities given in Fig. 3 are those nominally expected for a thin absorber. In addition
it is assumed that a line which should appear
only with one orientation of the fields will actually
be present to the extent of about 10% with the
other orientation, because of incomplete alignment of the fields in source and absorber. The
spectra in Fig. 3 are in good qualitative agree-,
ment with the observations in Fig. 1.
The hyperfine pattern of six components produces, in all, eight lines in the absorption spectrum. However, the splittings in the ground
state and in the excited state are such that two
doublets are formed which are not resolved in
the unpolarized spectrum. The resolved peaks
are numbered from one to six in Fig. 3. One

February

15,

I960

'1

3

4

5

5

2

UNPOL.

1

|
'
1

1

'

1

member of the doublet in line 2 is too weak to
affect the position of the peak.

Thus, the spac-

ings between line 1 and 2, 4 and 5, and 5 and 6

should be equal to the splitting of the ground state.

The spacing between lines 2 and 4 gives the splitting of the ground state.

Line 3 is a doublet, one
member of which should appear in the spectrum

with parallel fields, the other in the spectrum
with crossed fields. The separation in the doublet
is

equal to 2^ -g

,

where gx and g are the split-

tings of the excited and ground level, respectively.

We have measured this doublet separation

1

1

9i

1

V«o

1

*Wo

FIG. 3. Spectra predicted by the scheme in Fig. 2.
Top: unpolarized. Middle: magnetizations parallel.
Bottom: magnetizations perpendicular. The main
peaks are numbered from one to six. The symbols
g and #i represent the gyromagnetic ratios of ground
and excited levels, respectively.

with some care by observing the shift in line 3
in going from one polarized spectrum to the

The separation is (0.5 ±0.1) mm/sec. We
have also measured the separation between lines
1 and 2 more carefully than shown in Fig. 1 and

other.

obtained gx =(2.23 ± 0.03) mm/sec.

Hence g

= (3. 96 i 0.10) mm/sec.
8

Ludwig and Woodbury have recently obtained
an accurate determination of the magnetic moment of the ground state. If we use their value of
+(0.0903 ±0.0007) nm, the above measurements

give -(0.153 ±0.004) nm for the magnetic moment
of the excited state, and a value of (3.33 ±0.10)xl0

5

oersteds for the effective magnetic field at the iron
nucleus. We note the opposite sign of the magnetic moment, which is an important feature of
the above interpretation.

We would like to thank B. F. Martinka and H. W.
Ostrander for generous assistance in the mechanical aspects of our work. We are grateful to
179

228

Volume 4, Number 4

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

G. W. Ludwig and H. H. Woodbury for communicating their results to us.

February

15,

1960

ters 3, 556 (1959).
S

R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev.

Letters 3, 554 (1959).

Work performed under the auspices of the U. S.
Atomic Energy Commission.
*G. J. Perlow, S. S. Hanna, M. Hamermesh,
C. Littlejohn, D. H. Vincent, R. S. Preston, and
J. Heberle, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 74 (1960).
2
J. P. Schiffer and W. Marshall, Phys. Rev. Let-

180

4
S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J. Perlow, R. S. Preston, and D. H. Vincent, Phys. Rev.
Letters4, 28 (I960).
5
G. DePasquali, H. Frauenfelder S. Margulies, and
R. N. Peacock, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 71 (1960).
6
G. W. Ludwig and H. H. Woodbury, Phys. Rev.
,

(to be published).

229

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 4, Number 8

April

15,

I960

EVIDENCE FOR QUADRUPOLE INTERACTION OF Fe 57w
AND INFLUENCE OF CHEMICAL BINDING ON NUCLEAR GAMMA -RAY ENERGY"
,

O. C. Kistner and A. W. Sunyar
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York
(Received March 30, 1960)

The recoil -free emission and resonant absorp57
1
tion of the 14.4 -kev nuclear gamma ray of Fe
has been used to determine the quadrupole coup57
bound in
ling for the 3/2- excited state of Fe
Fe 2 3 and to measure an energy shift of this
,

,

nuclear gamma ray which is attributed to effects
of chemical binding. This effect is corollary to
the effects of chemical environment on internal
2
conversion coefficients and on electron capture

disintegration rates.

3

These measurements also

yield the value of the internal magnetic field at

the position of the Fe

57

in antiferromagnetic

Fe 2

nucleus when it is bound
3.

The Ml emission line of Fe 57 bound in ordinary
metallic iron is split into six components by the

magnetic hyperfine interaction. 4 The resonant

limits.

The 14.4 -kev gamma ray was detected with a
The phosphor was
2 mm thick and 1.5 inches in diameter. The
counter face was located 5.4 cm above the upper
limit of vertical travel of the source. The absorber was placed 4.7 cm from the counter face.

Nal(Tl) scintillation counter.

A single -channel pulse -height analyzer selected
the 14.4 -kev gamma ray photopeak. The outputs
1000 cps clock were
switched between two pairs of scalers so as to
record counting rate and velocity separately for
both directions of source motion.
of this analyzer and the

Figure 1 shows the counting rate (in arbitrary

57

absorption of this emission spectrum by Fe
bound in Fe 2 3 has been examined, as well as

units) as a function of source velocity relative to

the much simpler absorption pattern which re57

sults when the "unsplit" emission line from Fe
bound in a stainless steel lattice 5 is used. Because the interpretation of the two sets of measurements agree, only the latter measurements
are presented in this Letter. The former measurements, in which a Co 57 source co -plated with
iron onto 1-mil copper was used, will only

briefly be remarked upon.

The ~2-mg/cm 2 Fe 2 3 absorber used in these
measurements contained Fe 57 enriched to -30%.
The source consisted of Co 57 plated onto 0.001inch stainless steel (25% Cr, 20% Ni). After
plating, this source was annealed for one hour
at 900°C in a hydrogen atmosphere. All measurements were made with source and absorber
at a temperature of 25°C.

In order to obtain a Doppler shift of the emis-

sion line, a uniform motion was obtained by

coupling a pneumatically driven cylinder to
another cylinder filled with oil, the ports of
which were connected via a needle valve. A

wide range of uniform velocities could be selected by adjusting this valve. The direction of
source travel was reversed automatically by
means of microswitches. Additional microswitches, set to exclude the region of nonuniform
motion near the travel limits, were used to provide gate signals for the counters.

by counting the cycles from a 1000 cps tuning
fork oscillator during the time between the gate

The distance

the Fe 2 3 absorber for the stainless steel source.
Absorption of the "unsplit" emission line at each
of the six possible absorption energies of Fe 57 in

Fe 2 3 is evident. The lack of symmetry of the
absorption pattern about zero velocity shows immediately that one is not dealing simply with a
magnetic hyperfine splitting pattern.
The velocities at which absorption peaks occur
are given in Table I. Experimental values have
been corrected by -2.5% to take account of the
effect of geometry on our velocity scale. These
absorption line velocities may be fitted precisely
in terms of an energy level diagram as shown
in Fig. 2. It is necessary to introduce an energy
shift AE = A£ x + AE 2 between the center of gravity
of the absorption lines of Fe 57 in Fe 2 3 and the
emission line of Fe 57 in stainless steel. In addition, an energy shift e, of positive or negative
sign, on the individual m states of the excited
level is required. This is interpreted as being
caused by a quadrupole interaction when Fe 57 is
bound in Fe 2 3 A least -squares fit to our data
yields the following splitting parameters (in
"velocity units") for the two Fe 57 nuclear states
.

g

'

= 0.611 ±0.005 cm/sec,

&' = 0.345 ±0.003 cm/sec,

AE= 0.047 ±0.003 cm/sec,

of travel between the limits of the counting gates

was 0.973 cm. Source velocity was determined
412

e=0.012 ±0.003 cm/sec.

.

230

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 4, Number 8

April

15,

I960

150

w 145

O
> 140

i
"

135

•

-10

-4-2024

-6

-8

6

8

10

VELOCITY OF SOURCE (mm /sec)

ENERGY CHANGE

,

E

FIG. 1. The absorption by Fe bound in Fe 2 3 of the 14.4-kev gamma ray emitted in the
decay of Fe^
bound in stainless steel as a function of relative source- absorber velocity.
Positive velocity indicates a motion of source toward absorber.
'

m

These data indicate that the ratio g /gt is
1.77 ± 0.02, in excellent agreement with the re4
sults of Hanna et al., and that the internal magnetic field in antiferromagnetic Fe 2 3 is larger
'

'

the 3/2- state, providing confirmation for this
fact as previously reported. 4

Let us now consider the effect of quadrupole

than in ferromagnetic iron by the factor 1.547
5
± 0.022. If we take 3.33 x 10 oersteds as the
value of the internal field 4 in Fe, we find a value

-

s
oersteds at the Fe nucleus in Fe 2 3
worth noting that the absorption peaks in
Fig. 1 (reading from left to right) should have
"thin absorber" intensity ratios of 3:2:1:1:2:3.
However, the relative intensities found for the
absorption peaks clearly exhibit evidence of saturation due to the rather large effective thickness of the enriched Fe 2 3 absorber. Nevertheless, the experimental intensity ratios are such
that an inverted hyperfine pattern is required for

of 5.15 x10

.

k{

It is

r

Velocities of maximum absorption (cor-

Table I.

rected for geometry) for a stainless steel source and
Fe 2 3 absorber. The negative signs indicate motions
of source

K
f

•

«c

away from absorber.
\

Relative source-absorber

Absorption line

velocity (cm/sec)

METAL

Fe

1/2+

— 3/2+

1/2+
1/2+

— 1/2+
— 1/2-

1/2-— 1/2+
1/21/2-

— 1/2— 3/2-

-0.789
-0.417
-0.076
+0.192
+0.536
+0.859

STAINLESS STEEL

FIG 2 Schematic representation of the ground and
14.4-kev excited states of Fe57 bound in ordinary iron,
Fe 2 3 and stainless steel. This diagram illustrates
the details of magnetic hyperfine splitting, quadrupole
interaction, and energy shifts due to chemical binding
.

.

,

effects

413

231

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 4, Number 8
interaction.

For a pure quadrupole spectrum,

in the case of axially symmetric field gradients,

the shift e for the substates of a spin / state is

given by 8
e

2

gQ

4/(27-1)

[3m 2 -/(/ + !)],

where q denotes (l/e)(d 2 V/dz 2 ). All other symbols have the conventional meanings. When
Zeeman splitting is combined with quadrupole
interaction, the precise energy shifts for the

individual

m states due to quadrupole interaction

depend upon the orientation of the magnetic axis
relative to the axis of symmetry for the electric
field gradient,

for all

and are in general not the same

m states. 7 However, for a case such as

we deal with here, where the quadrupole interaction is small compared to the magnetic interaction, the absolute magnitude of e is the same
for all

m states of the spin 3/2 state within the

accuracy of our measurements, independent of
the orientation of the crystal axes. Thus, we
2
9
find € = \\e qQ\ =0.012±0.003 cm/sec (5.75xl0~
ev).

Since our measurements indicate that the

shift of magnitude e is negative for the rn =±3/2

substates and positive for the

m =±1/2 substates,

the product e 2 qQ is negative.

The absolute value

suggestive of a small quadrupole moment for
p e 57w although this statement cannot be ampli-

is

fied further without knowledge of electric field

gradients in Fe 2

3

.

using the emission lines of Fe
3

57

bound in
ordinary iron, we find an energy shift upward
(see Fig. 2) of AE^O.04 cm/sec. Within the
accuracy of our measurements, the splitting
parameters g ', g^, and e remain the same. A
separate measurement of the absorption by Fe 57
bound in stainless steel of the emission lines of
Fe 57 in ordinary iron confirms the implied existence of an energy shift downward (see Fig. 2)
of AE 2 = 0.01

cm/sec in this case.

The existence of an energy shift AE =(2.26±0.15)
xlO" 8 ev between stainless steel and Fe 2 3 has
been definitely established. We will now discuss
the ways in which differences in chemical environment may produce such a shift. (1) Source and
absorber will in general have different Debye
temperatures. Since the nucleus in its excited
state has a slightly greater rest mass than when
it is in its ground state, the energy difference
between the nuclear states will decrease from its
value for an "unbound" system by different

414

15,

I960

amounts because of the difference in the zeropoint energies. This reduction in energy is larger for the substance having the higher Debye
temperature. (2) In addition, when a lattice is
at a finite temperature, the energy difference
between the nuclear states is reduced further by
virtue of the previously reported temperature
8
effect.
Since the magnitude of this reduction
depends upon the integral of the specific heat of
the lattice up to the temperature of the substance,
it will be larger for the substance having the
lower Debye temperature. We expect this temperature effect to be small, although it should be
noted that it acts to reduce the energy shift between different substances which results from
zero-point energy differences. The sign and
magnitude of the observed shift between stainless steel and Fe 2 3 would require that Fe 2 3
have a considerably lower Debye temperature
than stainless steel or ordinary iron. Were this
the case, the Debye -Waller factor would materially depress the recoil -free resonant yield in
Fe 2 3 a result which is not indicated by the data.
(3) When chemical environment is altered, a
nuclear isotope shift may result. This effect has
its origin in the change in the electronic wave
functions over the region of space occupied by
the nucleus, s electrons may be expected to contribute most to this effect. Since s electrons are
in effect removed in going from Fe in metal to
Fe in Fe 2 3 a smaller charge radius for Fe 57W
than for Fe 57 in its ground state would produce a
shift in the observed direction. The direction of
the observed energy shift AE requires the presence of the nuclear isotope shift, since the zeropoint energy shift is in the opposite direction.
This nuclear isotope shift is similar to the isomeric isotope shift9 observed in the optical spec,

,

In our earlier absorption measurements on

Fe 2

April

trum of Hg 197

.

We wish to emphasize two additional points
about recoil -free emission and absorption experiments when source and absorber are chemically different. First, the existence of energy
shifts introduces asymmetries into the absorption pattern which make it essential not to combine data taken at equal velocities of opposite
sense. Second, any recoil -free absorption at
zero velocity is accidental. In general, therefore, a search for this effect by comparing absorption at zero velocity with absorption at a
large relative velocity between source and absorber will not yield significant results unless
source and absorber are identical chemically. It

232

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 4, Number 8

is amusing to note that in the absorption by

of the emission lines of Fe

57

Fe 2

3

in ordinary iron,

two such accidental coincidences do indeed occur
to give substantial absorption at zero velocity.

We wish to thank many of our colleagues,
particularly M. Goldhaber and J. Weneser, for
interesting discussions, and G. K. Wertheim
for providing us with a sample of the particular

stainless steel used in his measurements.

5

April

15,

I960

3
R. F. Leininger, E. Segre, and C. Wiegand, Phys.
Rev. 76, 897 (1949).
4
S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J. Perlow, R. S. Preston, and D. H. Vincent, Phys. Rev.
Letters 4, 177 (1960).
5
G. K. Wertheim (private communication) has informed us that Fe57 in stainless steel exhibits a single
absorption line. [See G. K. Wertheim, this issue,
Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 403(1960).]
6
T. P. Das and E. L. Hahn, Nuclear Quadrupole
Resonance Spectroscopy Solid State Physics, Suppl. 1
(Academic Press Inc., New York, 1958).
7
P. M. Parker, J. Chem. Phys. 24, 1096 (1956).
8
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr. Phys. Rev.
,

Work done under the auspices of the U.S. Atomic
Energy Commission.
*R. L. Mbssbauer, Z. Physik 151, 124 (1958).
2
K. T. Bainbridge, M. Goldhaber, and E. Wilson,
Phys. Rev. 90, 430 (1953).

,

Letters 4, 274 (1960).
9
A. C. Melissinos andS. P. Davis, Phys. Rev. 115
130(1959).

,

415

.

.

233

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 6, Number 2

January

1961

15,

ELECTRIC QUADRUPOLE SPLITTING AND THE NUCLEAR
VOLUME EFFECT IN THE IONS OF Fe 87 t
S. DeBenedetti, G. Lang, and R. Ingalls*
Carnegie Institute of Technology, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
(Received December 19, 1960)

where R e and R g are the charge radii of the nu-

A study of the Mo'ssbauer spectra of Fe 57 in
chemical compounds has revealed some striking
regularities. Typical transmission curves for
Fe ++ and Fe +++ ionic compounds relative to an
unsplit room -temperature stainless steel source
are shown in Figs. 1 and 2, respectively. Both

clear excited and ground states.

*^(0) is the

s -electron density at the position of the nucleus.

B is a constant which is 1.76 xlO cm/sec for
9

iron when R^p an(j ^2(
units,

2

p =(1 - oPZ )

are expressed in atomic

)

m is a relativistic factor equal
5

patterns exhibit a shift of the center of gravity

to 0.982 for iron.

from the zero of velocity, and the curve of Fe ++
shows the two absorption lines characteristic of

An estimate of Rg/R e may be made if one neglects the influence of the crystalline surroundings

a pure nuclear electric quadrupole interaction.
The quantities 6 and A£, which characterize

and uses wave functions 6 for the free iron ions.
Using (1) and the room -temperature shifts (which
are less sensitive to differences in 6 than are the
low-temperature shifts), we obtain

these effects, are defined in the figures; their
values for various compounds are shown in
Table I. It is noteworthy that the value of 6 and
the low -temperature value of &E are, for a given
iron ion, relatively independent of the chemical

combination.

6

+++

«B(R
e

«/

P)[

~

*

++

(0)

We have neglected the small difference A ++ -A +++
2

Watson's wave functions yield *++ 2 (0)< * +++ (0);

The center of gravity displacement, or chemical shift, 1 arises from two mechanisms: (a) the

the extra electron in Fe ++ apparently shields the

second order Doppler shift, 2 3 which is caused by
lattice vibrations, and is a function A(T s ,T a ,9 s ,6 a )
of the source and absorber temperatures and
Debye temperatures, and (b) the nuclear volume
4 5
which represents the change, from
effect,
source to absorber, in the modification of the
nuclear transition energy caused by electrons
'

Equation (2) yields R /R e

3s electrons slightly.
= 1.001.

Watson

6 7
'

g

has also calculated wave functions

for the outer electron configurations 3d8 4s 2 and
8

3d for iron.

Using an equation similar to (2) one

'

overlapping the finite nucleus. The total shift in
a Mo'ssbauer spectrum may be written:
2
2p
2p
6 *A(T
T e e ) + B(R
-R
(0) - */(())],
)[*
e
s
q s a
a
g
,

,

,

obtains the shifts expected for each case:

=-0.178 cm/sec for 3d4 4s 2

6

Fe

+0.182 cm/sec for 3d8

,

.

When metallic iron is used as an absorber with
the stainless steel source at room temperature,

(1)

a shift of +0.01 cm/sec results.
is

r
V

uji.ao

+1
+ 2
+3
+4
SOURCE VELOCITY (mm/sec)

-I

Mbssbauer spectrum of the Fe++ ion in an

FIG. 1
absorber of FeSo4 '7H 2
.

at nitrogen temperature using

a room-temperature stainless steel source. The pattern exhibits the chemical shift 6 and the electric quad-

O
O
UJlOO

H
£

.

'

\

M.IO
-2

Since this value

midway between the above calculated values,

«*T
-2

-1

(\

+2

+|

SOURCE VELOCITY

+3

(mm/feec)

rupole splitting A£ of the excited state of the Fe5T nucleus. The velocity is positive for the source approach-

FIG. 2. Mbssbauer spectrum of the Fe +++ ion in a
FeCl s absorber at nitrogen temperature using a roomtemperature stainless steel source
The velocity is

ing the absorber

positive for the source approaching the absorber

60

.

234

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 6, Number 2

January

15,

1961

A list of quadrupole splittings A£ and chemical shifts 6 relative to the emission line from a stainless

Table I.

steel source at room temperature.

A£(cm/sec)

Temperature

Fe 2
Fe 2

3

3

6(cm/sec)

Room

0.024 ±0.003

0.047 ±0.003

a

Room

0.024

0.050

b

Fe 2 (S04 3

Room

0.064

Fe 2 (S04 3

Room

0.055 ±0.005

this work

Fe 2 (S04 3

Nitrogen

0.065 ±0.005

this work

FeCl 3

Room

0.045 ±0.005

this work

FeCl 3

Nitrogen

0.065 ±0.005

this work

FeCl 2 -4H 2

Room

0.300 ±0.005

0.135 ±0.005

this work

FeCl 2 -4H 2

Nitrogen

0.310 ±0.005

0.145 ±0.005

this work

FeS0 4 -7H 2

Room

0.320 ±0.005

0.140 ±0.005

this work

FeSCy7H 2

Nitrogen

0.360 ±0.005

0.150 ±0.005

this work

Fe(NH4 ) 2 (S0 4 ) 2 •6H 2

Room

0.175 ±0.005

0.140 ±0.005

this work

Fe(NH4 2 (S04 2 •6H 2

Nitrogen

0.270 ±0.005

0.150 ±0.005

this work

FeF,

Room

0.268

)

)

)

)

)

b

c

a See reference 4.
I.

Solomon, Proceedings of the Allerton Park Conference on Mbssbauer Effect, University of Illinois,
Urbana, Illinois, June 5-7, 1960 (unpublished), Sec. lie.

"G. K.

it

Wertheim, Phys. Rev. 121, 63 (1961).

strongly suggests that metallic iron has an
7

outer electron configuration equivalent to 3d 4s

where y is the Sternheimer antishielding
Taking A£ to be 0.3 cm/sec one obtains
Q(l -y) s= 0.1 b, where Q is the nuclear electric

(1 -y),
1
.

Although the electric quadrupole splitting seems
it is roughly the
same at low temperatures for all the Fe ++ compounds listed in Table I. This suggests that the
relevant field gradient is mainly caused by the
++
ion has an outer elecion alone. The free Fe
6
5
tron configuration of 3d and is in a Z? state.
Five of these 3d electrons have their spins aligned
to be temperature dependent,

and together form a spherically symmetric distribution of charge. The sixth electron has opposite spin and also a choice of the five possible

factor.
I

I

quadrupole moment for the excited state of Fe".
The temperature dependence of the quadrupole
splitting could be caused by thermal excitation of
++
the Fe
ion into a state which yields a lower field
gradient at the nucleus. For sufficiently rapid
ionic transitions, the nucleus will respond to the
time average of the field gradient. This interpretation indicates that the level splitting of the Fe ++
ion in Fe(NH 4 ) 2 (S04 ) 2 -6H 2

is sufficiently small

that significant excitation occurs at room tempera-

values of mj. The crystal symmetry dictates the
m/ combination the ion will actually take. For
sufficiently low symmetry the lowest energy state

ture.

will be a linear combination of the two states with

is negligible field gradient from this ion,

mi equal to 2 and -2. Assuming this, and neg-

6
5
its 3d electron configuration gives a S state.
The splitting that does occur 4 is therefore caused
by field gradients from the neighboring ions rather
than from the Fe +++ ion itself.

lecting all other possible effects of the crystalline
environment, it is possible to calculate the ionic
field gradient at the nucleus to within the factor

It

is

noted that there is very little quadrupole
Presumably there
since

splitting in the case of Fe +++

.

61

.

235

Volume 6, Number 2

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

We are grateful to Professor J. Michael Radcliff e for

'''This

some very helpful discussions.

work was supported by the Office of Naval

Research.
'Submitted by R. Ingalls in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy at
the Carnegie Institute of Technology.
*0.
Kistner, Proceedings of the Allerton Park
Conference on Mossbauer Effect, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, June 5-7, 1960 (unpublished),

C

62

January

15,

1961

Sec. He.
2
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr.
Letters 4, 274 (1960).

,

Phys. Rev.

3

B. D. Josephson, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 341 (1960)
4
0. C. Kistner and A. W. Sunyar, Phys. Rev.
Letters 4, 412 (1960).
5
G. Breit, Revs. Modern Phys. 30, 507 (1958).
6
R. E. Watson, Technical Report No. 12, SolidState and Molecular Theory Group, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (unpublished),
7

R. E. Watson, Phys. Rev. 119, 1934 (1960).

-

-

-

236

Volume 6, Number 3

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

February

1961

1,

INTERPRETATION OF THE Fe 57 ISOMER SHIFT
L. R. Walker, G. K. Wertheim,
Bell Telephone Laboratories,

and V. Jaccarino
Murray Hill, New Jersey

(Received January 3, 1961)

We have made a systematic study of the Mo'ssbauer effect 1 of Fe 57 in di- and tri-valent iron
compounds and in d-group metals. The observed
"isomer shift"2 measures the total s -electron
The shift in compounds
is shown to depend mainly upon the 3d configuration of iron involved and to a lesser extent upon
the "chemical" bond. The Hartree-Fock calcula3
tions of Watson on the various 3d configurations
of iron are combined with the data on the shifts
in the most ionic compounds to obtain a calibration of the shift in terms of s -electron density.
This enables us to estimate the difference in
charge radius of the ground state and isomeric
57
state of Fe
We associate the shift of an Fe
solute ion in a d -group metal with the addition of
some fraction of a 4s electron to an Fe 3d 7 configuration; an estimate of the 4s-electron wave
function density at the nucleus from the FermiSegre-Goudsmit (FSG) formula4 enables this
density at the nucleus.

.

energies of the emitted and absorbed gamma rays
were noticeably different if the emitter and absorber were two dissimilar lattices containing
iron. The origin of this effect is as follows.
The ground and isomeric levels of the nucleus

have different effective charge radii; the electrostatic interaction with the electronic charge
is then different in the two states and the gamma
ray energy is consequently changed (relative to
its value for a point nucleus) by an amount pro-

portional to the s -electron density at the nucleus.

s-electron density is different for the absorber and emitter, the difference in gamma
ray energies, E a -E e is defined as the isomer

If the

,

shift.

E -E

2

=f7rZe [K io

is

2

-K

2

gr

][l^(0)

2
l

2

-l^(0)

I

],

(1)

and ground states and l^(0) a 2 and \ip(0) e 2 are
l

I

the total s-electron densities at the nucleus for

fraction to be determined.
5
Kistner and Sunyar first observed in the recoil

free emission and resonant absorption of the
14.4-kev nuclear gamma ray of Fe S7 that the
,

absorber and emitter, respectively. 9 It is to be
noted that the sign of the shift has its origin in
the fact that the level energy is lower the more

237

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 6, Number 3

February

1,

1961

compact the charge distribution.

An examination of the restricted Hartree-Fock
calculations of Watson

3

shows that there are

significant differences in the value of l^3S (0)l

2

for different 3d configurations of iron; the change
2
and l^2 s(°)l 2 is substantially smaller.
perhaps worthwhile to point out that unrestricted Hartree-Fock calculations, which exhibit the imbalance of up and down spin density
(exchange polarization effect), appear to give the
same total density at the nucleus as the restricted
2
procedure. 7 The variation of
sS (0)I is such as
to correspond to different degrees of shielding
of 3s by 3d electrons. To calibrate the observed

in l^ lS (0)l
It is

I</j

shifts in terms of total s -electron density,

we

associate the difference in the shifts for the most
2+
ionic Fe
and Fe 3+ compounds with the differ2
6
ence in Watson's values of
n =Jl^ws (0)l for 3d

£

and 3d 5 configurations. When an Fe atom is in2
troduced into a d -group host metal,
w <pns {0)
will also contain a contribution from 4s conduction electrons. Hartree-Fock calculations do
n
not exist for single 4s electrons outside 3d con4
figurations, but the FSG formula, combined with
w
8
the known term value of 3d 4s configurations,
provides an entirely adequate estimate of l^4S (0) 2
In Fig. 1 is shown a possible interpretation of
the observed shifts making use of the above ideas.
The total s-electron density in atomic units is
plotted as ordinate. Watson's values for
2
7
2En=?l^ns (0)l for the Fe 3d * configurations
from n = 4 to n = 8 are indicated on the left. The
scale on the right for MOssbauer center- of- gravi-

£

I

I

I

ty shifts relative to stainless steel is established
by identifying the shifts in the most ionic Fe2+
and Fes+ with Watson's densities for 3d and 3d 5 ,

The solid straight lines represent
n x
s-electron densities for hypothetical 3d \s con-

respectively.
figurations.

They are drawn on the assumption

that the density for such a configuration is of the

form \ip(3dn )\ 2 +x\ip4S (0)\ 2 where l^4S (0)l 2 is
calculated from the FSG formula for a single 4s
electron outside the 3d" configuration. This
assumes no screening of inner s electrons by
the single 4s electron. 9 Curves for the configurations 3d8_x 4sJf and 3d 7 "*4s* are indicated by
dashed lines and were obtained by extrapolation
and interpolation of the FSG formula. The experimental data are given in Table I.
The shifts for Fe in various metals have been
represented as horizontal lines of a length sufficient to cover what appear to be the most plausible configurations. Since for Fe in Fe metal
there are certainly 8 electrons to be accounted
,

FIG.

1.

A possible interpretation of the Fe" Mbss-

bauer isomer shifts In various solids.

The total s-electron density is plotted as a function of the percentage

of 45 character for various d -electron configurations.

.

The reasons for placing the experimental data on given
The con-

theoretical curves are discussed in the text.
~
stant C = 11 873 a t 3 .

for, the evidence seems to point clearly to the
7
configuration 3d 4s for this case. The smallness of the spread in shifts between the different
metals indicates strongly that the configuration

of the solute Fe is substantially the same in the

metals investigated. For the Fe2+ and Fes+
compounds, the experimental data are entered
x
upon the 3d6 4s and 3d 54s* curves, respectively.
This is consistent with the idea that in these
covalent compounds the 4s atomic orbitals are
partially occupied by electrons from the ligand
ions (bonding orbitals). 10 11 The data for the
"ferro" and "ferri" cyanides of potassium have
not been plotted since it is not clear how to fit
them into the above scheme. Indeed, since they
'

have ground states which do not follow Hund's
rule, it is unlikely that Watson's calculations are
applicable to them. The fact that the isomer
shifts in both cyanides are very small relative
to each other and to stainless steel appears to be
fortuitous.

From the observed isomer shift and the calculated difference in

2
I

^<0)

I

for the d 5 and de

free-ion configurations we may compute the dif-

ference of the excited and ground-state charge
99

238

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 6, Number 3

Table I. Observed shifts in gamma-ray energy in
various iron compounds and d -group metals measured
relative to type 310 stainless steel. (Source and absorber at room temperature.) The measured shifts
contain contributions from the second-order Doppler
shift and the zero-point energy shift in addition to the
isomer shift discussed here. Measurements at 77°K a
indicate that the second-order Doppler shift contributions are small compared to the total shift.

More-

over, since the Doppler shifts are likely to be of similar magnitudes in the compounds considered, they

will cancel, since we are ultimately concerned only

with differences in the shifts between similar materials. The same is true of the zero-point energy shift.
The uncertainty in comparing metals with salts is

considerably greater. To convert the shifts from
cm/sec to Mc/sec, one should multiply the values by
116. The errors indicated reflect the uncertainty in
the last significant figure.

Shift

(cm/sec)

3d*

FeF 2 (single crystal)

0.140 ±5

3d*

KFeFj

0.139 ±5

3d*

FeSCv 7H 2

0.140 ±5

3d*

FeCl 2 4H 2

0.130 ±5

3d*

FeS

3d 6

Fe 2 (S0 4 ) 3 eHjO

0.052 ±5

3d 5

Fe 20,b

0.047 ±5

3d 8

Yttrium-iron garnet,
octahedral

0.057 ±5

3d'

Yttrium -iron garnet,

-

~0.11
-

tetrahedral

Metals

±1

0.026 ±5

FeS 2 (pyrites)

0.048 ±5

FeS 2 (marcasite)

0.048 ±5

Feb

0.015 ±5

Co

0.012 ±5

February

1,

1961

assuming the usual charge
radius dependence on mass number, i.e.,
R = \.20A U3 xlO~ i3 cm. We obtain t>R/R = 1.8xl0' 3
radii using Eq. (1),

as the fractional change in the charge radius,
with the effective radius of the ground state
larger than that of the excited state. This result
12
is not unexpected
in sign and magnitude. The
shell model predicts that the ground state for 3
odd neutrons outside a closed shell (28 neutrons),
corresponding to a hole in the 2p 3f2 shell, is one
for which 7 = 3/2, as is the case for the 14-kev
excited state. The large spin-orbit coupling precludes the possibility of a 2p v2 configuration
being the ground state.
Using the radial moments for an isotropic
square well 13 and even assuming a proton excitation corresponding to A/ = 3 or 4, one still
obtains a value of only 2xl0" 3 for bR/R. (The
more likely case of a neutron excitation would
leave the charge radius unchanged in a first approximation.) It is most unlikely therefore that
the ground state is a simple shell state. It is
interesting to note that the charge radius change
expected for the addition of one particle (isotope
shift at A = 57) is bR/R = $(6A/A) = 5.9xl0" 3
In the isomeric transition of Hg197 (I
=1/2
2
/ ex = 13/2), it was estimated that the charge redistribution corresponded to an increase of onefourth to one -fifth of that observed experimentally
for the addition of one neutron at A =157. (The
excited state has the larger charge distribution
in this case.) Since both states are identifiable
as single -particle neutron states, it is clear that
a general charge redistribution accompanies the
isomeric transition.
We would like to thank W. E. Blumberg, A. M.
Clogston, and M. Goldhaber for several critical
.

—

discussions.
!

R. L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik 151, 124(1958).

isomer shift was first observed in the optical spectra
Ni

0.015 ±5

Mn

-0.008 ±2

Cr

-0.005 ±2

Mo

-0.001 ±2

K4Fe(CN) 6 '3H 2

0.0083 ±10

K s Fe(CN) s

0.0000 ±10

of Hg 197 (ground state /= 1/2, excited state /= 13/2);
A. C. Melissinos and S. P. Davis, Phys. Rev. 115
130 (1959). If one accepts "isotope shift" to be the
proper name for charge redistribution effects resulting
,

from addition of particles, the name "isomer shift" is
Un-

the logical choice for the effect discussed herein.

Cyanides

a R. L. Ingalls, G. Lang, and S. DeBenedetti, Bull.

Am. Phys. Soc. 5, 429 (1960).
"See reference 5.
'See reference 6.

100

fortunately, the phrase "chemical shift" has been used
to describe Mossbauer isomer shifts in the past.
3
R. E. Watson, Solid State and Molecular Theory
Group, Technical Report No. 12, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, June 15, 1959 (unpublished).
4
E. Fermi and E. Segre, Z. Physik 82, 729 (1933);
S. A. Goudsmit, Phys. Rev. 43, 636 (1933).
s
O. C. Kistner and A. W. Sunyar, Phys. Rev. Letters
A temperature-dependent shift had been
4, 412(1960).

239

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 6. Number 3

previously observed and identified as a second-order
Doppler shift resulting from the thermal motion of the
atoms. See R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys.
Rev. Letters 4, 274(1960).
3828 (1960). Apart
•i. Solomon, Compt. rend. 250
from the numerical constant which was not given in
this reference, our Eq. (1) is the same as the result
,

given there.
T

R. E. Watson and A. J. Freeman, Phys. Rev. 120

1125(1960).
8
C. E. Moore, Atomic Energy Levels , National
Bureau of Standards Circular No. 467 (U. S. Govern-

,

February

1,

1961

ment Printing Office, Washington, D. C.

1952), Vol. 2
R. E. Watson, Phys. Rev. 119, 1934 (1960). An
2
estimate of the charge |fy,(0) for the inner s electron
9

|

was made from this reference in which the configurations 3dn

~2

4s l are considered.

,0
J. S. Van Wieringen, Discussions Faraday Soc.
No. 19, 118(1955).
u The effect of covalency on the occupation of d orbit -

als is neglected.
12
,3

M. Goldhaber (private communication).
Revs. Modern Phys.

J. Eisinger and V. Jaccarino,

30, 528 (1958).

101

240

PHYSICAL REVIEW
LETTERS
APRIL 1, I960

Volume 4

Number 7

APPARENT WEIGHT OF PHOTONS*
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr.
Lyman Laboratory of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts
(Received March 9, 1960)

As we proposed a few months ago, 1 we have now
measured the effect, originally hypothesized by
Einstein,

2

of gravitational potential on the ap-

parent frequency of electromagnetic radiation by
using the sharply defined energy of recoil -free
y rays emitted and absorbed in solids, as discovered by MCssbauer. 3 We have already reported4 a detailed study of the shape and width of
the line obtained at room temperature for the

14.4-kev,

0. 1 -microsecond

level in Fe

57
.

Partic-

ular attention was paid to finding the conditions
required to obtain a narrow line. We found that
the line had a Lorentzian shape with a fractional
full -width at half -height of 1.13 xlO

-12

when the

source was carefully prepared according to a
prescription developed from experience. We have
also investigated the 93-kev, 9.4 -microsecond
67
level of Zn at liquid helium and liquid nitrogen
temperatures using several combinations of
source and absorber environment, but have not
observed a usable resonant absorption. That work
will be reported later. The fractional width and
57
intensity of the absorption in Fe
seemed sufficient to measure the gravitational effect in the

laboratory.

As a preliminary, we sought possible sources
of systematic error that would interfere with

measurements of small changes in frequency using
this medium.

Early in our development of the instrumentation necessary for this experiment, we
concluded that there were asymmetries in, or
frequency differences between, the lines of given
combinations of source and absorber which vary
from one combination to another. Thus it is ab-

solutely necessary to measure a change in the
relative frequency that is produced by the per-

Observation of a frequency difference between a given source and
absorber cannot be uniquely attributed to this
perturbation. More recently, we have discovered
and explained a variation of frequency with temperature of either the source or absorber. 8 We
conclude that the temperature difference between
the source and absorber must be accurately
known and its effect considered before any meaning can be extracted from even a change observed
when the perturbation is altered.
The basic elements of the apparatus finally
developed to measure the gravitational shift in
frequency were a carefully prepared source
containing 0.4 curie of 270-day Co 57 and a carefully prepared, rigidly supported, iron film absorber. Using the results of our initial experiment, we requested the Nuclear Science and
Engineering Corporation to repurify their nickel
cyclotron target by ion exchange to reduce cobalt
carrier. Following the bombardment, in a special
run in the high -energy proton beam of the highcurrent cyclotron at the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, they electroplated the separated
Co 57 onto one side of a 2-in. diameter, 0.005-in.
thick disk of Armco iron according to our preturbation being studied.

,

scription. After this disk was received, it was
heated to 900°-1000°C for one hour in a hydrogen
atmosphere 6 to diffuse the cobalt into the iron
foil about 3xl0"

5

cm.

The absorber made by Nuclear Metals Inc.,
was composed of seven separate units. Each
337

|

241

Volume 4, Number 7
unit consisted of about 80
in Fe

57

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS
mg of iron, enriched

1,

I960

The absorption of the 14.4 -kev y ray by air in
the path was reduced by running a 16-in. diam-

to 31.9%, electroplated onto a polished

eter, cylindrical, Mylar bag with thin end windows and filled with helium through most of the
distance between source and absorber. To
sweep out small amounts of air diffusing into the
bag, the helium was kept flowing through it at a

side of a 3 -in. diameter, 0.040-in. thick disk of

beryllium.

April

The electroplating technique required

considerable development to produce films with
absorption lines of width and strength that satis fied our tests. The films finally accepted, resonantly absorbed about 1/3 the recoil -free y rays

rate of about 30 liters/hr.

from our source. Each unit of the absorber was
mounted over the 0.001 -in. Al window of a

The over -all experiment is described by the
block diagram of Fig. 1. The source was moved
sinusoidally by either a ferroelectric or a movingcoil magnetic transducer. During the quarter of

3 in. x 1/4 in. Nal(Tl) scintillation crystal in-

tegrally mounted on a Dumont 6363 multiplier

The multiplier supply voltages were

the modulation cycle centered about the time of

separately adjusted to equalize their conversion
gains, and their outputs were mixed.

tion spectrometer, adjusted to select the 14.4-

phototube.

maximum velocity the pulses from the scintillakev y-ray line, were fed into one scaler -while,
during the opposite quarter cycle, they were fed
into another. The difference in counts recorded
was a measure of the asymmetry in, or frequencyshift between, the emission and absorption lines.
As a precaution the relative phase of the gating
pulses and the sinusoidal modulation were displayed continuously. The data were found to be
insensitive to phase changes much larger than
the drifts of phase observed.
A completely duplicate system of electronics,
controlled by the same gating pulses, recorded

The required stable vertical baseline was conveniently obtained in the enclosed, isolated tower
of the Jefferson Physical Laboratory.

7

A statis-

tical argument suggests that the precision of a

measurement of the gravitational frequency shift
should be independent of the height.

Instrumental

instability but more significantly the sources of

systematic error mentioned above are less critical compared to the larger fractional shifts ob-

tained with an increased height.

Our net operating

baseline of 74 feet required only conveniently
realizable control over these sources of error.

HYDRAULIC

MASTER

RACK S PINION
CLOCK DRIVE

^#fr

m^
JULTL^LTL

MONITOR

CHANNEL
AMPLIFIER

AND
PULSE

HEIGHTr

-

SELECTOR

AMPLIFIER

AND
PULSE HEIGHT
SELECTOR

COINCIDENCE
CIRCUIT

|

COUNTER

MERCURY
RELAYS

DISCRIMINATOR

COINCIDENCE

__

CIRCUIT

_ MERCURY
RELAYS

DISCRIMINATOR

|cqunter|

FIG. 1. A block diagram of the over-all experimental arrangement. The source and absorber-detector units were frequently interchanged. Sometimes a ferroelectric and sometimes a moving-coil magnetic transducer was used with frequencies ranging from 10 to 50 cps.

338

242

Volume 4, Number 7

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

data from a counter having a 1-in. diameter,
0.015-in. thick Nal(Tl) scintillation crystal cov-

ered by an absorber similar to the main absorber. This absorber and crystal unit was mounted
to see the source from only three feet away.
This monitor channel measured the stability of
the over -all modulation system, and, because of
its higher counting rate, had a smaller statistical
uncertainty.

The relation between the counting rate difference and relative frequency shifts between the
emission and absorption lines was measured
directly by adding a Doppler shift several times
the size of the gravitational shift to the emission
line. The necessary constant velocity was introduced by coupling a hydraulic cylinder of large
bore carrying the transducer and source to a
master cylinder of small bore connected to a
rack -and -pinion driven by a clock.
Combining data from two periods having Doppler shifts of equal magnitude, but opposite sign,
allowed measurement of both sensitivity and
relative frequency shift. Because no sacrifice
of valuable data resulted, the sensitivity was

calibrated about 1/3 of the operating time which

was as often as convenient without recording the
data automatically. In this way we were able to
pUminate errors due to drifts in sensitivity such
as would be anticipated from gain or discriminator drift, changes in background, or changes in
modulation swing.
The second order Doppler shift resulting from
lattice vibrations required that the temperature
difference between the source and absorber be
controlled or monitored. A difference of 1°C
would produce a shift as large as that sought, so
the potential difference of a thermocouple with
one junction at the source and the other at the

main absorber was recorded. An identical system was provided for the monitor channel. The
recorded temperature data were integrated over
a counting period, and the average determined
to 0.03°C. The temperature coefficient of frequency which we have used to correct the data,
was calculated from the specific heat of a lattice
having a Debye temperature of 420°K. Although
at room temperature this coefficient is but weakly
dependent on the Debye temperature, residual
error in the correction for, or control of, the
temperature difference limits the ability to measure frequency shifts and favors the use of a large
height difference for the gravitational experiment.
Data typical of those collected are shown in
Table I. The right -hand column is the data after

April

1,

I960

correction for temperature difference. All data
are expressed as fractional frequency shift xlO15
The difference of the shift seen with y rays rising
and that with y rays falling should be the result
of gravity. The average for the two directions
of travel should measure an effective shift of
other origin, and this is about four times the
difference between the shifts. We confirmed that
this shift was an inherent property of the particular combination of source and absorber by measuring the shift for each absorber unit in turn,
with temperature correction, when it was six
inches from the source. Although this test was
not exact because only about half the area of each
absorber was involved, the weighted mean shift
from this test for the combination of all absorber
units agreed well with that observed in the main
experiment. The individual fractional frequency
shifts found for these, for the monitor absorber,
as well as for a 11.7-mg/cm 2 Armco iron foil,
are displayed in Table II. The considerable variation among them is as striking as the size of
the weighted mean shift. Such shifts could result
from differences in a range of about 11 % in effective Debye temperature through producing
differences in net second order Doppler effect.
Other explanations based on hyperfine structure
including electric quadrupole interactions are
also plausible. Although heat treatment might be
expected to change these shifts for the iron -plated
beryllium absorbers, experience showed that the
line width was materially increased by such
treatment, probably owing to interdiffusion. The
presence of a significant shift for even the Armco
foil relative to the source, both of which had received heat treatments, suggests that it is unlikely
one would have, without test, a shift of this sort
smaller than the gravitational effect expected in
even our "two-way" baseline of 148 feet. The
apparently fortuitous smallness of the shift of
the monitor absorber relative to our source corresponds to the shift expected for about 30 feet
.

of height difference.

Recently Cranshaw, Schiffer, and Whitehead 8
claimed to have measured the gravitational shift
using the y ray of Fe 57 They state that they believe their 43% statistical uncertainty represents
the major error. Two much larger sources of
error apparently have not been considered: (1)
the temperature difference between the source
and absorber, and (2) the frequency difference
inherent in a given combination of source and
absorber. From the above discussion, only 0.6°C
of temperature difference would produce a shift
.

339

5

l

=

243

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 4, Number 7

April

1,

I960

Table I. Data from the first four days of counting. The data are expressed as fractional frequency difference
between source and absorber multiplied by 10 15 as derived from the appropriate sensitivity calibration. The
negative signs mean that the y ray has a frequency lower than the frequency of maximum absorption at the ab,

sorber.
Shift

Temperature

Net

Period

observed

correction

shift

Feb. 22, 5 p.m.

-11.5 ±3.0
-16.4 ±2. 2 a

-9.2
-5.9
-5.3
-8.0

-20. 7 ±3.0

-10.5
-10.6

-19.2 ±2.0

Source at bottom

-13.8±1.3
-11.9±2.1 a
-8.7 ±2.0 a
-10.5 ±2.0

Feb. 23, 10 p.m.

-22.3 ±2.2
-19.1 ±1.3

-19.9±2.1

-21.0±2.0
Weighted average 1 -19.7 ±0.8

Source at top
Feb. 24,

-12.0±4.1
-5.7±1.4
-7.4±2.1 a
-6.5±2.1 a

a.m.

-14. 8 ±2.1
-12.3±2.1
-21.4±3.1
-12.3±3.0
-15.4±2.0
-17.9 ±2.6
Weighted average -15.5±0.8
Mean shift = -17.6 ±0.6
Difference of averages = -4.2 ±1.1

-13.9 ±3. a

-6.6±3.0
-6.5 ±2.0 a
-10.0±2.6

Feb. 25, 6 p.m.

-20.6 ±4.1
-15.3 ±1.4

-8.6
-9.6
-7.4
-5.8
-7.5
-5.7
-8.9
-7.9

a These data were taken simultaneously with a sensitivity calibration.

Table II. Data on asymmetries of various absorbers in apparent fractional frequency shift multiplied
15

by 10
In the third column we tabulate the Debye
temperature increase of the absorber above that of the
source which could account for the shift.
.

Absorber

(AiV^)xio 15

A8j) in "K

No. 1
No. 2
No. 3
No. 4
No. 5
No. 6
No. 7
Weighted mean
of No. 1-No. 7
Monitor absorber

-8.4*2.5

+15 ±4
+41 ±6
+48 ±6
+33 ±6
+41 ±6
+29 ±4
+33 ±6

Armco foil

-24 ±3.
-28 ±3.
-19 ±3.
-24 ±3.

-17 ±2.5
-19 ±3.

-19 ±3.0

+0.55 ±0.15

+10±3.5

+33 ±5
-0.95 ±0.26
-17 ±6

as large as the whole effect observed.

Their

additional experiment at the shortened height dif-

ference of three meters does not, without concomitant temperature data, resolve the question

340

of inherent frequency difference. Their stated
disappointment with the over -all line width observed would seem to add to the probability of
existence of such a shift. They mention this
broadening in connection with its possible influence on the sensitivity, derived rather than
measured, owing to a departure from Lorentzian
shape. Clearly such a departure is even more
important in allowing asymmetry.
Our experience shows that no conclusion can
be drawn from the experiment of Cranshaw et al.
If the frequency -shift inherent in our sourceabsorber combination is not affected by inversion
of the relative positions, the difference between
shifts observed with rising and falling y rays
measures the effect of gravity. All data collected
since recognizing the need for temperature correction, yield a net fractional shift, -(5.13 ±0.51)
x1 q-i5 The error assigned is the rms statistical
deviation including that of independent sensitivity
calibrations taken as representative of their respective periods of operation. The shift observed
agrees with -4.92xl0" ls the predicted gravita,

tional shift for this "two-way" height difference.

244

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 4, Number 7

Expressed in this unit, the result is
(Ai/)
v

'exp

/(AvL.

theor

April

1,

I960

been preoccupied with it.

=+1.05±0.10,

where the plus sign indicates that the frequency
increases in falling, as expected.
These data were collected in about 10 days of
operation. We expect to continue counting with
some improvements in sensitivity, and to reduce
the statistical uncertainty about fourfold. With
our present experimental arrangement this should
result in a comparable reduction in error in the
measurement since we believe we can take adequate steps to avoid systematic errors on the resulting scale. A higher baseline or possibly a
narrower y ray would seem to be required to
extend the precision by a factor much larger than
this.

We wish to express deep appreciation for the
generosity, encouragement, and assistance with
details of the experiment accorded us by our

colleagues and the entire technical staff of these
laboratories during the three months we have

Supported in part by the joint program of the Office
of Naval Research and the U. S. Atomic Energy Com-

mission and by a grant from the Higgins Scientific
Trust.
*R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr.
Phys. Rev.
Letters 3, 439 (1959).
2
A. Einstein, Ann. Physik 35, 898(1911).
3
R. L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik 151, 124(1958);
Naturwissenschaften 45, 538 (1958); Z. Naturforsch.
14a, 211 (1959).
*R, V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr.
Phys. Rev.
Letters 3, 554 (1959).
6
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev.
Letters 4, 274 (1960).
6
We wish to thank Mr. F. Rosebury of the Research
Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, for providing his facilities for this treatment.
,

,

T
See E. H. Hall, Phys. Rev. 17, 245 (1903), first
paragraph.
8
T. E. Cranshaw, J. P. Schiffer, and A. B. Whitehead, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 163(1960).

.

245

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 4, Number 4

February

I960

15,

MEASUREMENT OF THE RED SHIFT IN AN ACCELERATED SYSTEM
USING THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT IN Fe 57
H. J. Hay, J. P. Schiffer,* T. E. Cranshaw, and P. A. Egelstaff
Atomic Energy Research Establishment, Harwell, England
(Received January 27, 1960)
In an adjoining paper

1

an experiment is described

in which the change of frequency in a photon pass-

ing between two points of different gravitational

potential has been measured.

Einstein's principle

of equivalence states that a gravitational field is

locally indistinguishable from an accelerated sys-

tem.

therefore seemed desirable to measure

It

the shift in the energy of 14-kev gamma rays

from Fe" in an accelerated system. In order to
do this we have plated a Co 57 source on to the
surface of a 0.8 -cm diameter iron cylinder.
This cylinder was rigidly mounted between two
Dural plates which also held a cylindrical shell
of Lucite, 13.28 cm in diameter and 0.31 cm
thick, concentric with the iron cylinder.
foil 3.5

An iron

mg/cm 2 thick and enriched in Fe 57 to

50% was glued to the inside surface of the Lucite.
This assembly was mounted in a neutron chopper
drive unit 2 and rotated at angular velocities up
to 500 cycles per second. The gamma rays
passing through the absorber were detected in a
xenon-filled proportional counter. A schematic
diagram of the apparatus is shown in Fig. 1
The expected shift can be calculated in two
ways. One can treat the acceleration as an effective gravitational field and calculate the difference
in potential between the source and absorber, or
one can obtain the same answer using the time
dilatation of special relativity. The expected
fractional shift in the energy of the gamma ray
2
2
2
2
20
is (/e i -/e 2 )oj /2c =2.44xl0- u) 2
The number of gamma rays as a function of
angular velocity is shown in Fig. 2. In a sep.

FIG. 2. Comparison of the calculated curve with
experimental points. The statistical errors of each
point are indicated. The curve was calculated from
the parameters given in the text.

The measured full width of the resonance
was 0.38 mm/sec. The curve calculated from
these parameters is also shown in Fig. 2. The
sensitivity of the equipment to vibrations was
tionary.

tested by vibrating the shaft of the rotor with

frequencies corresponding to the rotational frequencies involved, and negligible effect was observed. Changes in counting rate due to forces
on the absorber were also found to be negligible.
It appears that the observed effect is in reasonable agreement with expectations.

The size of

the shift of the gamma -ray energy in the effective gravitational field of a rotating system is
in agreement with that due to the terrestrial

arate measurement the counting rate as a func-

gravitational field, within the accuracy of the

tion of radial velocity was determined for this

measurements. The present experiment is expected to be improved when a more pure source

same source and absorber.

It

was found that

with the source moving rapidly the counting rate

was 1.29 times what it was with the source sta-

is available for reasons stated in the previous
paper. It will also be necessary to study further

the factors which could influence the absorption

process, including changes in the magnetic
hyperfine fields due to the high velocities.

We would like to acknowledge helpful and illuminating discussions with Dr. J. S. Bell, Dr. W.
Marshall, and Dr. T. Skyrme. We would also
like to thank Dr. E. Bretscher for his support
and encouragement.
FIG. 1
Schematic diagram of the experimental
equipment.
.

John Simon Guggenheim fellow, on leave from

165

246

Volume 4, Number 4

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois.
'T. E. Cranshaw, J. P. Schiffer, and A. B. Whitehead, preceding Letter (Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 163

166

February

15,

1960

(I960)].
2

Egelstaff, Hay, Holt, Raffle, and Pickles, J. Inst.
Elec. Engrs. (London) (to be published).

247

Absence of Doppler Shift for Gamma Ray Source
and Detector on Same Circular Orbit

By D. C, CHAMPENEY and P. B. MOON
Department of Physics, University of Birmingham

MS. received 29th August 1960

An experiment is described showing that for a source and absorber of
Fe placed at opposite ends of a rotor the Mossbauer absorption is unaffected by

Abstract.
57

rotation.

This is contrary to the situation with the source at the centre when

relativistic effects cause a frequency shift between source and absorber.

Reporting a test of the effect of circular motion on the resonant frequency of
the gamma-ray transition in 57 Fe, Hay, Schiffer, Cranshaw and Egelstaff
point out that one can treat the acceleration as an effective gravitaand calculate the frequency shift from the difference of potential
between source and absorber, or one can obtain the same answer by using the time
^ (1960)

tional field

dilatation of special relativity.

For their arrangement, with the source at the centre and the absorber at the
periphery of the rotating system, the same result also follows from the argument
that since source and absorber have relative velocity v (<^c) in a direction perpendicular to the line joining them, there exists a transverse Doppler effect giving a
fractional frequency shift v 2 /2c 2

.

It is perhaps surprising that the naive use of this formula, without any account

being taken of acceleration, should give the correct answer

;

an indication of the

subtleties that may be involved is obtained by considering source and absorber
to

move on the same circle, e.g. at opposite points on the periphery.

Their

pseudo-gravitational potentials are equal, so are their time-dilatations, yet their
relative velocity is 2v.

We are indebted to several of our colleagues for interesting comments on this
problem, involving such matters as Coriolis forces on photons and the difference
between the lines-of-flight of photons and the line joining instantaneous positions
of source and absorber.
Since in this laboratory we were undertaking a source at centre experiment
similar to that of Hay et al., we decided also to make an experimental test of the
peripherally opposite
arrangement. A null result, besides confirming the
consensus of theoretical opinion, would give an important check on the absence of
Doppler effect due to mechanical vibration of the rotor.
The source of 57 Co in a matrix of 56 Fe, was in the form of a slightly convex foil
F, 0-001 in. thick, hard-soldered to a short thin steel cylinder C which fitted inside
the tubular steel rotor (Fig. 1 ) against the rim R the absorber was a similar foil of
natural iron (2% 57 Fe) in the other tip of the rotor.
This assembly was spun within
an evacuated glass vessel provided with a thin window, behind which was a proportional counter for the 14 kev gamma radiation (Fig. 2). Two standard speeds
were chosen 100 rev/sec and 600 rev/sec and in separate experiments two different
methods were used to restrict the counting of gamma rays to those few degrees of
the rotor's azimuthal position within which the counter could 'see' the source
through the absorber.
'

'

'

;

:

'

248

Absence of Doppler Shift for Gamma Ray Source

351

In the first method, the counts were displayed on the screen of a 100-channel
kicksorter by a device that caused each gamma ray to deliver to the kicksorter an

impulse proportional to the azimuth of the rotor at the instant in question the
counts in the four channels corresponding most nearly to the seeing position
were totalled. A typical record is shown in Fig. 3.
;

'

'

Proportional

Counter

Fig. 1.

Diagram of the rotor.

Plan of the rotor, vacuum

Fig. 2.

vessel, shielding and counter.

i

300

i

_

';

200

\
_

1
Chosen
Four

\
%
'

"\

;/

Channels

•

>

•'

'*

V

100

/•

\

.

1

1.'
»

i

1

1

90

180

r

270

360

Azimuthal Position of Rotor (degrees)

Fig. 3.

Plot of typical kicksorter record. The channel number is expressed in terms
of the angular position of the rotor.

In the second method, the successive interception of two light beams by one
arm of the rotor opened and closed an electronic gate a scale-of-two device
prevented the gate from responding to the other arm of the rotor.
;

After subtraction of background (measured by placing | in. aluminium over
the window) the events recorded at 600 rev/sec were found by the first method to
be (0-4 ±3)% less and by the second method to be (2-0 ± 2-5)% more than those
at 100 rev/sec ;

combining these two results we obtain ( + 0-8 ± 2-0)%.

249

D. C. Champeney and P. B. Moon

352

The width of the resonance was measured for the actual source and absorber
by the method described by Cordey-Hayes, Dyson and Moon (1960); it was
thence calculated that a fractional shift h(2v) 2 /c 2 would have given a 9-4% higher
counting rate at the higher speed. In comparison with this figure, our result
with its associated probable error may be taken as satisfactory evidence in favour
of a null result.

As an incidental check that the null result was not due to instrumental
an experiment with the source at the centre gave an increase in
counting rate of (7-1 ±1/7)% at 900 rev/sec in agreement with an expected
deficiencies,

increase

of 5-4%.

References
Cordey-Hayes, M., Dyson, N. A., and Moon, P. B., 1960, Proc. Phys. Soc, 75, 810.
Hay, H. J., Schiffer, J. P., Cranshaw, T. E., and Egelstaff, P. A., 1960, Phys. Rev.
Letters, 4, 165.

Ruderfer, M., 1960, Phys. Rev. Letters, 5, 191.

—

Note added in proof. It may be pointed out that the experiment is equivalent
proposed by Ruderfer (1960) to test for the effects of other drift. No
special care was taken to obtain readings in more than one direction, but when
our results are interpreted according to Ruderfer's ideas they indicate an
to that

average value for v sin 9, over the six days of experimentation, of 17 ± 43

m sec -1

,

where v is the magnitude of the component of the ether drift velocity in the
plane of rotation of the rotor and
is the angle between this component and
the counting axis.

250

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 4, Number 6

March

15,

I960

VARIATION WITH TEMPERATURE OF THE ENERGY OF RECOIL- FREE
GAMMA RAYS FROM SOLIDS*
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr.
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts
(Received February 17, 1960)

The 14.4 -kev y ray emitted without recoil by
0.1-jLisec Fe

57

in metallic iron

1

"

4

homogeneous solid,

excited great

(Bv/BT) = -vC

interest as the most precisely defined electro-

magnetic frequency yet discovered.

It

may be

adequately well defined to allow measurement of
the influence of a gravitational potential on fre-

/2Mc 2

,

where C £ is the specific heat of the lattice and

M is the gram atomic weight of iron. In the hightemperature classical limit where C L = ZR,

quency 5 and of other small effects hitherto beyond the sensitivity available in the laboratory.
As a preliminary step in the operation of an experimental system designed to measure the
gravitational effect, we have been making tests
to find out whether other influences than the one
intended might lead to systematic errors by introducing important frequency shifts not taken

At lower temperatures one would expect a coefficient reduced by the value of the appropriate
normalized Debye specific heat function. For
iron, at 300°K one should find about 0.9 times,
and at 80°K about 0.3 times, the above classical

into account.

value.

So far the largest such effect found is that of
temperature. That temperature should influence
the frequency exactly as we observe is very
simply explained. Thermally excited vibrations
cause little broadening through first order
Doppler effect under the conditions obtaining in
the solid because the value of any component of
the nuclear velocity averages very nearly to zero
over the nuclear lifetime. The precision of the
57
y ray of Fe requires the second order Doppler
effect also to be considered. A shift to lower
frequency with increased temperature results
from this because the also well-defined average
of the square of the velocity of the particle increases in direct proportion to the average kinetic energy. As a consequence one would expect
a temperature coefficient of frequency in a

The temperature dependence has been measured by counting the y rays from our 0.4 -curie
Co 57 source transmitted through enriched Fe 57
absorbing films (0.6 mg Fe 57 /cm 2 ). The Co 57 of
the source is distributed in about 3xl0" 5 cm
thickness below the surface of a 2 -in. diameter
iron disk, made in the manner described ear1
lier.
Small frequency shifts that result when
the source and absorber are held at different
temperatures were measured by using a transducer to move the source sinusoidally at ten cps
toward and away from the absorber at a peak
speed of about 0.01 cm/sec. A gate pulse and
mercury relays were used to make one counter
record during 25 milliseconds of the modulation
period symmetrically disposed about the time of
maximum velocity toward the absorber. Another

274

(Bv/dT)

T-oo

-2.44 xl0" 15 i/ per °K.

251

Volume 4, Number 6

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

March

15,

I960

counter recorded the corresponding counts with
the source going away from the absorber.

The

difference of the counts in the two registers
should be proportional to the relative frequency
shift of the absorber and source for shifts small

compared to the line width. Quantitative knowledge of the parameters of the system that are
involved in determining the constant of proportionality is rendered unnecessary by adding

through a clock-driven hydraulic system a con4
tinuous relative motion of 6.3 xlO" cm/sec directed oppositely during each of the two halves
of the time for a given datum point.

In this way
TEMPERATURE

the Doppler effect is measured simultaneously

with the shift sought. The algebraic sum of the
counting rate differences for the two halves of
the run are proportional to the shift and the dif-

ference to the sensitivity.
The shift at liquid nitrogen relative to room
temperature is comparable to the line width and

300

200

the sensitivity to frequency shift originating in

FIG.

1.

DEGREES

KELVIN

Fractional shift of energy of 14.4-kev

gamma-ray absorption of Fe 57 vs absolute temperaThe solid line is derived from assuming a Debye temperature of 420°K.

ture of the metal.

for that point the two counting rates were re-

from our experiment on the effect of gravitational

corded at a series of values of the sinusoidal
modulation amplitude. From these a value of the
shift and of the apparent line width could be obtained although difficulties of calibration under
the conditions of operation have contributed
strongly to the uncertainties. There is evidence
that the line appears to broaden with such a temperature difference by perhaps a factor of 2.3
which might be evidence that the hyperf ine struc ture splittings are temperature sensitive to
some extent, as must be expected.
The data are plotted in Fig. 1. A solid line representing the effect expected with a Debye temperature of 420°K is also drawn. The agreement
can be regarded as an experimental demonstration of the second order Doppler effect using
thermal velocities rather than a centrifuge. It
might be remarked that crystalline anisotropy
might make this source of high velocities useful
for experiments to the end of detecting such spatial anisotropies as might accompany ether drift
or an inertial frame.
The temperature sensitivity at room temperature [experimentally (-2.09 ± 0.24) xlO" 15 per
degree C, theoretically -2.21 xlO" 15 per degree
C] is highly relevant to the interpretation of data

potential. A temperature difference of 1°C between the top and the bottom of our 22- meter
tower would result in a shift about equal to that
predicted by the principle of equivalence. For
smaller height differences correspondingly
smaller temperature differences would be re-

quired.

It is

now clear that correction for or

control of the temperature difference and perhaps

other parameters must be included in the instrumentation of experiments intending to utilize the
extreme frequency discrimination available with

gamma rays of this type.
*Supported in part by the joint program of the Office
of Naval Research and the U. S.

Atomic Energy Com-

mission.
1
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev
Letters 3, 554 (1959).
2
J. P. Schiffer and W. Marshall, Phys. Rev.

Letters 3, 556 (1959).
3
S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J.
Perlow, R. S. Preston, and D. H. Vincent, Phys.
Rev. Letters 4, 28(1960).
4
G. DePasquali, H. Frauenfelder, S. Margulies,
and R. N. Peacock, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 71 (1960).
5
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev.
Letters 3, 439 (1959).

275

252

TEMPERATURE -DEPENDENT SHIFT OF y RAYS EMITTED BY A SOLID
B. D. Josephson
Trinity College, Cambridge, England

(Received March 11, 1960)

Recent experiments by MOssbauer 1 have shown
that when low -energy y rays are emitted from

same formula can be deduced by regarding the
shift as due to a relativistic time dilatation.

To estimate T i we make the following assump(i) The atoms all have the same mass,

nuclei in a solid a certain proportion of them are

unaffected by the Doppler effect.

It

is the pur-

tions:

theless subject to a temperature -dependent shift

and the kinetic energy is equally distributed
among them, (ii) The kinetic energy is half the

to lower energy which can be attributed to the

total lattice energy, i.e.,

relativistic time dilatation caused by the motion

forces coupling the atoms are harmonic. Under
these assumptions 7\-/m ; = \U, where U is the

pose of this Letter to show that they are never-

of the nuclei.

we assume that the

-

Let us regard the solid as a system of interacting atoms with the Hamiltonian

#=£^.72™. +

^,

The relative shift
6E/E =£//2c2 For Fe at 300°K
13
this has the value 8xl0"
Clearly a compen-

lattice energy per unit mass.
is thus given by

.

.

sating shift would occur for absorption provided

The MGssbauer effect is due to those processes
in which the phonon occupation numbers do not
change.

It might appear that in such cases the
energy of the solid is unaltered, but this is not
so, as the nucleus which emits the y ray changes
its mass, and this affects the lattice vibrations.
Suppose the nucleus of the z'th atom emits a y ray
of energy E, its mass changing by 6m j = -E/c 2
The change in energy, 6E, of the solid is given
by
.

6£ = < Aff> = 6(p 2 /2m .) = -6w .</> 2 /2m 2 >
.

source and absorber were identical and at the
same temperature. A small difference in temperature between source and absorber leads to
a relative shift per degree given by 6E /E =Cp/2c2
where Cp is the specific heat. For Fe at 300°K
this is 2.2xlO" 15 /°K. This is sufficient for it to
be necessary to take it into account in accurate
experiments using the resonance absorption of
y rays, such as those to measure the gravitation2
al red shift. 3
I would like to thank Dr. Ziman, Professor
O. R. Frisch, and Dr. W. Marshall for helpful
'

discussions.

(6w./m.)7\

(B/t '.c*)T.,
i

i

where Tj is the expectation value of the kinetic
energy of the rth atom. The energy of the y ray
must accordingly be reduced by 6E so there is a
shift of relative magnitude 6E/E =T /wjC2
The
i
.

342

'R.

L.

MSssbauer, Z. Physik 151, 124(1958).

2

R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Phys. Rev. Letters

3

T. E. Cranshaw, J. P. Schiffer, and A. B. White-

554 (1959).

3,

head, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 163(1960).

253

Volume 5, Number

1

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

July

1,

I960

ACOUSTICALLY MODULATED y RAYS FROM Fe"
S.

L. Ruby and D.

I.

Bolef

Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
(Received June 13, 1960)

The relationship between the emission of y rays
by nuclei bound in a crystal and the creation (or
destruction) of phonons has been discussed by
Visscher, 1 and suggests that a careful study of
the "off- resonance" line shape in a Mossbauertype experiment may be used to observe the frequency distribution of lattice vibrations in the
crystal. Unfortunately, a direct attempt at such
a study seems difficult since it requires the
measurement of nuclear y-ray absorption cross
sections much smaller than the photoelectric
cross sections for the same atom. In an attempt

to investigate the interactions between phonons

and emitting nuclei, therefore, it was decided to
generate low-energy phonons acoustically, and
to study their effect on the y-ray spectrum.
Source and absorber were one-mil thick 321
stainless steel (18% chromium, 8% nickel) foils.
The source, into which had been diffused Co",
could be driven by either or both of two methods:
(1) a low-frequency (15 cps) drive utilizing a
loud speaker, and (2) a piezoelectric quartz
crystal drive mounted on the rear of the source
foil. The quartz crystal is driven by a radio-

254

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 5, Number 1

frequency oscillator whose frequency and amplitude are continuously adjustable. The counting
rate for the 14.4-kev y ray, as a function of loudspeaker velocity, is measured by using the output of a single -channel analyzer to "command" a
multichannel analyzer to measure the velocity at
a particular instant. This is accomplished by
feeding the amplified output of the velocity pickup
coil (rigidly attached to the source) to the appropriate place in the analog -to -digital converter

July

1,

1960

Jn 2 (m), where Jn (m) is the Bessel function of the
first kind of order n.
In Fig. 1 the solid lines in curves a-e

show the

result of calculations for five values of m, with

q/2v = 20 Mc/sec. The vertical scale of the drawing is based on curve a. Also shown in the figure
are the experimental results, using a 20-Mc/sec

section of the analyzer.

The experiment was planned on the assumption
that the density of ultrasonic phonons in a narrow

frequency band could be markedly increased over
that corresponding to 300°K, and that this should
lead to pairs of satellite peaks, symmetrically
located relative to the main Mossbauer peak,

with a spacing in energy units of AE =hq or, in
velocity units, v s =(c/E )AE. (q/2v = ultrasonic

frequency, £ = 14.4 kev.)

This corresponds to

the creation or destruction of acoustic phonons

with the emission of the y ray.

A similar dis-

crete Doppler effect has been observed in optical
light diffracted by acoustic "gratings. " The optical effect is extremely small, of the order of
10" 4 A for an optical wavelength of 5460 A and an

ultrasonic frequency of 10 Mc/sec.

The effect

has been observed for both traveling and stationary sound waves. 2 A theory of this optical effect
has been given by Raman and Nagendra Nath. 3
Since the source foil is thin (approximately onetenth the wavelength of sound at 20 Mc/sec), one
can alternatively consider the quartz transducer
as simply vibrating the foil with a sinusoidal
velocity, v s =v m cosqt. This corresponds merely
to a sinusoidal motion of the center of mass of
the foil. The "instantaneous" frequency of the
14.4-kev y ray may therefore be expressed as

v= i/j+Av siaqt,

(1)

where
v

=E /h = 3.48x10" cycles/sec,

and the maximum frequency deviation is Av
= v (v /c). Expressed in the language of frem
quency modulation, this corresponds to a carrier
of frequency v
modulated sinusoidally at a frequency q/2-n. The modulation index is m= {v m /c)
x(2rtv /q). The frequency spectrum can be shown4
to consist of the carrier and an infinite set of
side -bands, with the nth side frequency separated from the (n + l)th side frequency by the
modulating frequency, <?/2jr. The maximum amplitude of the nth side frequency is given by

-2-10

1

2

VELOCITY, MM /SEC

50 40

30 20

K>

10

20 30 40 90

FREQUENCY, MC/SEC

,

6

FIG. 1. Mossbauer pattern for Fe87 y ray emitted
by a stainless steel source driven by a 20-Mc/sec
x-cut quartz transducer. The experimental points are
shown in a -e for values of the driving voltage, V,
from to 2.0 volts rms. The solid curves are calculated on the basis of FM theory, using a single proportionality constant between
and Vrms which best

m

fits

the data.

3

255

Volume 5, Number

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

1

July

x-cut quartz transducer, taken at five different
transducer driving voltages. The maximum velocity of the iron atoms resulting from the ultra-

£ .95

sonic vibration has not been measured directly,

ec

but is expected to be proportional to the driving

o 90
z

voltage; the proportionality constant has been

chosen so as to fit the solid curves as well as
possible to the experimental points. Using

m = 1.1 rms

one finds v m = 0.29 cm/sec for
1.5 V Tms across the transducer. This value for
v m is consistent with the value calculated from the
piezoelectric properties of the quartz transducer.
The velocity at 20 Mc/sec corresponds to the
rather small maximum displacement of approximately 2xl0" 9 cm.
The progressive disagreement between the calculated and experimental curves with higher
drive voltage, especially near the carrier freV"

,

quency, suggests that all of the iron atoms did
not have the same velocities. A new source foil

was then prepared, care being taken to preserve
flatness of the foil and uniformity of the acoustic

a plot of the amplitude of the
carrier (unshifted y ray) vs the 20-Mc/sec driving voltage is given, together with a plot of
2
The calcu[1 - 0.24J (w)] with m =0.6 V rms
lated curve assumes that all the Fe 57 atoms have
the same maximum velocity v m
The pattern
using the new foil, however, still suggests a continuous range of velocities with perhaps 50% of
the Fe 57 nuclei moving considerably more slowly
than the remainder. Such an effect could be
caused by bonding defects, such as air bubbles
trapped in the cement between foil and quartz.
Velocity blurring also results from the fact that
the thickness of the foil is not negligible compared to the wavelength of the sound waves.
Since the energy shift of the y ray is determined solely by the frequency of the ultrasonic
drive, this discrete Doppler technique offers a
precise method for adding or subtracting known
quantities of energy to the y ray. This may be
useful in providing a monochromatic calibration
of energy or velocity in the measurement of line
splittings (such as Fe 57 in iron) or line shifting
bond.

1,

I960

^

/^

<

/

Z.85
3
O
° MO
u
>
•-

/"

.

*

*

.

•/

.75

<

' ••

•

_i

S

.70

1

FIG.

2.

1

1

1

1

1

Relative intensity of carrier (unshifted y

ray) vs voltage on quartz transducer.

The solid

line represents the theoretically predicted function

[l-0.24J B (w)], wherew = 0.6F rms for this case.
This prediction assumes that all the Fe 57 atoms have
2

the same maximum velocity v

m

.

In Fig. 2,

.

.

(such as temperature shifts of the Mossbauer
peak due to zero-pomt vibration). This method
for Doppler shifting may also be applicable at
low temperatures when more conventional drives
are inconvenient to use. For this purpose, broadbanding of the transducer frequency response will
be desirable.
We wish to thank Dr. L. Epstein for help in the
preparation of the source, Mr. John Hicks for
his careful and ingenious help throughout the experiment, and Dr. Meir Menes, who first sug-

gested the FM approach.

'W. M. Visscher, Ann. Phys. 9, 194 (1960).
2
For a review of this work see L. Bergmann, Ultrasonics (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1951), pp. 66 ff.
3
C. V. Raman and N. S. Nagendra Nath, Proc.
Indian Acad. Sci. (A}2, 406, 413 (1935); and (A)
75
,

(1936).
4

S. Goldman, Frequency Analysis, Modulation and
Noise (McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1948).

256

VOLUME 124, NUMBER 3

PHYSICAL REVIEW

NOVEMBER

I

,

1961

Measurement of the Refractive Index of Lucite by Recoilless Resonance Absorption*
L.

Grodzins and E. A. Phillips

Laboratory for Nuclear Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts

(Received June 20, 1961)

A method of frequency-modulating a monochromatic electromagnetic wave by varying the optical path
length between the source and detector is described. The method has been applied to the measurement of
the refractive index of Lucite for the 0.86 A radiation emitted from Co 67 the small frequency shift was
-6
detected by recoilless resonance absorption. The refractive index was found to be 1— n= (1.29±0.03)X10
;

,

in agreement with classical theory.

THIS paper describes a method of frequency-

shift

modulating a monochromatic electromagnetic
wave by varying the optical path length between the
source and detector. The method has been applied to,
and is described in terms of, the measurement of the

1

d<f>

=Av =

lirdt

(1-n) dL
(2)
it

c

refractive index of Lucite for the 14.4-kev radiation

An equivalent point of view considers the radiation as

emitted from Co 57 The measured refractive index
agrees, within the 2% experimental uncertainty, with
the simple theory applicable when the radiation energy
is much greater than the binding energy of the electrons
in the refractive medium, as in this case. The technique

being Doppler-shifted during the refraction by the

.

is

in principle applicable to the nearly monochromatic

radiation emitted from optical-frequency masers.
It is instructive to consider the

method from two

points of view, first in terms of frequency modulation

and then in terms of a Doppler shift. Consider a source

moving wedge [Fig. 1(b)]. As it leaves the wedge the
radiation is deflected (toward the normal, since «<1)

by an angle

A0=(1— n) tana.
The change in momentum of the photon is Ap=pA6,
and since the wedge is moving at a speed V it does
work on the photon, increasing its energy by

A£= VAp= Vp{X-n) tana=£[(l-«)/c]7 tana,

S and an observer (in our case a recoilless resonance
absorber) A separated by a distance x [Fig. 1(a)]. A
wave of angular frequency o> emitted by 5 will have the

which is equivalent to Eq. (2) above.
For 14.4-kev radiation, the refractive index of Lucite

~
form e ia(t xle) at A. If a length L of material with re-

is (see below)

(1-») = 1.29X10- 6

fractive index n is placed in the optical path, the wave

becomes e

ia< ~ x,e)+i
-

t

'

t',

<f>= (l

If

<f>

— n)o}L/c.

{Av/v) Xi kev

changes with time, the instantaneous frequency

wedge-shaped piece of material to produce a frequency
work is supported in part through a U. S. Atomic
Energy Commission contract, by funds provided by the U. S.
Atomic Energy Commission, the Office of Naval Research, and
the Air Force Office of Scientific Research.

=4X lO~ dL/dL
17

(1)

seen by A will be (o>+d<t>/dt). This is done by moving a

* This

,

so that

where the phase advance

The frequency shift thus obtained for reasonable values
of dL/dt can be detected by recoilless resonance
scattering. 1

A schematic drawing of the experimental arrangement is shown in Fig. 2(a). The recoilless resonance

R. L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik 151, 124 (1958); R. V. Pound
and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 337 (1960).

:

.

257

MEASUREMENT OF REFRACTIVE INDEX OF LUCITE

775

apparatus has been described previously. 2 The 14.4-kev

gamma rays from a Co 67 source diffused into Armco
iron passed through a rotating wheel, shown in profile

through a movable 0.5-mil Armco
Fe absorber to the Be- window Nal(Tl) detector.

in Fig. 2(b), then

To construct the wheel, 12-in. diam. pieces of YS-in.

ftMfcg

brass and j-in. Lucite were clamped together and 120
radial slots

y§- in.

wide were cut through both at an

angle of 60°. Since the gamma rays are stopped by the

Source

Wheel

brass, they are allowed to pass through only one side

Detector

Absorber
(a)

of each Lucite tooth. As the wheel rotates, every gamma
ray which passes through it does so when the thickness
of Lucite in the tooth is changing in the same direction.
Thus all the gamma rays detected undergo a frequency
shift of the same direction and magnitude.
The absorption line profiles for four wheel speeds are

I

Detector

shown in Fig. 3. The shift in the line position is evident.
The high-speed runs, 1500 rpm clockwise and counterclockwise, show a broader line which we attribute to
vibration transmitted through the air from the rotating

wheel to the source and absorber. This effect diminished
rapidly with decrease of angular speed and no attempt
was made to alleviate it. At speeds below 1000 rpm,
line broadening resulted in an error of less than 2% in
the determination of the line shift.

The shift in the position of an accurately known line
profile is most efficiently determined by measuring the

Fig. 2. (a) Schematic diagram of experimental arrangement,
(b) Detail of the slotted wheel ; not to scale.

change in counting rate at the maximum slope points
of the absorption line profile, 0.013 cm/sec in this case.

The counting rates for absorber speeds towards and
away from the source were separately recorded for
each of a set of speeds of the Lucite wheel the resulting
;

line shift as a function of wheel speed is shown in Fig. 4.
Phose advance

A least-squares fit of the data (from 4 to 12X10 6 counts
per point) between 900 rpm clockwise and 900 rpm
counterclockwise yields a slope
Av

Av

cm/sec

1

=c—

Attwheel

V

=(3.32±0.05)X10" 6

(3)

,

rpm

Awwheel

where Av/v is the relative frequency shift.
The effective radius from the axis of the wheel to
the gamma ray path was 14.2 cm so that

cm/sec

(dL/dt)

2.58-

(4)

rpm

Awwheel

A combination of Eqs. (2)- (4), yields the refractive
index
c{Av/v)

3.32 X10- 6

(dL/dt)

2.58

(1.29±0.04)X10- 6

(1-n)-

.

The stated error includes uncertainties in the effective
Fig. 1. (a) The phase advance produced by interposition of a
length L of refractive material between source 5 and observer A
(b) The deflection A0 of the beam when the refractive material of
Fig. 1 (a) is wedge-shaped.

*L. Grodzins and F. Genovese, Phys. Rev. 121, 228 (1961).

radius, the absorption line depth,

and the absorber

velocity.

This result is in agreement with the theoretical value
obtained for the refractive index of a gas in which the
binding energy of the electrons is much less than the

258

776

GRODZINS AND E. A. PHILLIPS

L.

energy of the radiation. This condition holds for 14.42 ) since Ek (oxygen)

kev radiation on Lucite (CbH 8
=0.53 kev. The result is3

(l-n) = N<r
2A nuoh
where the symbols have their conventional meaning';
No is Avogadro's number, p is the density, etc.
For the case of Lucite and 14.4-kev radiation, Z/A

i.e.,

Da*.

5BK

r—-

'

J

1
1

1

r

i

i

i

LUCITE WHEEL

t

h

*

1

f

800

t
Wheel Sptrt

57K

i

,

1500 RPM

CW

-

56K

1200

Fig. 4. Reduced data: Line shift versus wheel speed; the
theoretical slope contains an uncertainty in the wheel radius.

(See text.)

>

59K _

*

»

-

=0.54, p= 1.185, and w=2.185X10 19 Then

*

.

58K "{

f

,

56K

t

t"

(

1

57K

l-»= 1.285 X10-

500 RPM CW
i

H

number
by about 0.1%.
The measurement of the index of refraction at x-ray

!

tit
t

>t

57K -

t

*

i

56K _

/

500 RPM

CCW
-

59K

1

J

.

takes into account the binding energies of the electrons, 45 yields a result differing from the above

69K

58K -t

6

The exact theory of the index of refraction, which

-

1

<

58K

1000

RPM

i

\

l
1
t

1

1

1500 RPM

CCW

wavelengths is, of course, not new. 3 Indeed, Bearden*
measured the refractive index of diamond at 1.39 A to
an accuracy of 1 part in 10*. The phase modulation
technique can, if desirable, be made as accurate for
those wavelengths observed by recoilless nuclear gamma
emission.

We have shown that the frequency of a nearly monochromatic electromagnetic wave may be shifted by
modulating the optical path between source and observer.

56K -

The application to an optical-frequency maser
is evident. Since (1— n) is ~10*

where Av/p<lOr*

lit

S6K

times as large for optical frequencies as for x rays, fre-

quency modulation may be observed by varying either
» or L. For example, L may be varied by vibrating a
mirror [1— »=2 in Eq. (2)] from which the light is

',;

54K

»

S3K

1

l

.06

.06

,

i

i

i

l

l

1

.04

.02

O

.02

.04

.06

.08

.0

AbMrbtr Velocity cm /sec
Fig. 3. Absorption line profile versus wheel speed.

reflected.

who acoustically vibrated the source.

K. Richtmeyer and E. H. Kennard, Introduction to Modern
Physics (McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1947), 4th ed.,

*

pp. 522-527.

• S.

* F.

The corresponding experiment for recoilless

gamma radiation has been reported by Ruby and Bolef,'
J.

s

J.

A. Bearden, Phys. Rev. 54, 698 (1938).
A. Prins, A. Physik 47, 479 (1928).
L. Ruby and D. I. Bolef, Phys. Rev. Letters 5, 5 (1960).

259

Time Dependence of Resonantly Filtered Gamma Rays from Fe 57 f
F. J. Lynch, R. E. Holland, and M. Hamermesh

Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois
(Received June 6, 1960)

The time dependence of gamma rays emitted by the 14.4-kev state of Fe 57 has been studied by delayedcoincidence measurements between a 123-kev gamma ray preceding formation of the state and the 14.4-kev
gamma ray from the state. When no filter was used, the number of gamma rays decreased exponentially
with the known half-life of 0.1 /usee. When a foil of Fe 57 (which was resonant to 14.4-kev radiation) was
used as a filter, the number of gamma rays observed through the filter did not decrease exponentially.
Instead, the filter absorbed almost none of the gamma rays first emitted by the 14.4-kev state; at later times
the absorption increased. Data were taken with three different thicknesses of absorber and with emission

and absorption peaks separated by to 11 times the width of the resonance. The energy separation resulted
from the Doppler shift associated with a constant velocity between source and absorber. These data were,
for the most part, in good accord with the prediction of a theory based on a classical model for absorber and
source. In particular, the results verified the theoretical prediction that at certain times the intensity of

radiation observed would be greater with the filter than without it.

I.

INTRODUCTION

gamma

ray is highly converted 6 (a =15) so that
imprisonment of the resonance radiation need not be

an earlier paper, 1 we showed that the intensity of
the gamma rays transmitted through an absorber
which is resonant to the incident gamma radiation does

IN

considered.

II.

not decrease exponentially with time. Instead, the transmitted beam appears initially to decay faster than the
rate corresponding to the life-time r of the emitting
state. The intuitive picture which led us to undertake
the initial experiments was that the resonance absorption tends to reduce the intensity at the center of the
emitted line relative to the intensity in the wings.
Thus the width at half maximum of the remaining peak
is greater than the value T=H/t of the original peak;
and the lifetime of the state appears to be correspond-

absorber can be explained on a simple classical theory.
As in standard treatments of emission and dispersion,
the medium is assumed to consist of damped oscillators

with natural frequency wo and decay constant X. The
by the Fe 67 source has an electric

radiation emitted
field

1

ingly shorter.

a(/)

A quantitative theoretical treatment was developed

r

= exprjtw /- §x/]=— I

2iri J-

by describing the emitted radiation as a damped

to— wo— ?*X

r

electromagnetic wave. 2 On passing through a medium
filled

THEORY

The time dependence of the 14-kev radiation of
Fe 87 as observed in transmission through an Fe 67

with resonators, the frequency spectrum of the

radiation is altered, so that its time dependence is no

dto a(to)e^.

(1)

The theoretical analysis, which is

The constant X is just the reciprocal of the mean life

presented in Sec. II, suggested some of the experiments

of the excited state. In the case of the 14-kev line of

longer exponential.

Fe 57

which are described in Sec. III.

The

14.4-kev state of Fe 57 provides a convenient

,

93% of the radiation is internally converted; the

quantity X contains contributions from

source for observation of this effect. The formation of
the 14.4-kev state is announced by a 123-kev gamma

ray in the decay3 of Co 67 the Mossbauer effect is large4
,

(about 60% of the radiation is emitted without recoil
at room temperature), the half-life3 is 0.1 ^sec, and the

types of

constant is

fWork performed under the auspices of the U. S. Atomic

e(w)

Energy Commission.
R. E. Holland, F. J. Lynch, G. J. Perlow, and S. S. Hanna,
Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 181 (I960).
*M. Hamermesh, Argonne National Laboratory Report
ANL-6111, February, 1960 (unpublished), p. 6.
* Nuclear Data Sheets, National Academy of Sciences, National
Research Council, 1959 (U. S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D. C).
«R. L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik 151, 124 (1958); J. P. Schiffer
and W. Marshall, Phys. Rev. Letters 3, 556 (1959); R. V. Pound
and J. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev. Letters 3, 554 (1959).

all

decay (radiation and internal conversion).
The effect of transmission through the Fe 57 absorber
can be found by standard methods. 6 Each monochromatic component a(a))e*"' excites forced oscillations
of the resonators in the medium. The complex dielectric

= l+r^-^+wX)"

1

(2)

1

We have written coo' for the resonant frequency of the
absorber to take account of a possible Doppler shift
due to motion relative to the source.
5
H. R. Lemmer, O. J. A. Segaert, and M. A. Grace, Proc.
Phys. Soc. (London) A68, 701 (1955).
•J. A. Stratton, Electromagnetic Theory (McGraw-Hill Book
Company, Inc., New York, 1941), p. 321.

513

w

260

LYNCH, HOLLAND, AND HAMERMESH

514

From Eq. (2), the propagation vector in the medium

aJ-o

v>v

'

to be

is found

k= (w/c^l+Kwo^-c^+wX)- ]*.
1

-

io-'

rv^o

absorber is to change a(w) to a'(w), where
2
lO"

= c(«) exp{-2^[w 2 -w2 +wX]- },
'

:zi

1

(4)

V

in which b is a constant.

At w=w ', a'(wo') = a(w ') exp[— 2b/\~], so the transmission at the center of the line is exp[— lb/\\.
By combining Eqs. (1) and (4), the time dependence

io"

3

[2iboi

1

dor-

This integral

—

"I

;

>— Wo - §*X

I

Iff

result expressed as either
o'(t)

,

1

3

4

t/T

evaluated in the Appendix with the

is

11

,

75%'

V

100% -

12

4

(5)

•

w 2 — wo' 2 — *wXj

\

\=

/

-

2nd J_

r

—

of the transmitted amplitude is found to be

*'«)=— c

-

(3)

The wavelength of the radiation is about 10~ 8 cm and,
as in the x-ray case, we can expand Eq. (3) and retain
only the first term. The effect of passage through the

a'(«)

'

»I6

Fig. 2. Time dependence of radiation after transmission through
a resonant filter according to Eq. (7), assuming all radiation is
recoilless or 75% is recoilless 03=16, Ao>=0). The straight line
represents an exponential decay for comparison.

= exp\jo)o't— %\Q
(bt)**J n (2bW),

n=oL

'(ty

:

exp

iojo't

—

b

(6a)

I

J
I

1\\

— expil

h(w —

')2

Lw -w '

2JI

I

T=\t in Eq. (6a) yields

ri{w — wo'} 1"

<*>

X E

)

(iO-»'V„(2ftn*)l.

(6b)

The time dependence of the transmitted intensity is
given by |o'(/)| 2 Setting w — wo'=Aw, /3=46/X, and

a '(r)p=e-^/ 03iri)]2

—T+

X

X

Aw 4J

fAw
!

expt

-

Aw »0

(6)

transmitted intensity is

l«'(DI

1

1
'

.

For large values of Aw, the series (7) converges very
slowly. In this region, we use Eq. (6b) for a'(t). The

.

XV

(7)

In particular, for Aw=0 this reduces to

J

|

+ £ (—

oo
r 4 Ao>1 B
Awyrjer-ii"
f jSr-]*"
i-«=o L jS X J L 4 J

L

/Si

= 4

io-'-

-

2

io-

3

=

\

—

(9)

2 Aw

\ 75% ~
100%

-

JntfW)

In computing the time behavior of the transmitted
intensity, Eq. (7) converges rapidly for

.

IO"

+E

-

v\

Gsr)*<i,

P X

while Eq. (9) gives rapid convergence for
2 Aw

0ST)*>1.

12

fi

1

X

1

3

4

t/T
Fig. 1. Time dependence of radiation after transmission through
a resonant filter according to Eq. (7), assuming all radiation is
recoilless or 75% is recoilless 03=4, Ao>=0). The straight line
represents an exponential decay for comparison.

The detailed comparison of the theoretical formulas
with the experimental results is quite complicated.
Here we only indicate some of the points to be
considered.

Only some fraction of the 14-kev radiation is recoil-

261

TIME DEPENDENCE OF RESONANTLY FILTERED y RAYS
while the remainder is shifted far from resonance
and decays exponentially. In Figs. 1 and 2 we show the
time dependence of the transmitted beam for two

515

less,

DELAY
IOOO FT
RG 63/U

when Aw=0, for the
pure resonance radiation and for the case when 75%
different

absorber thicknesses

|

HP 460 A

|

I

HP 460 B

|

of the radiation is recoilless.

The effect of relative motion of source and absorber
on the time dependence of the transmitted beam is
shown in Fig. 3 (Aw=5X) and Fig. 4 (Aw=4X).
Figure 4 shows the surprising behavior which should
occur as the source and absorber frequency are separated
more and more: the intensity oscillates about the
exponential curve. Thus, at certain times more gamma
rays are received through the absorber than would have
arrived if the absorber were absent. The medium
behaves like a resonant filter and appears to "ring" in
response to the incident damped oscillation. As Aw is
increased the oscillations shown in Fig. 4 are shifted
toward shorter and shorter times so that, for very large
Aw, the normal exponential decay is approached.
The transmitted intensity given by Eq. (7) or (9)
can be written as
|a'(*)|

2

=exp(-X*)FG3,*),

where X= 1/r. The deviations from exponential behavior
are more easily seen if one plots the product of the
counting rate with the factor expQu). For the emitted
line this product is a constant. For the transmitted line,
the theory predicts that the product will vary as F(J3,t).
The theory given above assumes that there is a
single emission (and absorption) line. However, the
14.4-kev line of Fe 87 has a hyperfine structure of six
lines. 7 Since the separation of the hyperfine components
is large compared to the linewidth, we assume that

Fig. 3.

Effect of

motion on
time dependence of
transmitted radiation
according to
Eq. (7) 03 = 4, Ato
= JX). For comparirelative

HP 202 A
FUNCTION

GENERATOR

Effect of

motion on
time dependence of
transmitted radiation
according to
Eq. (7) 03 = 4, Ao>
=4X). For comparison, the straight line
represents an exporelative

nential decay.

|

ATE

*]_

Fig. 5. Schematic diagram of equipment.

each emitted hyperfine component is absorbed only in
the corresponding transition in the absorber. By use
of the values for the intensities of the hyperfine compo-

nents, the time dependence of the transmitted radiation
is found to be

|a'(0|»=exp(-XO[l-/+/{iF(fcM)

+mw)+m-hmi

(io)

where / is the fraction of gamma rays emitted without
recoil and /? is the thickness of the absorber expressed in
mean free paths at the peak of the absorption curve.
Although in principle /3 is measurable, it is difficult to
determine it accurately. We have used £ as a parameter
in fitting the theoretical formula to the experimental
data. Equation (10) was evaluated on an IBM-704

computer for various values of /? and the other parameters, and the calculated curve giving the best visual
fit was plotted with the data. One should expect that /3
would be given by N<r f, where /' is the fraction of
Fe 67 nuclei which can absorb without recoil, N is the
number of atoms of Fe 67 per cm2 <7 =47rX2/ (1+a), X
is the wavelength of the 14.4-kev gamma ray divided
by 2ir, and a is the internal conversion coefficient.
,

IH.

EQUIPMENT AND PROCEDURE

The measurements were made with a source of Co 67
57
per sec) co-plated 8 with
(25 000 disintegrations of Co
Fe 66 on a thin copper foil and annealed in vacuum at
800°C.

Fig. 4.

AMPLIFIER

|HP460A|

[COINCIDENCE I

son, the straight line

represents an exponential decay.

3L

T

Absorbers consisted of rolled

foils

of

Fe 67

(enriched to 75% in Fe 57 ) or normal Armco iron rolled
foils annealed at 800°C.

The geometric arrangement of

source, absorber, and detectors is shown schematically
in Fig. 5. The source, f in. in diameter, was mounted
on an extension of the speaker diaphragm which could

be used to shift the resonant frequency of the source by
the Doppler effect. The absorber foil (1 in. in diameter)
was clamped between two Lucite disks mounted f in.

above the source. The detector for the 14.4-kev gamma
7

S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J. Perlow, R. S.
Preston, and D. H. Vincent, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 177 (1960).

8
S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J. Perlow, R. S.
Preston, and D. H. Vincent, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 28 (1960).

262

LYNCH, HOLLAND, AND HAMERMESH

516

ray consisted of a Nal(Tl) scintillator 1 in. in diameter
and 0.006 in. thick mounted on a Lucite light pipe
and an RCA 7265 photomultiplier tube. A second
Nal(Tl) scintillator, 1 in. in diameter and \ in. thick,
served as a detector for the 123-kev gamma ray and
was mounted § in. from the source on a line making an
angle of 120° with the line connecting the centers of
the other detector and the source.

The speaker coil was driven with a peak-to-peak
amplitude of \ in. by the amplified signal coming
alternately from a triangular wave generator9 and
from a 40-cps sinusoidal signal. The triangular wave
caused the source to move with a constant velocity
either toward or away from the absorber, except during
the short interval of reversal of direction. This constant
velocity produced a small constant increase or decrese
in gamma-ray energy through the Doppler effect. On
the other hand, the sinusoidal signal, because of its
much higher frequency, produced a wide range of
energy shifts; most of the time the gamma rays were
not resonant nor even nearly resonant with the absorber.
Other sources of absorption, such as the photoelectric
effect, would be scarcely affected by the energy shift.
Thus we observed the effect of both nonresonant and
resonant absorption for small energy shifts with the
triangular

wave applied

to

the voice coil

and we

observed the effect of nonresonant absorption alone
with the sinusoidal voltage applied to the voice coil.
Because the average geometric arrangement was

two signals, measurements
were taken without an absorber, and the sinusoidal

speaker, source, absorber, and detectors in a box lined
with sound-absorbing material and acoustically isolated
from the floor. With these precautions, the observed
vibration of the voice coil because of acoustic noise
was less than 0.0004 in. per sec, which should be
compared to the velocity of 0.0037 in. per sec needed to
produce a Doppler shift of one resonance width. The
over-all performance of the system was investigated by
observing the width of the central dip in transmission.
This was 20% wider than expected for the thickest
absorber and 40% wider for the thinnest.
The circuits for measuring the coincidence rate as a
function of time delay after formation of the 14.4-kev
state are shown schematically in Fig. 5 and were the
same (except for slight modifications) as those used

previously to measure the lifetimes of excited states of
nuclei. 10

The output of the time-to-pulse-height con-

was stored in the right half of the 256-channel
when the voice coil was driven with the
triangular wave and in the left half when the voice
coil was driven with the sinusoidal voltage. During a
run, the triangular wave and sinusoidal voltages were

verter

analyzer

by a timing
mechanism, and data were accumulated over a 24-hr
period. Signals from slow amplifiers and single-channel
analyzers set on the photopeaks of the two gamma rays
were required in order to record an event.
Because of the method of recording data, slow
drifts were not important. The calibration of the
applied alternately for 4-min intervals

by using

slightly different for the

time-to-pulse-height converter (as obtained

was adjusted slightly to bring the coincidence
counting rate within 1% of the counting rate with the

data from the sinusoidal run to measure the
lifetime of the 14.4-kev state of Fe 57 ) remained constant
within 1.5% over a period of 1 month. A slow drift of
the peak channel was also observed (about \ channel

signal

triangular drive.
It is desirable that the triangular wave of voltage
should move the source with constant speed. The
degree to which this condition holds is determined by
the linearity of speaker movement with current, the
linearity of the triangular wave voltage, the duration
of the transient vibration occurring during reversal of

the direction of motion, and the isolation of the system

from mechanical vibrations conducted by the air or
by the building.

We investigated the movement of the voice coil as a
function of current and found the relationship to be
linear

within

the

accuracy of measurement

(2%).

The duration of the transient at the peaks of the
triangular wave from the generator was known to be
small. From the observed duration of the transient
voltage induced by a sudden displacement of the voice
coil,

the effect due to the inertia of the voice coil and

source holder was estimated to be less than 25 msec.

At the frequencies we used (<0.2

cps),

this corre-

sponded to less than 1% of the period.

The transmission of noise to the speaker was greatly
by mounting the assembly consisting of

reduced

•Model 202A function generator, manufactured by HewlettPackard Company, Palo Alto, California.

the

per day). The converter was linear to within 1% in the
region of interest.
IV.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The results of a typical measurement for the thickest
absorber foil (2.7 mg/cm2 of Fe 67 isotopic enrichment
75%) is shown in Fig. 6. The upper part of the figure
shows a conventional semilogarithmic plot of the data
,

after

subtraction of background due

to

accidental

background was determined from
the counting rate at times preceding the peak shown in
Fig. 6(a). In general it was less for the part of the run
in which the source was moved at constant velocity
than for the part in which the source was vibrated
coincidences. This

sinusoidally because the counting rate in the 14.4-kev

The total
number of accidental coincidences was 2.5% of the
total number of true coincidences for the data with
vibrated source shown in Fig. 6. The steep rise at the
detector was less in the former condition.

left side of

the figure represents the time resolution of
it corresponds to a resolution curve

the fast circuit;

» F. J. Lynch and R. E. Holland, Phys. Rev. 114, 825 (1959);
R. E. Holland and F. J. Lynch, Phys. Rev. 113, 903 (1959).

263

TIME DEPENDENCE OF RESONANTLY FILTERED
with a full width at half maximum of 25 rmisec. The
curve obtained with vibrated source shows the exponential decay with a half-life of 0.10 /usee in agreement
with previous measurements. 3 The curve obtained with
the

source

stationary

demonstrates

the

effect

data

RAYS

517

were accumulated without distinguishing

the

direction of motion. This motion of the source produced

we

expected.

The lower portion of Fig. 6 shows the same data
plotted in such a way as to exhibit the deviations from
exponential decay predicted in Sec. II. Here the

count in each time channel has been multiplied by e*',
where X is the decay constant and t is the time, and the
resulting numbers have been adjusted so that the
average value of the vibrated data was equal to unity
after the initial rise. Data in several adjacent channels

were averaged when the counting rate was low. Vertical
bars give the standard deviations as calculated from
the number of counts. The solid curve shown was
calculated for this absorber from the prescription given
at the end of Sec. II, with the thickness parameter
/3 adjusted for best fit to the data. This value of /J was
twice that expected from the thickness of the absorber.
Figure 7 gives typical results for a number of runs
in

which the source was moved at constant velocity
and away from the absorber, and

alternately toward

•.

%

VIBRATED

STATIONARY

v.'
*vi:

I

o o0 5

i

it,

VIBRATED

A

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

1.0

0.8
0.6

**U-.-LU

0.4

STATIONARY

AE = ur

0.2

oU
20
TIME CHANNEL

40
(

I

60
80
CHANNEL »9.4 m/i$«c)

Fig. 6. (a) Semilogarithmic plQt of delayed time spectra taken
with source and absorber (2.7 mg/cm s of Fe", isotopic abundance
75%) stationary and with source and absorber vibrated relative
to one another; (b) Data of Fig. 6(a) replotted with ordinate
multiplied by « X| in order to compare with theoretical expression
given by the solid line.

10

20

30

TIME CHANNEL

40 50 60 70 80
CHANNEL = 9.4 m^sec)

(I

Fig. 7. Time spectra obtained with various energy shifts of the
emitted gamma ray. The absorber was the same as in Fig. 6.
The energy shift AE is given in terms of the linewidth deduced
from the mean life of the state, T=h/r. The dashed curves give
the time spectra when the source is vibrated; the solid curves
are the theoretical predictions.

—

H

264

LYNCH, HOLLAND, AND H A M E R M E S

518

shift in energy of the emitted gamma ray. The
amount of the shift, AE, is given on the figure in terms

a

.

1.0

1

'

'___'_

"

L

0.8
0.6

.'

the emitted line. The data taken with the source
vibrated has been represented in these figures by the

.

light dashed line in order to keep the number of data
points from becoming so large as to be confusing. The

1

'

solid curve is as before

.'ilp

0.4 "i

AE«0

-

Ot
1

-i

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

i.o-

0.80.6-

0.4-

AE = ir

!

Qi
i

>-\

i

0.80.6-

-

0.4-

same as that used in Fig. 2. Similar data for a
mg/cm2 of Fe 67 in an enriched foil)
is shown in Fig. 8 and for a still thinner foil (0.22 mg/cm 2
67
of Fe
in a normal isotopic concentration) in Fig. 9.
Not shown are data which were obtained to verify
the

-

——

'

i

1

1

1

1

1

1

'

the prediction of the theory that the delayed time
spectrum depends only on the magnitude of the shift in
gamma-ray energy and not on its sign. A run was made
in which data were accumulated only during travel of
the source in one direction and the result was compared
with that obtained when data were accumulated during
travel in both directions. No difference could be
observed between the two runs.
All of the data have been compared to the theoretical

-

Ls&togMi+j

i.o-

z
8

a theoretical curve calculated
according to Sec. II, with the foil thickness parameter
thinner foil (1.27

0.2 .f

0.2-

of T=h/r, the expected full width at half maximum of

"pv/

AE=3r

0.2- j
i

^^^^i^-l+ift

i.o-

V

0.8-

-

0.6-

-

0.4-

0.2-

AE«5r

j

-

0^'

1

1

1

J^j&^UiJ.-M+U

i.o-

H

0.8-

f

0.6-

-

•

0.41

AE=7r

0.2- f

;

1

4

0*

.

,

.

1

1

1

1.

1

10

20 30 40 50 60 70 80
10
TIME CHANNEL (I CHANNEL -9.4 m/tsecj

Fig. 8. Time spectra obtained with various energy shifts of the
emitted gamma ray. The absorber was a rolled foil (1.27 mg/cm2
of Fe", isotopic abundance 75%). The energy shift
is given
in terms of the line width deduced from the mean life of the state,

AE

T=A/t. The dashed curves give the time spectra when the source
was vibrated; the solid curves are the theoretical predictions.

20

30

TIME CHANNEL

40
(I

50

60

70

80

CHANNEL = 9.4 m/tsec)

Fig. 9. Time spectra obtained with various energy shifts of the
emitted gamma ray. Absorber was rolled foil (0.20 mg/cm J of
Fe", natural isotopic abundance). The energy shift AE is given in
terms of the linewidth deduced from the mean life of the state,
T=H/t. The dashed curves give the time spectra when the source
was vibrated the solid curves are the theoretical predictions.
;

265

TIME DEPENDENCE OF RESONANTLY FILTERED

y

RAYS

519

expression at the end of Sec. II, the values of parameters

given in Table I being used. These are all as expected
except j8; all theoretical curves are plotted for a value
of /8 twice that obtained from the weight of the absorber
foil.

With this reservation and when allowance is made

for the effect of finite resolution time, the fit between

theory and experiment is fairly good. In particular,
the predicted overshoot was observed; this is most
noticeable in Fig. 7, where the curves for 5r, 7r, and
lir show that, at certain times, a higher intensity is
obtained with the absorber than without it.
We have chosen to plot the relative transmission as
a function of time, using the energy shift AE as a
parameter to label the various curves. This has the
advantage of allowing a direct estimate of the effect
of time resolution. One could, of course, plot the trans-

mission as a function of AE with the time as a parameter. This is done in Fig. 10 which shows the theoretical
and experimental transmission (relative to that of the
vibrated condition) vs AE for the times t=r/2 and
/=4r after the formation of the excited state. Note

2345678

10

ENERGY DIFFERENCE IN UNITS OF r
Fig. 10. Transmission (relative to the vibrated condition) of
enriched Fe" absorber obtained at \t and 4r after formation of
the 14.4-kev state. The solid and dashed curves represent the
theoretical predictions; the circles the experimental data points.

test

static

for

polarization of source

transmission measurements were

and

detector,

made with various

orientations of the clamped source

and absorber. No

from about 3r at t=r/2 to about 0.7r at /=4r. The
half-width measured without consideration of time was
about 1.6r for this particular absorber (1.27 mg/cm2

than the statistical accuracy of 1% was
found. In another measurement, an upper limit of 5
gauss was put on the local magnetic field, with a
probable value close to the earth's field. These two

Fe»).

observations

In some cases the discrepancies are larger than
experimental error. A number of possible sources of
deviation from the theory were investigated. First,
the theory assumes that no scattered radiation was
detected. However, the geometric arrangement we
used in order to keep the coincidence rate high was such
that any appreciable scattering would have been
detected. We made a crude check of this by increasing

absorbers were polarized. Third, because the measured
linewidths were somewhat greater than they should have

that the apparent half-width at half maximum decreases

the distance from the source to detector from f in. to
2 in. The fact that no change in the time spectra other
than the reduced counting rate was observed indicates
that scattered radiation was not contributing to the
effect. Second, the source and detector might be
polarized (because of permanent magnetization or
by stray magnetic field) arid thus change the relative
intensities and polarizations of the hyperfine lines.

To

Table I. Values of parameters used with theory of Sec. II

effect larger

make

it

unlikely

that

the

source

or

been, one should perhaps average over a range of energy
shifts in the region of the

nominal displacement AE.

A series of curves were calculated by averaging the
curves for a given AE over a Gaussian distribution of
AE. Although the agreement between theory and
experiment could be improved in some cases in this
way, it was worse in other cases and no net improvement
resulted.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are indebted to Dr. G. J. Perlow and Dr. S. S.
Hanna for suggesting

the original problem

and

for

supplying the proper sources and absorbers for performing the experiments. J. B. Baumgardner and A. Vander-

gust built most of the special electronic circuits used.

to fit data in Figs. 6, 7, 8, and 9.

APPENDIX
Parameter

Value

Comment

/

0.6

/'

0.6

Fraction of 14.4-kev gamma
rays emitted without recoil.
Fraction of Fe" nuclei absorbing without recoil.
Internal conversion coefficient.
Peak absorption cross section
for no hyperfine splitting.

a
<r

15

1.48XlO-»cm*
2N<r

N

f

The integral

[2ibw

+-

— J„r
1

a'{t)=

I

2iri

d<*u

\i\

I

w 2 — wo' 2- twXJ

(Al)

can be evaluated by completing the contour on a

Thickness parameter of theory.
(This value is twice the expected value.)

finding the residues of the integrand. Since wo'^X, the

Number of Fe" nuclei per cm'

exponent has singularities at w=±aj</+$tX. It is easily

in absorber. (Obtained from
weight of foil.)

semicircle in the upper half of the complex o> plane and

shown

that

the

contribution

from

w=— wo'-f-ftA

contains a factor X/W, so this term can be neglected.

266

LYNCH, HOLLAND, AND HAMERMESH

520

We are then left with
~

J

Substitution in Eq. (A4) yields

giut

2m J

**-— f

W -« -£*X

Xexp[ib(co—

W— 2^) _1]= —

Gdw

<p Gdw

«

/

ib

= -exp[W/-|Xf] £ (

a>o— wo

=

— <f +«x™

Gdw+ <f

I

'

GdoA.

(A2)
V

J'

'

J-o'+h-x

In the first integral we let z=w— wo— ?iX so that

y
Gdw=-^— exp(W—
®
—
2«.A*+ja
2«
1

Ji=

)

(B+ 1 >7
X(^)-i<«+
<(ft*)-*
n+1 (26i/i)

_.

,

,

_ "

= -exp[W<-§XOE

(A6)

[A]

n-1 LO) -

1

2^0

X(bt)- n ' 2J n (2bW)
X(ft/)~

(A6a)

(A6b)

= exppo> /— |X/+tft/(«o— wo')]-

(A3)

where S„ is the summand in Eq. (A6a).
In the second integral we set z=w-a>o'-|«X so that

—
w/,r+
I

Ii=

<p

Gdco=

»

—

We use the generating function (A5) in the first sum
and find a term which cancels I h so we are left with

j

exp[io)o't— %\t]

.,

2iri

L [-—
»—
*—

«'(/)=«pCW/-ixo

UzW-«o

L

V

—

I

Lo)
»Lo)o-o)
0>o'J
°°

ft\i
K^x-i
exp

r /

dz

X(bt)-»i*J n (2bW)

z/J

« fi(wo _ o)o')T

1

=exp[W/-§XO £

exp[W/-|X<]

2m

n=o L

/£)
«-0

<fe
(a)

-0)o')

n+1

expU ( tz+- \ 1
L \
Z/J

J

6

X(ft/)" /2/„(2ftM).

(A4)

(A7)

For large values of (o) — o) ') it is convenient to obtain

From the formula for generating Bessel functions,

exp[^(«-l/«)]=

E
«—

«-/«(*),

(A5)

a '(t) from the sum of (A3) and (A6a). Then we have

/— |X0J
expi
a'(/)
exp[zo)o'/—
(/) = exp[to)o
jA/Jj — expj
'

I

m
exp[i(te+-)] =
i (t/b)**z»J m (2bW).
m—co
Z/ J
L V

L

r

ft

f

«>

we find
(ASa)

+ £ f—
«=1 \O)

— 0)0 '/)

h(o>o— o>o')2
J

LO)o— o)o'
Lo)o—
O)o'

(bt)-"'V n (2bHi)

(A3)
\

267

Effect of Radiofrequency Resonance on the Natural Line Form (*).

M. N. Hack and M. Hamermesh
Argonne National Laboratory

-

Argonne,

III.

(ricevuto I'll Ottobre 1960)

Summary.

— The form of Zeeman

lines in the presence of a resonant

magnetic field is determined. The spontaneous emission distributions are obtained from the steady- state solutions, leading to a prerotating r.f

.

diction of the splitting of Zeeman lines at rotation frequencies corresponding to well separated single- and multiple -quantum resonance frequencies, as well as at the resonance frequency in the Majorana case.

1.

- Introduction.

Some time ago Bitter x and Pryce 2 indicated the possibility of a new
method of detecting radiofrequency resonance, by means of certain changes
in the radiation emitted by an atom when it is subjected to a radiofrequency
field at a resonance frequency between its Zeeman levels in a constant magnetic field. At that time the observation of such an effect appeared difficult
to perform, since it would require large radiofrequency field amplitudes and
(

)

(

)

high resolution of the emitted radiation in order to detect the changes pro-

duced by applying the radiofrequency field. However, the possibility of an
experiment on the nuclear Zeeman lines by means of the Mossbauer effect
has renewed interest in this problem ( 3 ).

(*)

Work performed under the auspices of the IT. S. Atomic Energy Commission.

1

F. Bitter: Phys. Mev., 76, 833 (1949).

f )
2
(

A.

)

M. H. L. Pryce: Phys. Rev., 77, 136 (1950). We are indebted to Professor
x
and 2 to our attention when we informed
)

Abragam for bringing references

(

(

)

him of our results.
3
A preliminary experimental attempt was reported by E. C. Avery, C. Little( )
john, G. J. Perlow and B. Smaller at the Allerton Park Conference, University of
Illinois (June 1960).

268
4-9- **^.^.***^.*4-**4»9"?"9-*****4»9'********4"9»^ 44-4-4-4-4-4-4-J>4-4-4>4-4-4-4-4-4-4'4-

EFFECT OF RADIOFREQUENCY RESONANCE ON THE NATURAL LINE FORM

2

[547]

In the present note we study the influence of radiofrequency resonance on
the natural line form of the emitted radiation.

The general theory is closely

related to the steady-state solutions found in the study of multiple-quantum
transitions ( 4 ).

2.

- The two-level ease.

We first consider a system undergoing radiative decay from a pair of levels a
and p to levels a' and p' respectively, in the presence of a rotating r.f field
which produces transitions between a and ft (Fig. 1). We wish to study the
.

effect

on the emitted spectral lines when the angular

frequency of rotation co is close to the resonance f re-

a

r

.

q

(

J

—

quency o) a p= (Ea Ep )lh between the upper states,
and the amplitude of the rotating field is sufficiently
large to produce an appreciable probability of transfer between a and ft during their mean life-time. We
shall assume that both states decay at the same rate.
For the present we neglect the influence of other
levels on the resonance a <-->/?.
In the following
section the possibility of transitions to other levels
will

be taken into account, leading to corresponding

'

—

a'

*
Fig.

1.

- Decay transi-

tions in the presence of

at the resonance frequencies associated

results also

^

6

a

rf

-

field

-

with well separated single- and multiple-quantum
transitions, as well as at the single resonance frequency in the case of equally

spaced levels.

To investigate the effect of the radiofrequency resonance on the natural
we study the solution of the system of equations

line form,
(la)

ib ao

= H exp [i(co ap- co)t] b po + 2 s M

\a'i l

ex P C*K«'

~ ^xW 6

<*'i

»

x

(16)

ib a

(lc)

ib

,

h

po

= Ba Hm exp [*(a>1 — co^)t]ba0
.

,

= H exp [i(co — co^f] b ao + J H^,^ exp [i{co^, - coa b^
)t]

,

a

(Id)

ib

fi%

= Hp

,

lg{fi0

exp [i(o a

- topp)

t]

bp

,

subject to the condition that initially no photons are in the radiation
(2)

ba

,

h (0)

=b

,

fi

la

(0)

=

field,

.

4
M. N. Hack: Phys. Bev. 100, 975(A) (1955); 104, 84 (1956); H. Salwen:
( )
Phys. Rev., 99, 1274 (1955); C. Besset, J. Horowitz, A. Messiah and J. M. Winter:
Journ. Phys. et Bad., 15, 251 (1954); J. M. Winter: Ann. Phys., 4, 745 (1959).
y

J

269

m. n.

[548

For

H = 0,

i.e.,

hack and m. hamermesh

3

for zero amplitude of the radiofrequency field, these equa-

6
tions reduce to the equations of Weisskopf and Wigner ( ) for describing the
elements
of the intermatrix
For
vanishing
states.
excited
of
radiative decay

action with the radiation

field,

= 0, etc., they would reduce to the

-H^^i

equations describing the transitions produced by the radiofrequency field alone.
In general eqs. (1) are too complicated to solve exactly. Nevertheless, for
the cases of practical interest a satisfactory approximate solution can be obtained. For this purpose we look for solutions of the form

(3a)

b a0

= Ca exv[—ipf],

(36)

b 0o

= Cp exp [— i(p + o> — a))t]

.

afi

Substituting (3a) into (lb) and integrating, subject to the initial condition

(2),

and inserting the result

GW + P — CO
and eqs.

(3)

into (la) gives
1

pC^HCp+C.^B

(5)

X

— exp [i(w + p —
a<x

>

co?.) t]

(For simplicity photon occupation numbers have been suppressed.)
It is now important to note that for the times of actual interest, i.e., during

a long time interval which includes the mean lifetime of the decaying states,

by virtue of the smallness of the decay constant

(line

width) compared to

the line frequency, the last term in eq. (5) is practically constant ( 6 ).

Denoting

V. Weisskopf and *E. Wigner Zeits. Phys., 63, 54 (1930).
V. Weisskopf and E. Wigner: ref. ( 6 ). One can estimate the upper limit
of the interval to be of the order of a few times r- 1 In (w /JT), for r
co
At the same
time one obtains an estimate for the lower limit (non-linear decay contribution to the
change in probability of remaining in the initial state at very early times) as being
at most of the order of the period 2n/co
These results follow already in the Weisskopf5

(

:

)

6

(

)

<

.

.

Wigner approximation, even with the usual neglect of the frequency variation of the
matrix element and density of states. In this case the second term in the sum in
eq. (5) leads to a factor
OD

r[exp[i(w-a> A -£;r)f|

^

rr^

dc°A

= 2m + exp rln<1T
[£ rt]I

,

270

EFFECT OF RADIO-FREQUENCY RESONANCE ON THE NATURAL LINE FORM

4

— (ij2)r-C

value by

its

7
<x

(

),

[549]

we have
v + -r\ca = nc,.

(6a)

In the same way we get

—

(46)

Or'

co a
iico^' + p— co
= tLR'fiKjfi exp[—
— —

)t]

—1

:

p

CO,

CO

,

CO c

and

HCa = [p + ^r+co^-co)<v,

(66)

where by the restriction to the case of equal lifetimes r has the same value
as in (6a).

The simple eigenvalue problem, eqs. (6a, 6), has the solutions
1

i

P± =2 (<» — (w j) + w±— -T,

(7a)

fl/

where

^ ± = ±K(co-co^) + 4ff^
2

(76)

>

and

±

(8a)

1
(86)

^../.

r > 0,

V2

i± [(co - COtf

—

co„pY

IT [(G)-0)^)«

CO

+ 4H«]*

+ 4fl-»]*]

7
and the last term furnishes the deviations. For all t>0 we have
and for £ » 1/eo, I ~ {exp pia>£]}/*(co — ir/2)t. More refined estimates tairing
into account the frequency variation of the matrix element and density of states lead
to similar results. The dependence of the decay constant on the r.f. quantities in our
case (co — co a/3 H is also weak since these are very small, of the order of the line
width, compared to the frequency of the line. Decay theory has been discussed from

where

(

)

|I|<l/a>t,

,

)

a different viewpoint, based on the characteristic functions of the total-energy operator,
Theor. Phys., 6, 1053 (1958).
7
We suppose the imaginary parts of the decay constants to be absorbed into
(
the energies E a and Ep. Then Tis purely real and moreover, as one readily verifies, >0.

by L. A. Khalfin: Sov. Phys. Journ. Exp.
)

We take r strictly positive, since we naturally are not interested in oases where selection
rules forbid the decay.

*

.

271

is

HACK and M. HAMERMESH

M. N.

[550]

The particular superposition satisfying the initial condition that the system
is given by
time t =

in the state a0 at

\o = Q\« ex P [- W+ Q + &-* ex P [- *P- fl
= C+« +/> eXP [— *+fl + -« C-/3 eX P [— V- Q) eX P t— *( W
»

(9)

ft

.

/J0

c«)q

(

The probabilities of finding the system subsequently, at time t, in the states
a0 or /?0 are therefore
\b

ao

(t)\*=(l-P)exj>[-n],

po

(t)\*=Pex V [-rt],

(10)
\b

where
42? 2
(11)

i.e.,

1

(a,-«, tf ). + 4H i

Sin2

2 «»

~ »^" + ***

'

the Eabi transition probabilities multiplied by the exponential decay

factor

exp[— TV],

The probability amplitudes for finding the system in the lower levels after
decay, with a photon of frequency a> x or a> a respectively in the radiation field,
are ( 7 )

Moo) = Ha a lr}+C +l
0>X

— aa — p + rj-C- (Dl—O)

<*>o

—

>

x

CD

(12)

>

«•

H

1

bp\oo) =HpJr)+C +t

0>*/3'

— P+ + + V-C.
CD

0) a

—

0) a

P- + 0)

where the constants r] ± (\r]+\ 2 4- \v~\ 2 = 1) determine the particular superposition satisfying an arbitrary initial condition.
For the initial condition corresponding to (9), rj+=C +i(X and r}-=G_ %
For

,

(13)

o)

=wp
a

(r.f.

resonance),

the corresponding emission probabilities are therefore

b^ a -(oo)

(

(a> A -a)o) 2

#«*'| 2
[((o x

-

<wo)

[{co a

-

o>i)

a

+ r*/4

- r*/4 - # + r*(m -o) y'
2

2

]

(14)

b^(oo)\^ = \m^Y

2

- r^/4 - b" + r
2

where
(15)

2

]

0) n

=

O),

2

(o>

-

o)o)z

272

EFFECT OF RADIOFREQUENCY RESONANCE ON THE NATURAE LINE FORM

6

[551]

Similarly for the condition that the system is initially in the state /?0 at time

*=0,

m

[{o) X

-

co

[{co a

-

co'

2

- r*/4 - H*Y + r*(a> -

2

a>

)

y - T^/4 - F 2 ] 2 + r*{a> a - co

)

x

)

(16)

'

(ayo-cooy + r'l*

The effects of the r.f

.

field

'

2

on the emitted spectral lines are readily seen in

They persist and take an even simpler form in the
case of equal populations (and random phase difference) in the levels a and /?.

the solutions (14) and (16).

In this case the emission distribution is the superposition with equal weights
of the distributions for the pure steady-state solutions

where the components

are displaced without change of shape.

Averaging over the inital states and summing over all the final photon
states at the energy tiw K

,

we obtain for the line a -> a' the photon frequency

distribution

=—

P(CO A )res

(17)

4tt [{(o x

-

co

+ # + T /4
- T /4 - # + r*((o

(a>x

o)

2

2

)

2

2

2

)

w 2

2

2

]

x

*

)

The similar distribution for the line f$ ->/?' is obtained by replacing co by co
The corresponding results in general, i.e., not restricted to r.f. resonance, are
.

P(mx) =

(18)

±71

T + T + I ° ~ W^ )2+

a>x—a)
<o x

—

{(

0>

—

(O*8 \ 2

3

1
1
)____

0) Q

_^ _^ + r«u -to - —
co

(co

)2

™**

Hi -(°>- <°«J (^A-«02

\

(O xfi

A

and the similar relation for the line (i -> ft' obtained by replacing co
co and changing the sign of the last term in the numerator.
a)a5
Fig. 2 shows the behavior of the emission distribution at resonance,
,

by

—

increasing values of the radiofrequency field amplitude.

for

When the field ampli-

tude is sufficiently large that the angular frequency of oscillation between a
and /? is comparable to the decay rate, the spectral lines a -> a' and ft -> /?'
each exhibit two peaks.

The

distribution P(a> A ) re

is

,

the superposition of two

Lorentzian ( 8 ) components of equal intensity, and widths equal to r, centered
at

±H

ft>

8
(

)

.

The frequency dependence of the factor (\E aet

t

\

e(a> A

)&Q leads to asymmetry

For the frequencies of interest, however, because of r<eo
we make a negligible error by replacing this factor for simplicity by its value at the
of the

normal line

5

(

).

,

273

M. N.

[552J

HACK and BI. HAMERMESH

One verifies further that the splitting of the spectral lines appears only
As the relative deviation of co from resonance inco close to resonance.

for

creases, both lines tend to their natural forms (the intensity of the off-frequency

The emission

component drops to

zero).

the two-level case

illustrated in Fig. 3.

is

distribution

near resonance

in

(1/2)

P

M2

(

"*ks
CO-

Ct)-Ct)

r

=

H

H = 2T
CO =U) r

Fig.

at

2.

- Emission distribution P^co^)

resonance for increasing
tude.

r.f.

ampli-

Fig. 3. - Emission distribution
for fixed

P^co^)

R=\r and varying deviation
from resonance.

At large w A it tends to zero by virtue of the retardation, as required for
convergence of the total radiated energy. For small co A (frequencies up to and even
beyond the line frequency) it has the approximate value jTco^/a)

line center.

.

.

274

EFFECT OF RADIO-FREQUENCY RESONANCE ON THE NATURAL LINE FORM

3.

[553]

- Arbitrary number of levels.

The preceding treatment of the. decay from two levels can readily be extended to the case of an arbitrary number of decaying states 9 ). We will
(

show that the splitting of spectral lines by r.f fields also occurs at distinct mul.

tiple-quantum resonance frequencies, as well as at the resonance frequency
in the case of equally spaced levels.

For this purpose we consider a rotationally invariant system which interthrough magnetic moments yJt and y a /a with an external magnetic
field consisting of a constant field 3^Q and a perpendicular rotating field of
constant amplitude Jf and angular velocity co, which causes transitions between the levels of the system in the constant field.
Omitting for the moment the interaction with the radiation field, and
choosing the z direction along the constant field and the x axis along the
direction of the rotating field at time t = 0, we have for the Hamiltonian of
the system
acts,

,

8=H + H',

(19)

where

H'= {y J + yzJ^'W? cos cot)i + (^ sinco«)y]

(20)

x

x

H contains the interaction with the constant field and the J, -J interaction,
2

and commutes with

the

z

-component

of

the

total

angular

momentum

The Schrodinger equation takes on a more convenient form if we transform
by means of the
unitary operator U= exp[iJs a>*/^]. Then

to the co-ordinate system of the rotating magnetic field ( 10 )

(21)

<p

= Uy> = exTp[iJ wtlfi]y)
z

satisfies

ih^ = W<p,

(22)

When the calculation is extended in addition to an arbitrary number of lower

9
(

)

which a given state can decay, the decay constants combine additively to
It is this summation which leads in practice to the (approximate) equality of lifetimes of the decaying states. When several states decay to the
same level, cross terms appear which are rapidly oscillating for co > J*.
10
I. I. Rabi, N. F. Ramsey and J. Schwinger: Bev. Mod. Phys., 26, 167 (1954).

levels to

give the total width ( 5 ).

(

)

275

hack and m. hamermesh

m. n.

[554]

9

where the transformed Hamiltonian

W=H -coJ +V

(23)

z

with

V= y Jv>X+y J*#

(24)
is

%

x

independent of the time.

The transformed Schrodinger equation' (22) has steady-state solutions
(25)

cp

= w-exp [— iwt]

.

By means of this transformation, the problem is reduced to the solution
of

an eigenvalue problem.

As in the two -level case treated in the previous

section, the introduction of the decay transitions effectively changes

w accord-

ing to

w -+ w -2r,

(26)

where r is the decay constant. Here, as before, we consider the case where
decay at the same rate. In this case the eigenvalue problem is the
same as in the absence of decay. (In the general case, the effect of decay is
all levels

HT

to introduce constants }i/\,

value equations.

2 > •••

into the diagonal terms of the eigen-

In the case treated here,

all

the .T's are equal).

For well separated resonance frequencies and for a> in the neighborhood
of a resonance frequency, it has been shown 4 that the eigenvalue problem
can be reduced to a two-level problem, even in the case of the higher order
multiple-quantum transitions.
Equations (1) then apply directly, with H replaced by an expression of
the type of higher order perturbation theory, ( n ) and o>
co^ replaced by
a quantity Q' 12 ). The splitting of the spectral lines thus occurs for each of
(

)

—

(

the resonance frequencies, including the ones corresponding to multiple- quan-

tum transitions. Only the two lines emanating from the particular initial and
final levels of

the r.f

.

field.

the given resonance transition are split by the application of

This follows from the fact that only these levels have appreciable

components in the corresponding steady-state solutions which become almost
degenerate at the given resonance.

The opposite case of equally spaced levels, where

several resonance fre-

quencies coincide, can be treated by similar methods.

Apart from the field-

(

u M. N. Hack: reference
M. N. Hack: reference

4

)

(

)

(

12
(

),

eq. (51) for 8.

),

eq. (42), (50), (51).

4

'

276

EFFECT OF RADIOFREQUENCY RESONANCE ON THE NATURAL LINE FORM

10

[555]

independent term of w, the steady-state solutions for this case (Majorana case)
can be expressed in the form ( 13 )

(27)

O£=d£.(0),

(28)

wf = ju[{oj — w Y + 4# ]*
2

r

,

where
cosO =

{29a)

{29b)

co r

sin d

[{a)

—

(o r

[(co

—

a) r

y + 4# 2 ]*

2H

=

y + 4B" 2 ]*

'

= yjJ^ 2H = y yf and the d ^m are representations of the rotation group.
(

,

j

1

Applied to the decay problem, they lead to the probability amplitudes

(30)

V»m = dfm exp {- i(m[co - co r ] + (x[{m - co r 2 + 4# 2 ]* - \ir)t)

(31)

&; £(oo)

)

(

= dfm H

- K + m[w -

t

coa

oj r ]

,

+ j*[(a> - co Y + 4fl- ]*) + JiT
2

r

In the case of equal populations and random phases, this gives

p;>,) = ^7i£2I<U0)I 2

(32)

-

1

*{co7- (co
i.e.,

+ m[(o - oj + /x[{a7^1oJ*~+lH>¥)y + T /4
2

'

r]

a superposition of normal components with widths r, centers at

co

+7n[co

—

to r

]+ix[{w — co r 2 4-4ff 2 ]^,
)

ju

=—

j,

— 7+1, ...?,

and intensities proportional to the squares of the coefficients of the rotation
matrices.

In this case, each line thus splits in general into a number of components
equal to the multiplicity

2j-\-l.

However, in certain cases fewer components

may appear, because some of the intensity coefficients vanish. At resonance
{(o

= co

r ),

next to

13
(

)

this occurs
last

when the multiplicity is odd, for the central level

(the

and alternate components are absent) and besides the central

H. Sal wen: reference

4
(

),

eq. (38), (39).

;

277

HACK and M. HAMERMESH

M. N.

[556]

level for all the alternate levels starting

11

from the next to

last (the central

component is absent).

(

ct)-(t)

r

-

-

*UH

0)-OJr --2H

n \

3 2

P 3 /2

r\

W
H-f

\

a)

0)-Wr -H

-

-

0J=CJ

r

//1Y\%"

////

"*
1

1

1

1

1
1

1

Photon

Photon

frequency

frequency

Fig. 4. - Emission distribution P^ioy^) for fixed
(6)

1

1

1

I

*V3y

0J f

,

co^
t

co*

H=^T and varying co>(o

r .

(a)

ra=f

m=\. The corresponding curves for co<cor are obtained by reflection in the verthrough co
The curves for negative m are obtained by reflection in the
same axis and displacement to the corresponding mean emission frequency.

tical axis

.

In the particular case of j = \, eq.

(32)

reduces to eq. (18)

ff.

(Figs.

2

and 3). The graphs of P^ico^) for the case of j = f are shown in Fig. 4a and b
for fixed

H = T/2.

278

EFFECT OF RADIOFREQUENCY RESONANCE ON THE NATURAL LINE FORM

12

RIASSUNTO

[557)

(•)

determina la forma delle linee di Zeeman in presenza di un campo magnetico
Le distribuzioni della emissions spontanea vengono ottenute
dalle soluzioni per lo stato continuo, e portano alia predizione della scissione delle linee
di Zeeman sia per frequenze di rotazione pari alle ben distinte frequenze di risonanza quantistiche singole e multiple, sia per la frequenza di risonanza nel caso
di Majorana.
Si

rotante risonante a r.f.

(*)

Traduzione a cura della Redazione.

279

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 4, Number 8

April

15,

I960

RECOILLESS RAYLEIGH SCATTERING IN SOLIDS
C. Tzara and R. Barloutaud
Centre d' Etudes Nucleai res de Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette (Seine-et-Oise), France
(Received March 21, 1960)

In the present work,

where we detect the elas-

Using the Mossbauer effect, photon sources
and analyzers extremely selective in energy are
now available. We study here with such an analyzer the recoilless Rayleigh scattering by atoms

factor cpT is the relative number of photons scat-

in solids.

tered without energy change.

This effect is related to the x-ray diffraction by
crystals as follows. The interference at the exact Bragg angles occurs when the scattering is
elastic with respect to the lattice as a whole,
that is, without any phonon exchange. Debye and
Waller have calculated the reduction in intensity
of x rays scattered at the Bragg angles in a
solid at temperature T, 1

same factor which gives the proportion of re-

.x

exp
2

where x = T/Q,

k6 L 4

x •'o e

(1)

U
-

J'

d is the Debye temperature,

and
energy
given to the free atom by a photon of energy E

E R = (E 2 /Mc 2

)

(1 - cosfl) is the recoil

scattered at the angle Q.

tic

scattering directly by an energy selection

instead of analyzing a diffraction pattern, the

It

is clearly the

coilless y rays in the Mossbauer effect2

;

in that

czseE R =E 2 /2Mc 2 in Eq. (1).
In order to measure the factor <p

T we have
,

studied the Rayleigh scattering for several maPt, Al, graphite, and paraffin. The
23.8-kev photons emitted by Sn 119 * were scattered at 50° ± 5° and absorbed by a Sn 119 foil
40 mg cm" 2 thick (almos* completely black for
the recoilless photons 3 ) (Fig. 1). The scatterers'
thicknesses were such that the transmission of
the y rays was of the order of 10%.
The Rayleigh- scattered photons are accompanied by inelastically scattered photons (Raman,
Compton), considerably shifted in energy, so
that the selective abs'orption in Sn 119 occurs only

terials:

405

//

280

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 4, Number 8

April

Wet

Sn 119 * source; (2) scatterer; (3) bismuth
119
foil (71.5% Sn
); (5) 62
mg cm" 2 Pd foil absorbing Sn x rays; (6) 1.5
1.

(1)

0.27

±0.03

0.72 ±0.09

0.80

Al

2.15

0,19

±0.016

0.92±0.09

0.62

C

4.13

0.10

±0.01

0.79±0,09

0.68

CH,

5.30

0.020 ±0.01

m

mm

Nal(Tl) scintillator and photomultiplier.

for a fraction a of all the scattering processes;

a is extracted from the form factors given by
Compton and Allison. 4
We have measured the relative decrease A of
counting rate between room temperature T - 300°K
and T„ = 80°K. The recoilless scattering proportion
1

I A
T2

where

2

calc

1.05

Pt

FIG.

1960

Experimental and calculated values oi<pj

Table I.

stopper; (4) 40 mg cm" 2 Sn

15,

'

we notice that the Debye temperatures are deduced from specific heat measurements rather
than from x-ray diffraction.
We have also, using a thin Sn 119 foil as a scatterer, observed at low temperature the resonant

Mossbauer scattering. 5
This method extends the range of solids which
can be studied by means of the Mossbauer effect
or by x-ray diffraction.
It is a pleasure to acknowledge interesting discussions with Dr. Abragam, Dr. Cotton, and

Dr. Jacrot.

€

a f2 -e

is the ratio of recoilless

emission of the

Sn 119 * source and e is its self- absorption at T 2
Here 2 = 0.32 ±0.01 5 and e = 0.05±0.01. We neg-

1

2

.

lect the small recoilless emission at 300°K which

introduces a negligible correction for (p T
The results are given in Table I. The agree.

3

I.

Waller, Ann. Physik 79, 261 (1926).

R. L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik 151, 124(1958).
R. Barloutaud, E. Cotton, J. L. Picou, and J.

Quidort, Compt. rend. 250, 319(1960).
*A. K. Compton and S. K. Allison, X-Rays in Theory

and Experiment (D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc.,
Princeton, New Jersey, 1947), 2nd ed.
p. 781.
,

ment between the calculated and experimental
values of <p is reasonably good, especially when

406

5

C.

Tzara and R. Barloutaud, Compt, rend,

published).

(to be

281

PHYSIQUE NUCLEAIRE.

— Sur

la possibility de mettre

en evidence la coherence

de phase dans la diffusion de resonance des rayons y par des noyaux ato-

miques. Note de M. Alfred Kastler, presentee par M. Gustave Ribaud.

Lorsque la diffusion de resonance des rayons y par des noyaux atomiques d'un
rgseau se fait sans recul du noyau, la coherence des radiations diffusees doit se
manifester par une repartition d'intensite analogue a celle de la diffraction des
rayons
par les electrons d'un cristal.

X

La decouverte faite par Mossbauer

d

que des rayons y de faible energie
peuvent etre emis ou absorbes par des noyaux situes dans un reseau
cristallin sans perte d'energie due au recul du noyau, a souleve un interet
considerable. La finesse extraordinaire des rayons y obtenus dans ces
L'etude de la
conditions permet d'aborder des investigations nouvelles
analyse
cinetique
grace
l'effet
Doppler,
l'etude par
raie
par
a
largeur de
la
structure
Zeeman
et
la
structure
hyperfine
de
ce meme procede de
de la raie, la mise en evidence par une experience de laboratoire de l'effet
Einstein, c'est-a-dire de la difference de frequence entre deux etalons
(

)

:

identiques liee a la difference de potentiel gravifique
confinees jusqu'a present au

2
(

).

D'autres etudes,

domaine optique vont pouvoir etre etendues

au domaine des rayons y. Citons a titre d'exemples les mesures de variation de frequence dans la diffusion des ondes electromagnetiques par les

ondes d'agitation thermique (effet Brillouin), les etudes des effets de polaet d'anisotropie spatiale des radiations de resonance lorsque
emetteur et absorbant sont soumis a des champs magnetiques de directions
variees ( 3 ), enfin les applications des methodes optiques de spectroscopic

risation

des radiofrequences

4
(

).

Une autre question interessante va pouvoir recevoir maintenant une
reponse experimentale, celle de savoir si les radiations de resonance electro-

magnetiques diffusees par des centres resonnants presentent des effets de
coherence de phase. Une telle coherence a ete explicitement admise par
Weisskopf ( 5 ). Si la radiation de resonance diffusee est totalement incoherente, sa repartition spatiale doit etre continue et conforme aux relations de correlation angulaire qui ne font entrer en jeu que le caractere
multipolaire de la transition spectrale et les nombres de spin des niveaux
qui bordent la transition. Si, au contraire, la radiation diffusee est partiellement coherente, comme on peut le supposer pour la composante Zeeman
qui ramene le noyau au niveau magnetique initial, il faut s'attendre a
observer des effets d'interferenCe.

Une diffraction selective doit se faire

dans les directions de von Laue-Bragg, ou dans celles des anneaux de
Debye-Scherrer, suivant que la matiere diffusante est mono- ou polycristalline.

282

(

*

)

Dans le domaine optique, lorsqu'il y a diffusion resonnante de la lumiere
par les atomes d'une vapeur sous faible densite, la lumiere diffusee ne
presente pas de caracteres de coherence. Dans ce cas, l'irregularite des
positions des centres diffusants et les fluctuations de densite masquent
completement la coherence (si elle existe) de Facte de diffusion elementaire
(tout comme l'irregularite des mouvements de translation de ces centres
masque la finesse « naturelle » de la raie). L'apparition, aux fortes densites
de vapeur, d'une reflexion reguliere sur la face d'entree de la vapeur 6
(

)

revele la coherence.

Dans
le

cas de la diffusion resonnante de rayons y par des

le

quantique

caractere

du phenomene

n'exclut pas les proprietes de coherence.

est

noyaux,
Ce caractere

predominant.

Dans le cas de la diffusion de

photons y par les noyaux d'un reseau, le noyau diffusant devient identifiable lorsqu'il recule (par exemple, il peut quitter un noeud du reseau
pour se mettre en position interstitielle). Dans ce cas, la faculte d'interference du photon diffuse se trouve detruite. Mais lorsqu'il n'y a pas de
recul nucleaire, lorsque c'est le reseau tout entier qui encaisse la quantite

de mouvement du recul, le noyau diffusant n'est pas identifiable. Dans ce
cas, la

coherence de phase du rayonnement

liee

a l'arrangement spatial

periodique des centres diffusants doit se manifester.
II

faut remarquer que la coherence n'est que difficilement observable

noyaux diffusants sont ceux d'un isotope irregulierement
dans un melange isotopique. L'observation de la coherence parfaite necessite un arrangement spatial regulier des noyaux diffusants, done
Femploi d'un cristal forme d'un isotope pur ou fortement concentre.
lorsque les
repartis

Lorsqu'on ajoute a cet isotope actif des proportions croissantes d'isotopes
inactifs dans le reseau, l'intensite des raies de diffraction diminue au profit

du fond continu incoherent et le contraste se trouve affaibli.
II

faut pouvoir distinguer la diffusion de resonance nucleaire coherente

de la diffusion normale, egalement coherente, par les electrons des atomes

du reseau. Dans le cas de 57 Fe, ce dernier phenomene est d'ailleurs d'intensite negligeable ( ). Les deux effets sont separables en comparant l'intensite diffusee avec une source immobile et une source mobile. Le mouvement de la source permet de supprimer la resonance nucleaire, il ne
7

modifie pas l'intensite de la diffusion des rayons y par les electrons.
a prevoir que la diffraction nucleaire

II

est

donne des raies de diffraction beau-

coup plus fines que la diffraction electronique a cause de la grande finesse

La localisation precise des
noyaux dans le reseau donne lieu a des caracteres particuliers les franges
spectrale des radiations de resonance nucleaire.

:

d'interference d'ordres eleves doivent etre intenses.
II

faut noter qu'un cristal emetteur de substance-fille
57

57
(

Fe)

conte-

nant des noyaux emetteurs de substance-mere ( Co) donne lieu au phenomene d'autodiffusion dont la coherence peut se manifester par des lignes
de Kossel

8

(

).

283

(

3

)

R. J. Mossbauer, Z. Physik, 151, 1958, p. 124; Naturwissenschaften, 45, 1958,
p. 538; Z. Nalurforschung, 14 a, 1959, p. 538.
2
Rev. Lett., 3, 1959, p. 221;
( ) Craig, Dash, Mc Guire, Nagle et Reiswig, Phys.
Lee, Meyer-Schutzmeister, Schiffer et Vincent, Phys. Rev. Lett., 3, 1959, p. 223;
R. V. Pound et G. A. Rebka, Phys. Rev. Lett., 3, 1959, p. 43g et 554; J- P- Schiffer
(*)

et

W. Marshall, Physik. Rev. Lett, 3, 1959, p. 556.
3
A. C. Mitchell et M. W. Zemansky, Resonance Radiation and Excited Atoms,

( )

Cambridge, University Press, 1934; P. Pringsheim, Fluorescence and Phosphorescence,
Interscience, 1949.
(*)
8

( )
6

( )

A. Kastler, Nuovo Cimento, 6, 1957, Supplemento n° 3, p. 11 48.
V. Weisskopf, Ann. Phys., 9, 1939, p. 23 (voir particulierement p. 25-26).
R. W. Wood, Physical Optics, Mac Millan, New- York, 3* ed., 1934, p. 534; J. L.

Cojan, These, Paris, 1953, Ann. Phys., 9, 1954, p. 385.
7

( )
8

( )

S. S.

Hanna et coll., Phys. Rev. Lett, 4, i960, p. 28.

W. Kossel et H. Voges, Ann. Physik, 23, 1935, p. 677.
(Laboratoire de Physique de I'Ecole Normale Superieure,
24, rue

Lhomond, Paris,

5 e .)

284

Resonant Scattering of the 14-keV. lron-57
y-Ray, and its Interference with Rayleigh
Scattering

When radiation is scattered by a resonator, the
question of its identity of frequency and coherence of
phase with the incident radiation is not simply
answered except for an infinitely narrow incident
line,

when the scattering is fully coherent (see, for

example, the discussion by Heitler 1 written in the
context of atomic resonances but equally relevant to
,

nuclear ones).

Coherence may be experimentally proved by
observing interference between the resonance radiation
and some other form of scattering that is known to be
coherent
for y-rays, one would naturally look for
interference with the Rayleigh (elastic electronic)
scattering. In the long-studied 411 keV. resonance of
mercury- 198, such interference is unobservable 2
because of the thermal broadening of the line as
well as for other reasons. It might just be observable
in samarium- 152, where the natural width of the
961-keV. line is not completely negligible 3 4 in comparison with the thermal
but the best conditions
appear to be provided by the very narrow lowenergy lines discovered by Mossbauer 5 in which a
substantial part of the radiation is unaffected by
recoil or thermal broadening.
After preliminary experiments in collaboration
with Dr. B. S. Sood, in which the resonant scattering
in metallic iron of the 14-keV. line of iron-57 was
found to have the expected intensity, we decided
that a foil of 65 per cent iron-57, electroplated on
thin copper by the Isotope Division, Atomic Energy
Research Establishment, Harwell, would give comparable amplitudes of resonant and Rayleigh scattering at convenient angles. We in fact chose an angle
of 43 ± 2°, which would include the (211) Bragg
reflexion. The geometry of the apparatus is indicated
in Fig. 1
the source 6 about 20 mc. of cobalt-57 in a
matrix of iron- 56, was mounted on a 30 c.p.s. vibrator
so that the exact energy of the emitted radiation
could be oscillated through the resonant energy.
Auxiliary apparatus enabled the intensity of transmission through, or scattering from, the foil to be
plotted automatically as a function of speed, the
abscissae of the resultant graphs extending over
;

,

,

;

;

,

;

285

*&^^&$
~* «.

>»

IV

5 cm.

Fig. 1.
Diagram of experimental arrangement. B, vibrator;
S, source
C, proportional counter ; F, iron foil. The shaded
blocks are heavy alloy shielding. The different positions of the
source and vibrator are
I, for scattering ; II, for transmission
III and IV, for checking absence of shift in transmission
;

:

12,000

11,000

3

10,000

»

3,000

-

cP°°

cpoo^

o°o

2,500

2,000

-2

+2

+6

+4

4

+ 81 + 8

+ 6 +2
+ 4

Velocity of source (10 -2 cm./sec.)
Fig. 2. Plots of intensity versus velocity for transmission (dots)
and scattering (circles). The zero of the velocity scale is fixed
only by the position of the transmission minima.
Positive
velocities are for the source approaching the foil. The position
on the velocity scale is the point at which the acceleration
reverses

M

rather more than half a cycle of vibration, so that
passages through zero velocity in both senses of
acceleration were displayed.
Fig. 2 shows the transmission minima and scattering
maxima obtained it will be seen that the scattering
peaks are somewhat broader and slightly nearer to
one another than are the absorption minima.
The reduced separation of the peaks was, however,
due entirely to the shift of one of them presumably
the whole pattern had suffered an instrumental drift
;

;

286

26,000

23,000

» '20,000

|

8,000
0^0

O
O

000°

7,000

^oo%*P*W

6,000

j_L

+4+2 0-2-4-6 -8 M-S -6-4-2 0+2+4 + 6
Velocity of source (10~ 2 cm./sec.)
Fig. 3. Plots of intensity versus velocity for a separate experiment
in which, as indicated on the velocity scale, negative velocities
are displayed in the centre

during

the

necessary.

long

periods

of operation

that

were

We repeated the measurements with the

apparatus set to display negative, instead of positive,
speeds at the centre, alternating transmission and
scattering measurements and adding the results of all
sets of each kind. Fig. 3 shows that the peaks now
appeared, as expected, more widely spaced than the
dips, with no evidence of general drift. Thus, assuming
the transmission dips to occur at exactly zero velocity,
we can say that the maximum scattering occurs when
the source is approaching the scatterer with a velocity
corresponding to a fraction of the line-width.
It remains to verify that the dips correspond
this need not be so if
precisely to zero velocity
source and scatterer materials are not identical. This
point was checked at the suggestion of Mr. D. A.
O'Connor, by successive transmission experiments
with the source assembly set in the positions marked
;

this amounts to reversing the
III and IV in Fig. 1
velocity-scale about the true zero. No change in the
dip position was found.
If there is some coherence of phase between
resonant and Rayleigh scattering, we should expect
them to be in quadrature at exact resonance, moving
towards coincidence of phase on the high-frequency
Thus, on top of the constant intensity of the
side.
;

Rayleigh and the sharply peaked contour of the
resonant scattering, there should be added a dispersion-type curve representing the interference
between them, with its maximum a fraction of a
line-width to the positive side of zero velocity.

The

287

observed shift and broadening are probably to be
explained in terms of such coherence, but the measurements are not yet detailed enough to show clearly
the asymmetry of line-shape that is also to be expected
or to determine what percentage of coherence exists
full coherence is not to be expected when the incident
line is of similar breadth to that of the resonance.
We have also observed the resonant scattering
from ordinary iron (2-2 per cent iron-57) at a mean
angle of 90°, in the presence of a relatively large
intensity of Rayleigh scattering. We found neither
shift nor broadening of the scattering resonance,
which is consistent with the expectation that, at this
angle of scattering in a magnetic dipole transition,
the resonant component will be polarized at right
angles to the Rayleigh.
It is to be expected that the narrow -line resonance
radiation will show, in its scattering from crystals
containing iron-57, interference phenomena similar to
those of X-rays.
Interesting differences may arise
from the resonant absorption which accompanies the
scattering, from the narrowness of the line as compared with X-ray lines, and from the simple way in
which the exact energy, and with it the phase of the
resonant scattering, may be varied.
;

P. J. Black
P. B. Moon

Department of Physics,
University of Birmingham.
1

*

Heitler, W., "The Quantum Theory of Radiation", chap. 3 (Oxford
Univ. Press, 1944).
Moon, P. B., Proc. Phys. Soc, A, 63, 1189 (1950).

8

Grodzins, L., Phys. Rev., 109, 1014 (1958).

4

Moon, P. B., and Sood, B. S., Proc. Roy. Soc, A, 257, 44 (1960).

•Mossbauer, Pv. L., Z. Phys., 151, 124 (1958);

Naturwiss., 45, 538

(1958).

•Chackett, G. A., Chackett, K. F., and Singh, B., J. Inorg. Nucl.
Chem., 14, 138 (1960).

288

The Mbssbauer Effect in Tin from 120 °k to the Melting Point
By

A.

F.

J.

BOYLE, D.

St.

BUNBURY, C. EDWARDS and

P.

H. E.

HALL

The Physical Laboratories, University of Manchester
Communicated by B. H. Flowers;

MS. received \%th June 1960

Abstract.
Measurements have been made of the intensity of the recoilless
resonance absorption of the 24 kev y-ray from the decay of 119 Snm in metallic
Values of the Debye-Waller factor deduced
tin from 120°k to the melting point.
from these results tend towards the values calculated for a Debye
of 142 °k
the behaviour of the Debye-Waller factor at higher
at low temperatures;

temperatures indicates considerable anharmonicity of the lattice vibrations.
Comparison with evidence from the thermal expansion and specific heat suggests
that the quartic term in the interatomic potential is positive, and that the ratio of

quartic to cubic terms is of the same order as the ratio of cubic to quadratic terms.

In the last few degrees below the melting point the resonance absorption shows
It is suggested that this
effect is due to enhanced self-diffusion in the solid, and it is estimated that the
-8
cm2 sec -1 about 0-6°k below the
diffusion coefficient reaches a value of 10
a rapid drop accompanied by an increase in line width.

melting point.

§ 1.

Th

Introduction

e primary purpose of the experiments to be described in this paper was

way in which the recoilless y emission discovered by
Mossbauer (1958) is affected by the transition from solid to liquid; for
this purpose the 24 kev y-ray of 119 Sn m in metallic tin was used.
The experiments
show that the effect disappears continuously in the last few degrees below the
melting point, and this result is attributed to self- diffusion in the solid. In
addition, measurements of the intensity of the effect down to liquid air temperatures have yielded some information about the nature of the atomic vibrations in
to investigate the

tin.

For the purpose of this paper it is convenient to express the emission of y-rays
from a solid in a way analogous to the elegant result derived by Van Hove (1954)
Van Hove
for the scattering of x-rays or neutrons by an assembly of atoms.
shows that the differential cross section for scattering with momentum change
fix, and energy change ha* is proportional to a quantity »S(x, a>) which is the Fourier
transform in space and time of a time dependent pair correlation function.
S(x, a>) is given by

S(x,a>)=J-r e^/Bexpt-m.r^jexptm.r^)]),
^ 7r J — oo

(1)

ij

where r (t) is the Heisenberg position operator of the ith atom and the symbol ( )
t

289

A. J. F. Boyle, D. St. P. Bunbury, C. Edwards and H. E. Hall

130

denotes an average value in thermal equilibrium.

For emission of a y-ray from

a given atom the equivalent result (Marshall and Schiffer, private communication)
is

that the probability of the emitted y-ray having wave number k is

^JP-00

P( k )= o-

ex P [ic{k-K)t] exp (- £r y |*|)<exp[-xk. r(t)] exp [ik. r(0)]></f,
(2)

where hck is the energy of the y transition and F y its width.
in (e"-* k r(/) e*
-

k r(0)
-

The correlations

) at small times give the emission of y-rays with recoil;

at large

times this factor tends asymptotically to

exp(-2W0 = exp(-*V),

(3)

mean square displacement of the atom (assumed Gaussian) in the
The factor (3) is the Debye-Waller factor,
familiar in x-ray crystallography, and from Eqn (2) we see that this fraction
where x

2

is the

direction of emission of the y-ray.

of the y-rays is emitted as a sharp line with the energy and width of the nuclear
transition.

The cross section for resonance absorption is likewise multiplied
For a Debye solid

by this factor.

where E y is the energy of the y-ray and

M the mass of the emitting atom.

§ 2. Experimental Method
The resonance absorption was measured by moving the source so as to destroy
The source was driven by a flat-topped
the resonance by the Doppler effect.

saw-tooth waveform, so that it was stationary and moving for equal periods of
time; a feedback amplifier was used to ensure that the motion of the source
Pulses from a scintillation counter were passed
followed the driving waveform.

through a single-channel pulse height analyser and then gated into separate
counting channels for the stationary and moving periods the counting rate was
obtained by simultaneously gating pulses from a standard oscillator. The
velocity in the moving part of the waveform was such as to shift the emission line
This velocity was calculated from the
off resonance by about ten half-widths.
frequency of the driving waveform and the amplitude of motion (about 0-2 mm,
measured with a micrometer-eyepiece microscope).
To obtain maximum recoilless emission the source was maintained within a
few degrees of liquid air temperature throughout the experiments, by enclosing
The absorber was situated in the
it in a chamber surrounded by liquid air.
vacuum space below this liquid air vessel. It was held between graphite disks
clamped in an aluminium ring the graphite disks were machined so as to preserve
Palladium foils placed on either
the shape of the absorber when it was melted.
side of the absorber served both to absorb unwanted x-rays and as thermal
Absorber temperatures above room temperature were obtained
radiation shields.
by electrical heating; for temperatures below room temperature the absorber
was connected thermally to the liquid air vessel, and electrical heating was again
used to obtain temperatures up to room temperature. The temperatures of
source and absorber were measured by copper-constantan thermocouples in
contact with them the thermocouples were calibrated in liquid nitrogen and at
;

;

;

the melting point of tin.

290

The Mossbauer Effect in Tin

131

Since the temperatures of source and absorber were normally different, a
made to the results to allow for the thermal shift
reported previously (Boyle et al. 1960) this never amounted to more than 7%.
small correction had to be

;

The apparent absorption actually measured was less than the true absorption
because of the finite source velocity used
sequent reduction of the results.

;

this factor was allowed for in the sub-

§ 3. The Debye- Waller Factor
To convert the measured absorptions into values of the Debye- Waller factor

was necessary to know the fraction of recoilless y-rays emitted by the source.
were made with three absorber thicknesses of
approximately 0-001 in., 0-003 in. and 0-008 in. After correcting for background to the 24 kev photopeak passed by the single-channel analyser and for the
thermal shift, the values of absorption as a function of absorber thickness were
plotted on double logarithmic graph paper for six selected temperatures.
These
six sets of three points could then be compared with a calculated curve of apparent
fraction of recoilless y-rays absorbed as a function of na e~ 2W where n is the
number of atoms per cm 2 and a is the absorption cross section at resonance. In
this way six values of the fraction of recoilless y-rays emitted by the source were
obtained; they agreed within the experimental error and had a mean value of
19-4%. All the results could then be expressed as fractions of recoilless y-rays
absorbed, and using the known value of a and the measured values of «, e~ 2W
could be found from the theoretical absorption curve. The results are shown as

it

To this end measurements

,

,

a function of temperature in Fig.

1.

A slight extrapolation of these results

yields an expected Debye- Waller factor for the source of 40%

;

after correction

for self-absorption due to finite source thickness we expect a recoilless emission

of 23%.

The presence of 113 In K x-rays in the source could account for the

difference between this value
latter estimate is

and the directly measured value of 19-4%;

this

probably about 10% too low, however, because of broadening

200

300

Temperature (\)

Fig. 1.

Temperature dependence of the Debye-Waller factor. Broken line, Eqn (5)
0=142°k; chain curve, corrected for change in
due to thermal expansion;
full curve, corrected for change in
due to thermal expansion, and for the effect

for

of anharmonicity at constant volume.

291

132

A. J. F. Boyle, D. St. P. Bunbury, C. Edwards and H. E. Hall

of the emission line by self-absorption.

Fortunately, the corresponding error

in our values of the Debye- Waller factor for the absorber is of second order in the

source and absorber broadenings, and is probably less than 1%.
For T>\® the high temperature approximation to Eqn

is

(4)

not in

error by more than 7%, and we may put

-

2W = kV

=w
37? 2

T

(5)

= 142°k. MeasureThe broken line in Fig. 1 represents Eqn (5) with
of 195 °k below 2°k, but the
ments of the specific heat of tin indicate a Debye
In view
falls rapidly to a minimum of 125 °K at about 12°k.
effective value of
of 142°k for the
of these large deviations from the Debye law, an effective
Debye- Waller factor does not seem unreasonable. But the experimental results
deviate more and more from the linear law of Eqn (5) as the temperature
rises.

The result x 2 ozT at high temperatures depends only on the assumption

shown in

Fig.

1

W

and T
an explanation of the non-linear relation between
must therefore be sought in terms of anharmonicity of the

of harmonic forces

;

lattice vibrations.

Anharmonicity can affect x 2 in two ways. First, the effective Debye
will
be altered by thermal expansion; this is the effect considered by Zener and
Bilinsky (1936).
If we assume that all lattice frequencies are changed in the
same proportion by expansion

31n0 _

VP

,,v

{}

aTnT~c^'
where /3 is the coefficient of cubic expansion and
From Eqn (6) we have
pressibility.

^ln0

VjP_

dT

CV K'

K

is

the isothermal com-

{)

and if we further assume Gruneisen's law that jSocCv

-(I) =

*©7>
S( r -5 e>

<8 >

since the specific heat is almost classical in the temperature range with which we
are concerned.

If

we insert numbers into Eqn (8) we find that the value of

x 2 given by Eqn (5) has to be increased by a fraction (2-63 x 10 _4 )(r — 10);
values thus corrected are shown by the chain line in Fig. 1.
It can be seen that
this correction is too small by a factor of more than 3 to account for the experimental results. The correction is not very certain because we have, for example,
ignored the very large anisotropy in the thermal expansion of tin but it seems
most unlikely that our estimate could be in error by so large a factor, and there is
;

indeed a second mechanism by which anharmonicity can increase x 2

.

Even at

constant volume x2 is not proportional to T at high temperatures if the forces are

anharmonic. To estimate the magnitude of this effect consider a particle bound
in the one- dimensional potential

V(x) = %ax 2 + bx 3 + cx*;

(9)

292

The Mossbauer Effect in Tin
it is

133

then easily shown that in classical conditions (cf. Peierls 1956) the specific

heat is, including only the lowest order corrections,

"-"{'?[-©'-<©]}

<•>

and the mean square displacement is

-tKtW" ©]}12

j

<">

This model therefore leads us to expect a fractional deviation in x2 about three
more or less according to the sign and magnitude
of the quartic term in the potential.
The measured expansion coefficient and

times that in the specific heat

;

Cv at high temperatures,
excluding the electronic specific heat, is moderately well represented by
specific heat of tin show that the fractional excess in

Af
=1
= 1-38 x 10-*(T- 50).

(12)

Cv

If a correction of 4-5 times this amount is added to the previous correction to the

value of ^calculated from Eqn (5) we obtain the
is

in excellent

agreement with the experimental

full

1, which
This factor of 4-5

curve of Fig.

results.

implies that in Eqn (9)

5-K9'-

< 13 >

In view of the grossly over-simplified model used to derive this result too much
significance should not be attached to it; but it is perhaps worth pointing out

that for a 12-6 interatomic potential ac/b 2 = 1-26.

§ 4.

Diffusion near the Melting Point

Experimental values of absorption in the 0-008 in. absorber near the melting
The full line corresponds to the full curve of Fig. 1.
It is clear that there is a significant decrease in resonance absorption below
the value expected from the Debye- Waller factor in the last few degrees below
Measurements of line width were also made at temperatures
the melting point.
approximately 0-8 and 8°k below the melting point, by taking additional readings
with a source velocity corresponding approximately to the half- width; it was
found that 0-8 °k below the melting point the width of the absorption line had
point are shown in Fig. 2.

increased by a factor of l'97j;J:||.

To see how such an effect might arise, consider the effect of diffusion on the
r(0)
e*
In an ideal lattice this tends asympto(e~*) in Eqn (2).
r( ' )

factor

lc

-

2W at infinite time, but if any diffusion occurs this is no longer true.
In fact, the wavelength of 24kev y-rays is sufficiently short that if the atom has
jumped to another lattice site at time t, (e _lkr(<) > is effectively zero. The value
of ^e _ik r(0 eikr(0) ) is thus the value in the absence of diffusion multiplied by the
chance that the atom concerned has not diffused from its original lattice site, i.e.
tically to e~

(e-*K0e*K0))^e-2prexp[-rD |f|],

(14)

where r D is the mean jump frequency of the atoms in the diffusion process.
Eqn (2) thus becomes
p{k)

-If" exp

[ic(k

-ka )t] exp [(|r y + r D )|*|]e-^A

(15)

.

293

A. J. F. Boyle, D. St. P. Bunbury, C. Edwards and H. E. Hall

134

The effect of diffusion is thus to increase the width of the absorption line by a
factor (r y + 2r D )/r y and thus to reduce its maximum height by the same factor.

When this absorption line is folded with the emission line of width \T y we find
by a factor (r y + r D )/r y
,

that the actual reduction in resonant absorption is

.

-w-v^T-Tm (°K)
Fig. 2.

W^-^H-o-

Resonance absorption in the 0-008 in. absorber near the melting point.

The full line corresponds to the full curve in Fig. 1

Fig.

Diffusion near the melting point.
The point marked by a circle was deduced
from the width of the resonance absorption, and the other points from its amplitude

3.

(Fig. 2).

Values of 2r D /r y calculated from the measured reduction in absorption are shown
a point calculated from the change in line width is also shown the
in Fig. 3
agreement with the other points provides some confirmation of Eqn (15).
The diffusion coefficient D may be estimated from the relation for a random walk
;

;

in three dimensions

r D = 6D/S2,

(16)

where 8 is the step length. A tin atom has four nearest neighbours at 3-02 A, and
two others at 3T6 A. We therefore have taken a mean value of 3T A to obtain the
approximate values of diffusion coefficient indicated on the right-hand ordinate of
Fig. 3. Measurements of self- diffusion in tin (Fensham 1950) only extend up to
223- 1°k (8-8°k below the melting point), where Z>=2-65 x lO" 10 cm 2 sec" 1 along the
tetrad axis and Z) = 0-93 x 10~ 10 cm 2 sec -1 perpendicular to it.
Our results could
reasonably be extrapolated to join these smoothly, but they indicate a greatly

Such an effect has been found
by conventional methods in indium close to the melting point by Eckert and
Drickamer (1951). This encourages us to believe that our proposed explanation of
accelerated rise in diffusion near the melting point.

294

The Mossbauer Effect in Tin

135

the behaviour of the Mossbauer effect near the melting point is indeed correct.

We

may also mention that very rapid recrystallization of an unmelted absorber foil
was observed at temperatures where the Mossbauer effect was reduced.
§ 5.

Conclusion

Our experiments show that the intensity of the Mossbauer effect is essentially
determined by the mean square displacement of the emitting atom during the
The effect of
lifetime of the excited state, in accordance with Eqn (2).
diffusion may be thought of crudely as defining rather precisely the time at which
the y-ray was emitted, and thereby broadening its energy.
because of diffusion that the effect is not observed in the liquid

It is essentially
;

but there seems

to be no reason in principle why it should not be observed in a liquid if the diffusion
coefficient were sufficiently low and the lifetime sufficiently short.

Our analysis in § 3 shows that measurements of the Debye- Waller factor
may give useful information about lattice anharmonicity, if a more thorough
For this purpose the Mossbauer effect has the
advantage over x-ray diffraction that it readily yields absolute values of the DebyeWaller factor.

theoretical analysis can be given.

Acknowledgments

We should like to thank Dr. S. F. Edwards, Dr. A. Herzenberg and Dr. J. O.
Newton for a number of helpful discussion, and Mr. J. R. Rook for computing
One of us (C.E.) is indebted to the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for financial support.

the theoretical absorption integrals.

References
Boyle, A. J. F., Bunbury, D. St. P., Edwards, C, and Hall, H. E., 1960, Proc. Phys.
Soc, 76, 165.
Eckert, R. E., and Drickamer, H. G., 1951,^. Chem. Phys., 20, 13.
Fensham, P. J., 1950, Aust. J. Set. Res. A, 3, 91 4, 229.
Mossbauer, R. J., 1958, Z. Phys., 151, 124.
Peierls, R. E., 1956, Quantum Theory of Solids, § 2.3 (Oxford: University Press).
;

Van Hove, L., 1954, Phys. Rev., 95, 249.
Zener, C, and Bilinsky, S., 1936, Phys. Rev., 50, 101.

295

Mossbauer Effect Applications to Magnetism
:

G. K. Wertheim
Bell Telephone Laboratories, Inc., Murray Hill, New Jersey

The Mossbauer

effect,

the resonant absorption

of

nuclear

gamma rays in solids, may be used to obtain the hyperfine
structure of

Fe" in magnetic materials. Experiments are per-

formed by observing the absorption by stable Fe 67 of the 14.4-kev
gamma ray coming from a source which contains radioactive
Fe" produced by the decay of Co 57 The experiments are not
limited to naturally iron-bearing materials; other substances can
be studied, provided only, that small amounts of cobalt can be
introduced into lattice sites of interest. The magnetic moments
of the ground and first excited states of Fe S7 are known and
.

make possible direct determination of the field at the iron nucleus
once the hyperfine structure has been measured. The magnetic
field

5
transition metals (Fe 3.42X10 6 oe, Co 3.12X10 6 oe, Ni 2.80X10
oe at 0°K), but no hyperfine structure has been observed down to
4°K in the antiferromagnetic transition metals, Mn and Cr. In

the case of yttrium-iron garnet the fields at the iron atoms in the
two types of sites have been obtained (tetrahedral 3.9X10 5 oe,
octahedral 4.7 X10 6 oe). The most complete analysis so far has
been made in FeF 2 where the magnetic field in the antiferro-

magnetic state (,Hr_o = 3.40Xl0 6 oe) and the quadrupole splitting
paramagnetic state (31.2 Mc/sec) have been obtained.
Other materials under investigation are the iron oxides and

in the

some ferrites, where, for trivalent iron, fields in the vicinity of
5.0X10 6 oe have generally been found.

at iron nuclei has been determined in the ferromagnetic

INTRODUCTION

THE

realization

by R. L. Mossbauer

As a consequence of the large mass of the recoiling
1

that the

nuclear recoil associated with gamma emission
may be absent when the decaying atom is bound in a
crystal lattice has led to a

number of interesting ex-

periments in nuclear physics. It also has considerable
promise as a tool in solid-state physics, and in particular
in magnetism. The connection between these usually
unrelated fields arises from the narrowness of the line-

width of the emitted gamma rays, which makes it possible to resolve the hyperfine splitting of the nuclear

energy levels. 2-4 These, of course, reflect the magnetic
field at the nucleus as well as the electric field gradient
tensor, both of which are of immediate interest to the
solid-state physicist.

The statement that the nuclear recoil is absent does
not imply a violation of the law of conservation of
momentum. In the recoil-free emission process the
crystal containing the decaying atom recoils as a unit.

R.

L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik 151, 124 (1958); Naturwissenschaften 45, 538 (1958); Z. Naturforsch. 14a, 211 (1959).
2
L. L. Lee, L. Meyer-Schutzmeister, J. P. Schiffer, and D.
Vincent, Phys. Rev. Letters 3, 223 (1959).
5
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev. Letters 3,

554 (1959).
* I. Ya Barit, M. I. Podgoretskii,
Eksptl. i Teoret. Fiz. 38, 301 (1960).

unit, the energy associated with the recoil is vanishingly

small, and the nuclear gamma ray has an energy which
is

very closely equal to that of the nuclear transition.

It is this fact

(which

we will discuss further below)

that in turn makes possible the resonant reabsorption
of the gamma ray by another atom of the same species,

which is an essential part of all Mossbauer experiments.
The fraction of decays which take place without
recoil depends on the ratio of the free-atom recoil energy
to the Debye energy kd D the characteristic energy of a
phonon. An atom in the solid may be thought of as being
free to emit zero, one, or many phonons, but as being unable to recoil with an arbitrary energy. 6 (This statement
is true only as long as the recoil energy is sufficiently
small so that the atom is not displaced from its lattice
site by the recoil.) When many decay processes are
considered it is found that the average energy of the
emitted phonons per decay is still the free-atom recoil
energy. From this it is immediately apparent that when
the free-atom recoil energy is smaller than kBo, there
will be a high probability of emitting no phonon at all.
These facts are contained in the familiar Debye-Waller
,

6
For a fuller discussion see W. M. Visscher, Ann. Phys. (N. Y.)
194 (1960); H. J. Lipkin, ibid. 9, 332 (1960); K. S. Singwi and
A. Sjolander (to be published).
:

and F. L. Shapiro, Zhur.

9,

;

296

MOSSBAUER EFFECT: APPLICATIONS TO MAGNETISM

111S

factor expressing the fraction of recoil-free events

3

ErV

2/tT\

2
1

/=exp

sequent verification by a number of other groups, 28
attention has shifted to other suitable isotopes. One
of the first to be used, and one which remains of par9-12
ticular interest for solid-state work, is Fe 57
This
isotope offers a combination of desirable properties
which have already made possible experiments ranging
from a verification of the gravitational red shift to the
determination of magnetic fields in solids. The cobalt
parent of Fe 87 has a 270-day half-life, convenient for
most work. The decay is by electron capture, and the
neutrino which accompanies this process has an energy
of ~0.6 Mev. The iron is left in a fairly low state of
excitation (134 kev), from which it makes a 120-kev
.

2ke D i

3\e D /]\

The usefulness of the zero-phonon gamma rays arises
from their unusually narrow linewidths. The natural
linewidth of a gamma ray is determined by the widths
of the states involved in the decay process. Here we
will consider only decays from an excited state to the
ground state of a stable isotope, in which the width is
entirely determined by the excited state. The natural
width of the excited state is determined through the
uncertainty principle by the lifetime of the state; a
-7
lifetime of 10
sec, characteristic of the widely used
Mossbauer isotope Fe 57 leads to a level width of
-9
ev (equivalent to 1.13 Mc/sec), which is
4.6X10
smaller than characteristic hyperfine or quadrupole
,

gamma transition to the first excited state whose lifetime is 10~ 7 sec. The low energy (14.4 kev) of the transition to the ground state used in the experiment leads

to a large fraction of zero-phonon decays. In addition,

Fe 57 has the advantage that iron is a component of

many interesting magnetic materials.

interaction energies in many solids.

EXPERIMENTAL

Other sources of line broadening must also be considered. The thermal motion of the emitting atoms could

be a serious limitation in a gaseous or liquid source, but

Experiments always involve a source which contains
the radioactive species, an absorber which contains the

since the zero-phonon process takes place to a measur-

stable isotope,

we will consider only this

and a radiation detector (Fig. 1). The
substance under study may be used as either the source

case. Lattice vibration frequencies are characteristically

or the absorber. If a substance is naturally iron-bearing

able extent only in solids,
10 13 sec

-1
.

If an isotope is considered whose excited state

there are a number of advantages to using it as an ab-

has a lifetime long compared to the period of the lattice

sorber.

vibration, there will be no first-order Doppler broadening

lattice site, rather than in a site characteristic of cobalt

or shift from this cause. There will, however, be a second-

another is that there is no preceding electron-capture
decay, which could result in a displaced or multiply
ionized atom. The concentration or iron in the material
should be high enough so that an absorber of areal
density 0.1 mg/cm2 of Fe 57 can be made. Since the
natural abundance of Fe 57 is only 2.14%, the use of
enriched isotope may be desirable. (It has also been
possible to use as absorbers substances not normally
iron-bearing into which Fe 57 obtained as separated
isotope was introduced in amounts less than 1 atom-

order Doppler shift*57 which depends only on the average
of

the

square of

on the kinetic
energy, of the lattice atoms. This shift is small and does
not affect the resolution since it is of the same magnitude
and in the same direction for all emitting atoms. Broadening can also arise if the environment of the emitting
atoms varies, as it might in an alloy, or if the crystalline
fields at the emitting atoms have frequencies comparthe velocity,

i.e.,

able to the lifetime of the excited nuclear state.

The existence of recoil-free emission and resonant
absorption is best demonstrated in a simple transmission
experiment in which gamma rays from a source pass
through an absorber to a detector. If the resonant
absorption is destroyed, the counting rate at the detector
will increase. This is most simply accomplished by giving

the source a velocity sufficient to Doppler-shift the
energy of the emitted gamma rays by more than their

natural linewidth; velocities of the order of a small
fraction of 1 cm/sec are required. A simple extension
of this idea produces a "Mossbauer spectrometer" with

which an absorption spectrum is obtained simply by
observing the counting rate at the detector as a function
of the Doppler velocity of the source.

After the original demonstration of resonant absorption by Mossbauer using the isotope Ir 191 , and its sub-

One of these is that the iron is in a normal

percent.)

Substances which do not normally contain iron may
be studied by incorporating small amounts of Co 57 into
them and using them as sources. Such studies yield
information on the fields at isolated impurity atoms.
This general approach is of course also applicable to
iron-bearing substances. In the case of metallic iron no
difference has been found between experiments using the
iron as an absorber in the pure form and those using
67
In
it as a source containing trace amounts of Co
insulators, however, major differences between these
two types of experiment have been observed.
.

8
P. P. Craig, J. G. Dash, A. D. McGuire, D. Nagle, and R. D.
Reiswig, Phys. Rev. Letters 3, 221 (1959).
9
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev. Letters 3, 439

(1960).
10

J. P. Schiffer

and W. Marshall, Phys. Rev. Letters 3, 556

(1959).
8

R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 227

(1960).
7
B. D. Josephson, Phys. Rev. Letters

4, 341

(1960).

11

S. S.

Hanna et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 28 (1960).

" G. DePasquali, H. Frauenfelder, S. Margulies, and R. N.
Peacock, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 71 (1960).

297

G.

K.

WERTHEIM

112S

A second group of substances that has been widely
used is the stainless steels. 15 Most of the experiments
described in this paper were done with sources made by
incorporating Co 57 into type 310 stainless. Here it has
proved to be easy to prepare sources by simply evaporating Co 57 Cl2 solution to dryness on stainless steel and
diffusing at 950°C in a carefully evacuated quartz
-SOURCE

3""0— -o-ooi'

AT.

capsule.

The linewidth of the absorption or emission line in
stainless steel has

been examined in some detail, and

has generally been found to be considerably larger than
the natural linewidth. Any or all of the following mechanisms may contribute.
(1) The environment of the various iron atoms in
an alloy is necessarily different. Since it is known that
the chemical environment can shift the energy of the
nuclear levels, it is possible that there is inhomogeneous
broadening due to this effect.

(2)

The existence of a single line of natural width is

predicated on an electron spin correlation time sufficiently short to destroy the hyperfine interaction. For
a broadening of less than 10%, a spin correlation time
12
less than 3X 10~ sec is required. The actual correlation
time is not known, but values of 10~ 12 or 10~ 13 sec do

not seem unreasonable. Some indication of a temperature-dependent linewidth, which would confirm that
this mechanism is operative, has been obtained.
(3) Broadening can also arise from the finite thick-

and begins to be ap(30%) when the radiation traverses one ab-

ness of the source or absorber,
preciable

sorption length of material.

The importance of this

effect in stainless steel of the thickness generally used

Fig. 1. Experimental arrangements used by the author: (a)
Stationary source and moving, unsplit absorber, (b) Moving,
unsplit source and stationary absorber.

One of the components of the experiment, either the
source or the absorber, should have an unsplit line in
order for the hyperfine spectrum of the other to be observed directly. A number 'of substances have already-

been used for this purpose. The first to be proposed were

as an absorber has been investigated. A series of experiments have been conducted using as a source Co 57
diffused into chromium metal, the combination which
produces the narrowest unsplit line found so far, and
using as absorbers type 310 stainless in a variety of
thicknesses. The linewidth was 0.045 cm/sec, or more
than two times the natural linewidth. No difference
in linewidth was found with absorbers ranging from
0.00025 in. to 0.0010 in., the latter being the thickness
usually used in experiments. It was noted that the frac-

the ferrocyanides, 13 which are diamagnetic and have
no hyperfine field at the iron atom. In general, these
suffer from the disadvantage that they do not contain

much iron for use as absorbers. Considerable improvement can be obtained with a ferrocyanide made with
separated Fe 67 isotope. 14 Even at room temperature this
substance, used as an absorber, is by far the most successful we have yet used, the criteria of excellence being

the linewidth and the ratio of resonant absorption to
photoelectric absorption. Unfortunately, all attempts to

make sources by incorporating Co 57 into a ferrocyanide
have failed 13 because the structure of the cobaltocyanide
is different from that of the ferrocyanide.
13

S.

L. Ruby, L. M. Epstein, and K. H. Sun, Rev. Sci. Instr.

31, 580 (1960).

The author is indebted to J. D. Struthers of this laboratory
or the preparation of this material.

-0.4 -0.2

o

0.2

0.4

VELOCITY IN CM/SEC
Fig. 2. The hyperfine spectrum of Fe" in iron metal, obtained
with a stainless steel source and a natural iron absorber 0.001 in.
thick.

14

'

G. K. Wertheim, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 403 (I960).

298

.13S

MOSSBAUER EFFECT: APPLICATIONS TO MAGNETISM
EFFECTIVE MAGNETIC FIELDS IN THE
TRANSITION METALS

tional absorption in these experiments was not propor-

tional to absorber thickness. This fact

might be con-

sidered evidence that the absorber is thick, i.e., longer

than one absorption length, but the effect could equallywell be caused by the increase in the degraded 120-kev
radiation falling into the energy selection channel. The
deterioration of the gamma-ray scintillation spectrum
with increasing absorber thickness is in accord with the

The first substance in which the field at an iron atom
was determined by the Mossbauer effect was metallic
iron itself. 16 The experiment was originally done with
an iron source as well as an iron absorber. In addition
to the field at the nucleus (3.33X 10 6 oe at 300°K),

the magnetic moment of the first excited state was ob-

These difficulties, inherent in the use of an alloy, have

tained. In subsequent experiments in which an external
magnetic field was superposed, it was shown that the

not prevented the widespread use of stainless steel, but
there is a continuing interest in other substances. One

direction of the field at the nucleus is opposite to the
external magnetization, 17 a result contrary to theoretical

latter interpretation.

of the most promising is

KFeF

3,

a cubic material with

perovskite structure, used as an absorber at room temperature where it is paramagnetic. Its spin correlation

time at room temperature is short enough to result
in a relatively narrow line, while its cubic nature assures
the absence of quadrupole interaction. Its use as a
source is being studied.
Experimentally, two distinct methods for taking data
have emerged. The first uses motion at a constant
velocity, usually symmetrical in the forward and backward directions; different velocities are obtained by
changing frequency or amplitude. As the source of
motion, electromechanical transducers, cams, lathes,
and constant-velocity servos have been used. The experiments reported here were done with a system of
this type employing a loudspeaker voice coil driven
at constant velocity by dc coupled transistors from the
symmetrical sawtooth wave output of a HewlettPackard function generator. In the second method, all
desired velocities are included in the motion, and the
counts are sorted according to instantaneous velocity
of the source relative to the absorber. This is generally
done by using a sinusoidal motion, or more advantageously a double parabola, which has the feature that
equal time is spent at each velocity increment. The
instantaneous velocity is determined by a pickup coil
rigidly attached to the moving source and placed in a
uniform magnetic field. The resulting signal is either
fed directly into the address logic in a multichannel
analyzer or else used to modulate the amplitude of the
energy-selected counts, which can then be sorted by an
unmodified multichannel analyzer.

The first method places somewhat higher demands on
counting rate stability and requires a motion which is
more difficult to obtain, especially at high velocities.
On the other hand, it is more flexible, since part of an
absorption spectrum can be examined without sweeping
through the whole range. The second method requires
a normalization of the data if a sinusoidal motion is
used, since more time is spent at high velocities than
near zero. However, this problem is absent when a
double parabola is used, and for many experiments this
may be the most attractive approach. It might be
noted, however, that the multichannel analyzer system
does not collect data any faster than the constant
velocity system.

expectations. 18

The use of an iron source and absorber gives rise to
an extremely complicated pattern. If a source emitting
an unsplit line is used instead, the hyperfine pattern
of Fe 57 can be obtained directly (Fig. 2). This type of
experiment can readily be adapted to determine the
field at an iron impurity atom in the other transition
metals. 15 Such experiments have actually been done by
using an unsplit absorber, such as stainless steel, and
making a source by diffusing the radioactive species,
Co 67 into rolled foils of the material under study. 19 Results for cobalt and nickel at room temperature are
shown in Fig. 3. The fields at room temperature are
found to be3.10±0.05X10 5 oe and 2.65±0.05X10 6 oe;
,

when these are extrapolated to 0°K using the known
magnetization curve, values of 3.12±0.05X10 B oe and
2.80±0.05X10 5 oe for cobalt and nickel, respectively,
are obtained.

57

Fe
370

360

i
z

Co

Y

^ry»v V I
*\

Si

in

8 3.S0
o
2 250

-O.B

1

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2
0.2
VELOCITY IN CM/SCC

0.4

0.6

0.8

Fig. 3. The hyperfine structures of impurity Fe 57 in cobalt and
nickel metal, obtained with a stainless steel absorber 0.001 in.
Co" was diffused into thin cobalt and nickel
foils which were then used as sources.

thick. Radioactive

Hanna et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 177 (1960).
Hanna et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 513 (1950).
W. Marshall, Phys. Rev. 110, 1280 (1958).
18
The foils of type 310 stainless steel, high-purity iron, and
nickel were supplied by K. M. Olsen of this laboratory.
16

S. S.

17

S. S.

18

299

G.

K.

WERTHEIM

6

Table I. Magnetic fields (in units of 10 oe) at transition
metal nuclei located in transition metals.

It

114S

would not be surprising to find that the iron ex-

hibits a splitting characteristic of a field of 3X10 8 oe

when the host lattice is below its Neel temperature, but
Nuclei at which

Lattice atoms

field is measured

Co
3.42"
3.20"

actually, in the case of chromium, data taken between

4°K and 370°K show an unsplit line whose width de-

3.12 b
2.20°
2.134d

2.80 b
0.80°

Ni

1

See footnote 20.

These values should be compared with the results
obtained for cobalt and nickel atoms in the transition
metals, using a variety of other techniques. The fields at
cobalt in a range of Fe-Co and Ni-Co alloys were determined by Arp, Edmonds, and Petersen 20 from the
measurement of the nuclear contribution to the heat
capacity. Their results gave a value of 3.20X 10 5 oe at a
cobalt atom in iron and 2.20X 10 6 oe at a cobalt atom in
cobalt. An independent measure of the field at a cobalt
atom in cobalt has also been obtained by Gossard and
Portis21 using nuclear resonance techniques. For fee
cobalt, they found a value of 2.134X 10 5 oe at 0°K. Most
recently a value for the field at a nickel atom in nickel
has been similarly determined. 22 These results are summarized in Table I.
It may be noted that the field at the iron nucleus in
a given metal is in every case larger than the field at

creases uniformly with increasing temperature (Fig. 4)

without discontinuity of any sort even at 308°K, the
Neel temperature. The data for a-manganese are similar,
except that the change in linewidth is much less pronounced. These results suggest that the exchange
coupling between iron and chromium or manganese is
sufficiently small so that the iron atoms are not aligned
by the host lattice atoms. This conclusion is consistent
with the results obtained from low-temperature susceptibility measurements in dilute iron-chromium alloys, 24 which also indicate that the iron is not aligned
by the antiferromagnetic Cr system.

FERROUS FLUORIDE
As an illustration of the application of the Mossbauer
effect to a naturally iron-bearing antiferromagnet, let

us consider the determination of the hyperfine structure
of Fe 57 in ferrous fluoride. 26 This material is antiferro-

magnetic, with a transition temperature of 79°K. It
has the rutile structure thus the symmetry around the
;

atoms is no higher than that characterized by
three mutually perpendicular reflection planes. The
electric field gradient (EFG) tensor at the iron atoms
iron

the host lattice nucleus, and that fields at all the iron
nuclei are of similar magnitude. This suggests that the
field at an iron nucleus is due largely to its

own electrons

and depends only slightly on the host lattice magnetization, an idea which is borne out by a recent experiment
on a CoPd alloy, 23 in which isolated impurity iron atoms
were found to have fields similar to those in other
metals studied. This property of the iron atom indicates
that it is not a good field probe, and to some extent lessens the interest in impurity experiments. However,
the present results do help to elucidate the various
contributions to the field at the nucleus in a ferromagnet,

and for that reason remain of interest.
In spite of this limitation on the utility of iron atoms,
some interesting results have been obtained by the extension of experiments of the type described above to

the antiferromagnetic transition metals, manganese and
chromium. These experiments were quite analogous to
those for the ferromagnetic case. The source was made
by diffusing Co 57 into electrolytically deposited Cr and
Mn the absorber was isotopically enriched potassium
;

ferrocyanide.

-0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

VELOCITY IN CM/SEC
20

V. Arp. D. Edmonds, and R. Petersen, Phys. Rev. Letters
212 (1959).
A. C. Gossard and A. M. Portis, Phys. Rev. Letters 3, 164
(1959) A. M. Portis and A. C. Gossard, J. Appl. Phys. 31, 205S
(I960). See also W. A. Hardy, J. Appl. Phys. 32, 122 (1960),

3,

21

;

this issue.
22

L. J. Bruner, J. I. Budnick, and R. J. Blume, (to be published).
23
D. E. Nagle et al., Phys. Rev. Letters 5, 364 (1960).

Fig. 4. The line shape of the 14.4-kev gamma ray of Fe 67
produced by the decay of Co 67 diffused into chromium metal.
The data were taken with an absorber of potassium ferrocyanide
made with enriched Fe 57
,

.

24

M. M. Newman and K. W. H. Stevens, Proc. Phys. Soc.

(London) 74, 290 (1959).
26
G. K. Wertheim, Phys. Rev. 121, 63 (1961).

:

;

300

MOSSBAUER EFFECT: APPLICATIONS TO MAGNETISM

115S

therefore does not have axial

symmetry and may be

characterized by two independent parameters, usually

o

-

chosen to be the largest diagonal element of the tensor
and a parameter which describes the deviation from

^T
\Y f%t
y

Otffe

f

axial symmetry.

The experiment was done using two 0.005-in. thick
26
One

single-crystal slabs of the material as absorbers.

slab had the c axis normal to its plane, the other parallel.

290° K

V

V
| 15,000
m 18,000

1

1

1

1

1

- *lftfc

a 6,000

binding in ferrous fluoride, and from the
exchange polarization of the inner 5 electrons by the
d shell, which causes a charge rearrangement of the

| 15,000
O

1

1

1

nents are resolved [Fig. 5(b),(c)]. (In the case where
the magnetic c axis is prependicular to the plane of
the absorber two lines, corresponding to the Am = Q
transitions, are missing. This is in accord with the radi-

ation pattern for these transitions, which has zero intensity in the direction of the axis of quantization.) The

spacing of these lines may be analyzed in terms of excited and ground-state splitting.

The energy levels of

/dw dW\ /dw
26

dx2 // dz 2

The oriented slabs of ferrous fluoride were obtained from

V. Jaccarino.
27
O. C. Kistner and A. W. Sunyar, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 412
(1960).
28

V. Heine, Phys. Rev. 107, 1002 (1957); W. E. Blumberg and
V. Jaccarino (private communication).

1

*? fSc

iofl.

PARALLEL

16,000

45°K
15,000

i

i

-0.8

i

-0.6

i

-0.4

1

-0.2

1

1

1

1

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

VELOCITY IN CM/SEC
Fig. 5. Resonant absorption in 0.005-in. single-crystal ferrous
(a) above the Neel temperature; (b) below
the Neel temperature with magnetization along the direction of
observation; and (c) below the Neel temperature with magnetization perpendicular to the direction of observation.
fluoride absorbers

as follows
2

e Qq[

/

4gffff \

1+-

2

e Qq

-

/

— [(l-

2

ifV

HI
,

4g/3ff \ 2

iTl*

Qq )

3 J

'

e

2

The analysis yields two independent measures of the
magnetic field at the iron nucleus, in terms of the ground
and excited state moments, respectively. The average
of these measurements gives a value of 3.13X 10 5 oe at
45°K, the temperature of the measurements. Extrapolated to 0°K this becomes 3.40X10 5 oe. The quadrupole interaction deduced from the antiferromagnetic
state data is consistent with that determined from the
paramagnetic state, but it is found in addition that the
direction of the major axis of the EFG tensor is perpendicular to the axis of magnetic alignment and that the
asymmetry parameter is 0.33.

YTTRIUM-IRON GARNET

the magnetic hyperfine interaction gf3H, the z

\dv2

1

\T^vf?yrv^v

the excited state are given as functions of three param-

component of the electric field gradient tensor eq, and
an asymmetry parameter

1

>

wave function at the nucleus. 28 The effect

with the electronic wave functions, 27 and is observable
provided that the strength of the interaction is different
for the ground and the excited states of the nucleus,
so that the corresponding energy levels are shifted by
different amounts. This will be the case if the nuclear
size is different in the two states.
In the antiferromagnetic state, six hyperfine compo-

1

1

^^s^X f^^xK
17,000

arises from the electrostatic interaction of the nucleus

eters,

y^

^&

l-

steel to ionic

electron

45° K

wlf

</)

In the paramagnetic state, at room temperature, two
well-defined absorption lines were obtained [Fig. 5(a)].
Their spacing indicates a quadrupole splitting of 31.2
Mc/sec due to the interaction of the excited state quadrupole moment with the crystalline electric field gradient. A large displacement of the centroid of the absorption from zero velocity, i.e., the energy of the
gamma ray emitted by iron atoms in stainless steel, is
also observed. Only a small part of this displacement
can arise from a difference in the second-order Doppler
shift 6 in the two materials. The major part is due to a
nuclear isotope shift 27 arising both from the removal
of 4s electrons in going from metallic binding in stainless

.y

u o u <v

>-

^2o
1

as described above.

1

PERPENDICULAR

A radioactive source, consisting of Co 57 diffused into
type 310 stainless steel, was mounted on a loudspeaker
voice coil driven with a constant-velocity sawtooth wave

1

One of the more complex systems which has recently
been investigated29 is yttrium-iron garnet, Y 3 Fe 2 (Fe0 4 )3.
The structure of this material is well known, 30 and for
the present purposes it suffices to point out that iron
atoms are located in two nonequivalent sites, those
with tetrahedral symmetry and those with octahedral
29
This work was done in collaboration with Miss C. Alff of
Columbia University, during a summer appointment at this
laboratory.
fuller account will be published.
30
S. Geller and M. A. Gilleo, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 3, 30 (1957)
S. Geller and M. A. Gilleo, Acta Cryst. 10, 239 (1957) ; F. Bertaut
and F. Forrat, Compt. rend. 242, 382 (1956).

A

301

WERTHEI M

K.

o 127
w 126
O 125
o
co

116S

Table II. Characteristics of iron sites in yttrium-iron garnet

xlO*

for the two cases used in the experiment.

MAGNETIC FIELD IN
(III)
DIRECTION

VI

124

z 123

Angle"

{2 122

Field direction
111
Intensity 6
Angle*

Tetrahedral

54°44'

90°
0°

Octahedral

70°32'

54°44'

§ 121 -

100
Intensity b

0°

Angle between direction of magnetization and axis of electric field
gradient tensor.
b Relative number of iron atoms occupying sites characterized by the
given angle.

TETRAHEDRAL (0=55°)

OCTAHEDRAL (e * 70°)

1.0 -0.6 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2

VELOCITY

0.2
IN

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

CM /SEC
:rystal

yttrium-iron garnet absorber with magnetization in the [111]
direction. The source was stainless steel.

direction in the plane of the slab. It should be pointed
out that when the field is in the [111] direction the
symmetry axes of all the tetrahedral sites make the
same angle (54°44') with the applied field, while the
axes of the octahedral sites make angles of either 0°
or 70°32', in the proportion of 1 to 3. Similarly, when

the field is in the [100] direction, the [111] symmetry

symmetry. The relative number of these is 3:2. Both
sites have axes of symmetry sufficiently high to assure
that the electric field gradient tensors are axially symmetric. The tetrahedral sites have fourfold rotary in-

axes of all the octahedra make an angle of 54°44' with
the field, while the axes of the tetrahedra make angles
of 0° or 90° in the proportion of 1 to 2. (This information is summarized in Table II.)

Three hyperfine pat-

version axes in [100] directions, while the octahedral
sites have threefold axes in [111] directions. The [111]

terns are thus to be expected in each experiment.

directions are the directions of easy magnetization, but

ture are shown in Figs. 6 and 7. In the [100] case (Fig.

The experimental results obtained at room tempera-

an externally applied field the
magnetization tends to be normal to the surface.
The experiments were performed using as an absorber a thin slab of the material cut normal to a [110]
direction from a single crystal grown by Nielsen of this
laboratory. 31 The slab was cut and lapped to a thickness

The identification of lines belonging to a given hyperfine
spectrum was made partially on the basis of the intensi-

according to the process described by
Dillon. 32 Data were taken at room temperature with a

The resulting groupings were in every case unambiguous.
The magnetic fields at the iron nuclei in each case

magnetic field applied in either the [111] or the [100]

were obtained directly from the distance separating
the second and fourth or third and fifth absorption lines
in the pertinent hyperfine spectrum. This distance depends only on the ground-state magnetic moment, and
is independent of the quadrupole coupling. Values were
obtained of 3.92±0.05X10 5 oe for the tetrahedral sites

in a thin slab without

of 0.002

in.

;I0'
{^

MAGNETIC FIELD IN

157

(100) DIRECTION

o '56
8 |55
J

154

«o

153

150

the absorption lines and partially on the basis
some simple properties of the hyperfine patterns.

ties of

of

of the experimental hyperfine spectrum with spectra

computed for the known angles between the magnetic
field and the axis of the EFG tensor. The computations
were based on the tabulations of Parker, 33 which are
applicable to the excited state and give the hyperfine

TETRAHEDRAL {6 '90')

OCTAHEDRAL (©=55°)

-0.6

0.4-0.2
VELOCITY

0.2
IN

Q4

parameter \ = e2Qq/^y.H
measuring the strength of the quadrupole coupling relative to the magnetic hf coupling. The best value for X
was 0.10±0.02 in each case. The large uncertainty arises
from a weak dependence of the hfs on X, which is particularly pronounced in the 54°44' case. The resulting
splitting as a function of the

TETRAHEDRAL (0»O°)
1.0-0.8

0.6

0.8

1.0

CM/SEC

Fig. 7. Resonant absorption in the absorber of Fig. 6 with
the magnetization in the [100] direction.

32

[111] case (Fig. 6) only the two stronger ones are seen.

and 4.74±0.06X10 5 oe for the octahedral sites. The
agreement between the independent determinations
made for the [100] and [111] cases was satisfactory.
Further analysis was based on a direct comparison

| 152
8 151

31

7) all three hyperfine spectra are resolved, while in the

YIG

The
was obtained from J. F. Dillon.
J. F. Dillon and H. E. Earl, Am. J. Phys. 27, 201 (1959).

83

P. M. Parker, J. Chem. Phys. 24, 1096 (1956).

302

MOSSBAUER EFFECT: APPLICATIONS TO MAGNETISM

117S

quadrupole couplings, expressed as the quadrupole
transition energies in the absence of a magnetic field,
are 9 and 11 Mc for the tetrahedral and octahedral
sites respectively, with an uncertainty of 20%.
Further experiments are being done to obtain the
temperature dependence of the field at the iron nucleus.

VYvrvv

w

!s

Fe.O,

OXIDES AND FERRITES
Of the iron oxides only the simplest, Fe 2 3 in which
all the atoms are in equivalent sites, has so far produced
conclusive results. Kistner and Sunyar 27 have shown
,

that the field at the iron atom is 5.15X10 6 oe at room

temperature; a small quadrupole component has also
been observed.
Stoichiometric FeO probably does not exist because
of the strong tendency of iron to be trivalent. Attempts
to prepare this

compound by the decomposition

of

ferrous oxalate in an inert atmosphere have produced

-1.2 -1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2

equal intensity at room temperature. These may be
identified with di- and trivalent iron, since their unequal intensity and the fact that FeO is cubic rule out

quadrupole splitting as a possible interpretation.
In Fe 3 4 there exist both A sites, with tetrahedral
oxygen coordination, and B sites, with octahedral oxygen coordination. Moreover, the iron occurs with two
valences which are distributed over the sites in such a
way that three types of iron are found in equal concentration trivalent iron in A sites, trivalent iron in B sites,
:

and divalent iron in B sites. As a result, three separate
In prac-

six-line hyperfine patterns are to be expected.
tice these patterns

appear superposed in such a way

that analysis is at best difficult. However,

it

is

clear

from the data in Fig. 8 that the field at the nucleus is
approximately 5X10 5 oe in every case.

Among the ferrites the simplest results should be
obtained from those with a structure like that of nickel
that is, like FeO Fe 2 3 in which all the divalent
iron atoms are replaced by divalent atoms of another
metal and all the remaining iron is trivalent. Results

ferrite

•

;

obtained

with

NiO-Fe 2

34
3

a

thin

polycrystalline

absorber

of

indicate that the field at the iron nucleus

about 5.1 X10 5 oe, but the linewidths are found to
be broad compared to those of the simple oxides. A
number of ferrites have also been studied by Kistner and
Sunyar 35 with generally similar results.
is

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.6

1.0

1.2

VELOCITY IN CM/SEC

a material which exhibits two absorption lines of un-

Fig. 8. Resonant absorption at room temperature in powdered
iron oxides and polycrystalline nickel ferrite. The source is
stainless steel.

an iron atom depends largely on its own elecand only weakly on its environment is
itself interesting but lessens the usefulness of isolated
iron atoms as field probes. A few generalizations have
begun to emerge from the results now available: (1) the
field at

tronic shell

field at iron nuclei in

ferromagnetic metals is close to

3X10 5 oe. (2) The field in oxides, ferrites, and yttrium
iron garnet at trivalent iron

atoms in octahedral co-

ordinations is in the vicinity of 5X 10 5 oe. These generalizations are as yet tentative

and subject

to further

confirmation.

While Fe 57 is without doubt the most attractive isotope for Mossbauer effect studies, and the only one
considered in this paper, there are a number of others
which

will

make it possible to extend the range of

materials which can be investigated. The most useful
of these is Sn 119

,

an isomer with a 250-day half-life and

a linewidth only five times greater than that of Fe 57

Other possible isotopes are Dy 161

,

W

182
,

Ir 193 , and Au 197

.

.

The maximum absorption that can be expected with
these is very much smaller, because of higher gamma
energy or lower Debye temperature than Fe 57 and the
linewidth is larger by a considerable factor.
,

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
CONCLUSIONS
The Mossbauer effect of Fe 57 has proved to be a
useful tool for the investigation of magnetic fields and
electric field gradients at iron nuclei in ferromagnetic

and antiferromagnetic materials. The
34

fact

that the

The nickel ferrite was prepared by F. J. Schnettler of this

laboratory.
36
O. C. Kistner and A. W. Sunyar (unpublished).

Conversations with V. Jaccarino, J. F. Dillon, W. E.
Blumberg, S. Geschwind, and a number of other members of this laboratory have been of great assistance to
the author by providing many valuable ideas and fruitful insights into the field of magnetism. The cooperation
of Mrs. M. H. Read and W. M. Augustyniak in specific

phases of the work, and the general technical aid of
D. N. E. Buchanan are also gratefully acknowledged.

303

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 4, Number 10

May 15, I960

DIRECTION OF THE EFFECTIVE MAGNETIC FIELD AT THE NUCLEUS IN FERROMAGNETIC IRONt
S. S.

Hanna,

J.

Heberle, G. J. Perlow, R. S. Preston, and D. H. Vincent
Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois
(Received April 28, 1960)

In a recent experiment 1 it was shown that in
ferromagnetic iron the effective magnetic field
at the iron nucleus is strongly correlated with
the magnetization. The sense of the correlation,
however, was not determined, i.e., it was not
known whether the effective field was parallel or
antiparallel to the magnetization. The sense of
the correlation has now been established by observing the change in the hyperfine splitting of
the nuclear energy levels of Fe 57 on application
of an external field of 17 to 20 koe.
In an earlier paper2 we presented the hyperfine

spectrum obtained in the resonant Mossbauer 3
absorption in Fe 57

.

The interpretation given to

the spectrum has since been confirmed in detail.

Several groups have shown the correctness of
the hyperfine pattern by observing the spectrum

when different alloys and compounds of iron are
used. 4 Gossard, Portis, and Sandle 5 have ob-

served the nuclear magnetic resonance in the
ground state of Fe 57 at a frequency corresponding
to a value of the effective field in close agreement
with the value of 333 koe deduced in reference 2.
6
In addition, Ewan, Graham, and Geiger have
513

.

304

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 4, Number 10

M

radiation
found that the £2 admixture in the
"4
which confirms that the effect
is less than 10
of E2 radiation in the spectrum is indeed negli,

gible.

2

Experimentally it was feasible to apply a large
magnetic field only to the source of the resonant
radiation. The absorber was either in the fringing field of the electromagnet holding the source
or in a small parallel magnetic field of its own,
applied to produce a definite magnetization in the
At the top of Fig. 1 is shown the velocity spectrum which is applicable if the hyperfine splittings in source and absorber are identical. The intensities are appropriate to the emission of polarized radiation from the source but
to an unpolarized absorption process. If, on the
other hand, the hyperfine splittings in the emitter
are about 10% greater (for example) than those
absorber.

in the absorber, then the complex spectrum at

the bottom of Fig.

obtained.

1 is

It is

May 15, I960

assumed in Eq^ (1) that H no is not appreciably
influenced by H ext. The quantity of interest is
the sign of Hno

Since M,, and H ext are parallel
under saturation conditions, the sign can be determined by observing whether the hyperfine
splitting increases or decreases on application
of a field. With a field of 17.6 koe a shift of
±2.65% is expected in line 6.
The experimental technique was similar to that
1
2 7
in our earlier work.
The carriage of a lathe
was used to provide velocities by means of which
the spectrum was scanned. The source was
mounted in the narrow gap of an electromagnet
capable of producing fields up to 20 koe. The
magnet was attached rigidly to the end of the lathe
and the absorber was mounted on the carriage.
.

*

.

The result obtained for line 6 is shown in Fig. 2.

On application of the field to the source, a shift
to lower energy is unmistakable.

The correlation

clear that

a study of the singlet line 6 affords the best means
of determining the change that an external field

produces in the hyperfine splitting.
For the effective field at the nucleus we write

H « = #no M o + H ext>

(1)

where M

is a unit vector along the direction of
magnetization in a ferromagnetic domain, and
H no is the magnitude of the effective field in the

absence of the external field H ext- The latter
quantity includes the demagnetizing field which
is negligible for the planar samples used.

Since

Hext/^no << * in tne present experiment,

is

it

Speed -*
II
1

6
s

4

:>

>

'"'
'I

T

li

f

10
FIG. 1. Theoretical absorption spectra of 14.4-kev
resonance radiation from Fe5T
Top: metallic source
and absorber with identical hyperfine splittings. Bottom: same source and absorber but with the splitting
in the source increased by 10%.
.

514

II

SPEED (mm/sec)
FIG. 2.

Line 6 observed with#ext =

koe, where #ex

t

source of resonance radiation
of 10

3

counts

and # ext = 17.6

is the external field applied to the
.

The ordinate is in units

.

.

305

Volume 4, Number 10

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

May 15, 1960

The magnitude of the observed shift is (2.7±0.4)% which is compatible

E. Kowalski for assistance in taking the data. We
have profited from a stimulating discussion with

with the linear relation Hn =Hno -H e xt-

W. Marshall.

is therefore negative.

A negative

shift of about the correct magnitude was also ob-

served in line 4. The multiplet structure in line
4 is symmetrical (Fig. 1) and so does not seriously

interfere with the observation of a shift of its

central member.

The effective field at the iron nucleus has now
been determined both in sign and magnitude. The
existence of such a large negative field (-333 koe)
was unexpected. Marshall 8 has discussed a number of sources of the effective nuclear field. These
consist mainly of direct effects of the 3d electrons
and indirect effects of polarization of the various
s electrons, which then contribute to the field via
the Fermi contact interaction.

The polarization

of inner shells of electrons results in negative
In view of the experimental result these negative terms must completely
dominate the other contributions.
We are grateful to S. Raboy for loan of the magnet
We wish also to thank M. R. Perlow for pre-

contributions to the field.

.

paration of the source; F. J. Karasek for continuing to supply us with thin rolled iron foils; and

This work was performed under the auspices of the
U. S. Atomic Energy Commission.
J
G. J. Perlow, S. S. Hanna, M. Hamermesh, C.
Littlejohn, D. H. Vincent, R. S. Preston, and J.
Heberle, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 74 (1960).
2
S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J.
Perlow, R. S. Preston, andD. H. Vincent, Phys. Rev.
Letters 4, 177 (1960).
3
R. L. Mdssbauer, Z. Physik 151, 124 (1958).
4
(Ferrocyanide) S. L. Ruby, L. M. Epstein, and
K. H. Sun (to be published); (ferrocyanide, stainless
steel) G. K. Wertheim, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 403
(1960); (Fe 2 3 ) O. C. Kistner and A. W. Sunyar, Phys.
Rev. Letters 4, 412 (1960).
5
A. C. Gossard, A.M. Portis, and W. J. Sandle
(to be published)
6
G. T. Ewan, R. L. Graham, and J. S. Geiger (to
be published)
7
S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J.
Perlow, R. S. Preston, andD. H. Vincent, Phys. Rev.
Letters 4, 28 (1960).
8
W. Marshall, Phys. Rev. 110, 1280 (1958), and
private communication.

.

306
a^a a^a a^fa a^a a^a a^a a^a a^a a^a Jm

M Ml W

Volume 5, Number 8

<^fc-

a^a a^U a^a «*Jfc- a^a a^a Ji a^a a^> a^a a^a a^a a^e a^a a^a a^a a^a a^a a^a a^a a^a *^a a^a a^a a^a a^a a^a a^a a^a a^a

^i^lJ| Ji^i^ll^l J|J| AJlU

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

October

15,

I960

TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF THE INTERNAL FIELD IN FERROMAGNETS*
D. E. Nagle, H. Frauenf elder, + R. D. Tayloi, D. R. F. Cochran, and B. T. Matthias*
Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, University of California, Los Alamos, New Mexico
(Received September 22, 1960)

The saturation magnetization of a ferromagnet
varies with temperature in a characteristic and
well-investigated manner; it reaches a limiting
value at temperatures well below the Curie temperature Tq and vanishes at and above Tq. The
behavior of the internal magnetic field, however,
Because the theories
is much less well known.
of internal fields in ferromagnets are still far
from satisfactory, 1 accurate and detailed measurements of these internal fields over a wide
temperature range are important; the effects
near the Curie point are particularly revealing.
Preliminary work on such problems has been
discussed by the Argonne group. 1 In the present
Letter, we report a determination of the temperature variation of the internal magnetic field in

Fe (T c = 1043°K) and in a CoPd alloy (T c = 275°K)
by means of the Mossbauer effect.
That the MSssbauer effect is well suited for the
investigation of internal fields no longer needs

any justification. The radioisotope Fe 57 is very
convenient for such experiments, since Fe itself
is a ferromagnet and since the MOssbauer spectrum of its 14.4-kev gamma ray is well known. 2
The emission spectrum of an Fe source at room
temperature consists of six lines, well separated
by the Zeeman effect due to the internal magnetic
field. With an Fe absorber of identical internal
field, these lines give rise to a MSssbauer spectrum consisting of a prominent central absorption line and five strong satellites on either side,
two of them doublets. The internal field has been
deduced from the splitting of these lines. 2
Complications arise when the source and the
absorber have different internal fields. The six
emission and six absorption lines of different
spacing then give rise to as many as 36 lines;
the MOssbauer spectrum becomes harder to find
and harder to identify. There are three ways to
circumvent this difficulty. One can employ a
source having no effective internal field where
the six emission lines are collapsed into one, 3
one can utilize a single line absorber, 4 5 or one
can reduce the number of lines by selecting
plane 2 or circularly 6 polarized gamma rays. The
best method will depend on the particular problem. We have chosen the first approach for Fe
and the third one, with selection of circularly
1

A CoPd source was prepared by electroplating
Co" onto a CoPd alloy (92% Pd, 8% Co) and
heating the CoPd foil in a vacuum furnace at
1000°C for two hours. The source was then
placed in a cryostat which allowed the source
C

temperature to be varied from 88 K to room temThe MSssbauer spectrum was observed
with an Fe absorber, enriched to 75% Fe 57 and of
equivalent thickness 2.2 mg/cm 2 This absorber
was mounted on a Jensen 8 -inch Flexair woofer
and moved sinusoidally at a frequency of 11 sec" 1
perature.

.

.

The output pulses from a scintillation counter
were energy selected by a single-channel analyzer and modulated with a saw tooth voltage, which
was locked in with the speaker drive. The modulated pulses were displayed on a 400-channel

RIDL analyzer and thus yielded directly the desired MOssbauer spectrum, 4 as shown in Fig. 1.
Due to the sinusoidal drive and linear display,
the velocity scale in Fig. 1 is sinusoidal. The
slight drop to the right in each spectrum is

caused by dead-time effect in the 400-channel
analyzer.

A series of measurements was taken in which
the temperature of the CoPd source was varied

and the temperature of the Fe absorber was 24°C.

(

364

5xlO COUNTS /CHANNEL

_,

-^^ v Wsv

-

"

*\
"l "^.»»
<

UJ

z
z
<
X
o
•^

**"*-H«V,

.-

z
z>
o
o

—«.

—
\

s

W^"'V'*""*"*"**" **—W

*"

/'~~

».

^»^-^/"^S

738 * C

+S\/**\>\j+^'**m*~ ~**~ 722«C
r\.

•*•"

*""->

v.v—.

v v-Saf^/^y'* •«"••—
'.

^

.—V " 1MS

•«'

693 . c

•..'

\ /

-•%

W-~2I5*C

y rrs^v--

r

»5.32

FIG.

»773*C

~"'% ~ 753#C

,

•-— ^.^

(f)

/"*

"**'

,

\

—*•-.

'

polarized gamma rays, for CoPd.

S

•****.- -

1.

mm /tec

Mossbauer spectra of a CoPd source at

C

24 C and an Fe absorber as functions of the absorber

temperature. Positive velocity is taken to mean source
moving away from absorber.

307

Volume 5, Number 8

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

October

When the CoPd was above its Curie point of
1

i

i

T

i

1

!

I960

15,

1

1

'

275°K, the six-line spectrum was obtained, similar to the lowest curve of Fig. 1; such a spec-

1.0

-

:

I>

trum is typical of a single-line source with an Fe
absorber. Thus CoPd above its Curie point pos03

sesses only a very small effective magnetic field:
From the position of the lines and from the line
widths, an upper limit of 2000 oersteds is obtained. Below the Curie point, the splitting pattern changes rapidly, indicating the appearance
of an internal magnetic field. At 88°K, astonishingly enough, the pattern is typical of source and

^V

-

\l
»

0.6

•

RUN
RUN 2
1

0.4

Hence at 88°K,
57
nucleus in CoPd is 3.3 xlO 5
the field at the Fe
57
oersteds, 2 the same as that of Fe in Fe at temperatures well below the Curie point. Details of
7
these measurements will be published elsewhere.
The single emission line of the CoPd source
above its Curie point now offers a convenient tool

-

\

absorber with identical fields.

for the investigation of the internal field in Fe.

0.2

1

FIG.

For this experiment, an absorber (5 mg/cm 2 Fe 57
75% enriched) was placed in a furnace equipped
with thin entrance and exit windows and containing an atmosphere of hydrogen. The CoPd source
was mounted on the speaker and the transmission
spectrum recorded as a function of the absorber

,

temperature. Some typical spectra obtained in
this way are shown in Fig. 1.
The curves in Fig. 1 show the decrease in the
8
internal magnetic field, the temperature shift 9
of the center of the spectrum, the decrease in
Mo'ssbauer absorption due to the Debye -Waller
factor, and finally the disappearance of the effective magnetic field in the Fe absorber at the Curie

1

1

X-

Relative internal magnetic field H(T)/H(2$TK)

2.

at the Fe

!

67

nuclei in an Fe absorber, as deduced by

Mossbauer effect.

The solid line indicates the relative

saturation magnetization, cr(T)/o-(297°K), of Fe.

*Work done under the auspices of the U. S. Atomic
Energy Commission.
tConsultant, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois.
% Consultant, Bell Telephone Laboratories, Murray
Hill,

New Jersey.

'

point.

The relative magnetic field at the Fe 57 nucleus,
as deduced from the curves in Fig. 1 and some
additional data, is plotted in Fig. 2 as a function
of T/Tq.

For comparison, the relative satura10
tion magnetization
is indicated by the solid line.
We thank Dr. R. M. Bozorth for determining
the Curie point of our CoPd alloy, Dr. C. E.
Olsen for the preparation of the CoPd alloy and
the annealing of the source, and Dr. W. E. Keller
for the loan of his DYNA amplifier. We are grateful to Dr. P. P. Craig and Dr. J. G. Dash for
stimulating discussions and to Mr. R. Hanft for
his tireless efforts during the experiment.

'

Mossbauer Effect, Allerton House Conference,

edited by H. Frauenfelder and H. Lustig (University
of Illinois, Urbana, 1960).
2
S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J.
Perlow, R. S. Preston, and D. H. Vincent, Phys. Rev.

Letters 4_, 177 (1960).
3
0. C. Kistner and A.
Letters 4, 412 (1960).
4

S. L.

W. Sunyar, Phys. Rev.

Ruby, L. M. Epstein, and K. H. Sun, Rev.

Sci. Instr. 31, 580 (1960).
5

G. K. Wertheim, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 403 (1960).
6
H. Frauenfelder, D. E. Nagle, R. D. Taylor,
D. R. F. Cochran, and W. M. Visscher (to be published).
7
R. D. Taylor, D. E. Nagle, H. Frauenfelder, and
D. R. F. Cochran (to be published).
8
R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev.
Letters 4, 274 (1960).
9
B. D. Josephson, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 341 (1960).
10
American Institute of Physics Handbook (McGrawHill Book Company, New York, 1957), p. 5-208.

365

308

Volume 5, Number

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

12

December

15,

1960

POLARIZATION OF THE CONDUCTION ELECTRONS IN THE FERROMAGNETIC METALS*
A. J. F. Boyle, D. St. P. Bunbury, and C. Edwards
The Physical Laboratories, University of Manchester, Manchester, England
(Received November 15, 1960)
It

1
has recently been proposed that the polar-

ization of the 4s conduction electrons in Fe, Co,

and Ni is antiparallel to that of the electrons in
the unfilled 3d shell; this is the reverse of the
usual assumption. There are few ways in which
this polarization is manifested. One, however,
is in the effective magnetic field at a nucleus,
which acts through the contact interaction with
the 4s electrons. The magnitude of this field has
been given by Marshall 2 as

H

c

= (8n/3)i

'

\

s

p(0)\

l

A

where \i is the Bohr magneton,

\i.np,

£s

I

(1)

ip{0) l^

2

is

the average probability density of a 4s conduction electron evaluated at the nucleus

[I^O)!^ 2

being the free atom value], n is the number of
conduction electrons per atom, and/) is their
polarization.
i.e.,
if

The sign of the field is positive,

Hanna et aL 3 4 have measured the magnitude
and sign of the field at the Fe nucleus in iron by
observing the Zeeman splitting of the 14-kev
transition in Fe 57 and obtain the value -3 xlO 5 koe.
In this case, however, there are other contributions to the field beside H
mainly those due
c
to the electrons of the same atom, i.e., the
polarized 3d electrons. These other contributions almost certainly outweigh the effect of the
field H alone (H is probably of the order of 50
c
c
to 100 koe), and it is therefore difficult to draw
any conclusion concerning its sign.
In an attempt to measure H directly, dilute
c
(1%) solid solutions of Sn in the ferromagnetic
metals (Fe, Co, and Ni) have been prepared.
Since Sn is basically diamagnetic, we expect
that there will be no contribution to the field at
the Sn nucleus from its own inner electrons and
that the field will be given simply by
>

;

parallel to the direction of magnetization,

the polarization of the 4s electrons is parallel

to the 3d polarization.

H

=(4tt/3)M+//
s

c

,

(2)

553

309

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 5, Number 12

where l^(0)l^ 2 in (1) is the appropriate value for
a Sn atom.

Since H c is due to an over -all polar-

ization of the conduction electrons, the other

terms should remain those appropriate to the
solvent atoms.

5

The Zeeman splitting of the 24-kev transition
119
was observed8 using the MCssbauer
in Sn
7 8
The transmission through the absorber
effect.
(the alloy) of the radiation emitted by a moving
source was measured as a function of the velocity
of the source. The velocity spectrometer has
6
been described in detail elsewhere. The temperature of both the source and absorber were

Decembei

I960

Results derived from the velocity spectra
119m
in absorbers containing 1 % of Sn 119 dissolved in Fe Co,
displacement
of
the
spectra
The
shift
is
the
and Ni.

Table I.

of the absorption of 24-kev y rays from Sn

,

towards negative velocity due to chemical effects, H s
is the field at the Sn nucleus, and (4ti/3)M is the usuaJ
Lorentz field.
Shift

'

Solvent (mm/sec)

(koe)

(4tt/3)M

Hs - (4tt/3)M

Fe

1.1

-81 ±4

7.5

Co

1.1

-20.5 ±1 5

6.1

-26.5 ±1.5

Ni

1.1

+ 18.5±1

2.0

+ 16.5 ±1

-88

maintained around 100°K. Figures 1, 2, and 3
show the transmission spectra obtained for Fe

and Ni and Co. Each member of the doublet is
an unresolved triplet caused by the splitting of
the excited \ state, while the doublet separation is due mainly to the splitting of the ground
+
state. The field strengths H s listed in Table I
£
were derived using the known values of the magnetic moments. (The excited state moment has
been measured as 0.83 ±0.03 nuclear magneton. 9 )

The shifts listed in the table refer to the displacement of the spectra towards negative velocity and are almost entirely due to the chemical

shift.

10

In this case,

where the source was

metallic tin, the magnitude of the shift should be

proportional to (|

s

- £

Sn ) 10(0) Sn
l

2
;

£ Sn and £ s

refer to metallic tin and the solvent metal,
respectively.

The sign of H g was determined by placing each
absorber in a transverse magnetic field of about
7 koe; the magnetization direction is now parallel
to the external field. A positive field was observed only in the case of Ni. The final values

FIG. 1. The absorption
spectra obtained with 1% Sn 119
in Fe.

scale, •

190

—

magnetized, zero

o

field

94
• transverse

7 koe

field,

188
J

554

I

I

I

I

L

Left scale, o
.

;

right

310

Volume 5, Number 12

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS
-2

1

O

-1

2

1

1

1

1

1

•

1

FIG. 2. The absorption
spectra obtained with 1% Sn 119
Left scale, o

in Ni.

scale, •

;

_
- 75

•

•
39

1960

3

1

•

40

15,

mm/sec

velocity

-3

December

On

•

^

"%

\

•

\\
••X

c
38
o

- 73

cP«*

• • •
o

- 71

•
•

T
/

P •
• •

right

*

.

<

69

»

•

37

nickel

o

unmagnetized

•

transverse

field,

67

6 koe

36
1

1

1

mm/sec

velocity

2-1

-4
1

1

1

1

1

1

1

O
1

I

1

2

3

1

1

1

CD£Tc9

40 —

—

jff

o
QiO
<0

FIG.

3.

The absorption

spectrum obtained with 1 %
Sn

119

in Co.

39

—
unmagnetized

1

of [H s - (4tt/3)M] are listed in the table,

the values of

where

M have been corrected for the

quenching of the atomic moments by the added
valence electrons of Sn. This is most significant
in Ni, and, since it will occur predominantly
amongst the nearest neighbors, will undoubtedly
result in a lowered value of the observed field.

1

1

1

1

cobalt

1

1

1

1

The results are obviously inconsistent with the
existence of the single field H

•

firstly because

of the different signs and secondly because of

the relative magnitudes of the fields.

Since p is
very closely proportional to A/, 2 the expression
(1) for H c can be written simply, H = const £$M.
c
Further, we can conclude from the chemical

555

311

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 5, Number 12
shifts that

| s is

practically constant for Fe, Co,

and Ni, and therefore H c will be roughly pro-

I960

field at In

114

and Sb 122 dissolved in Fe.

We are indebted to Dr. C. Johnson for drawing

There is another mechanism 11 by which an
effective field might be produced at the Sn nucleus

The wave function for the 4s

electrons of the Sn atom will overlap with those
of the 3d electrons of the surrounding solvent

atoms, and the polarization of the latter will result in a change in the relative spatial distribution of the 4s electrons in respect of their spin
orientation. In the region of the Sn nucleus,
electrons with spin antiparallel to the 3d polarization will predominate, producing a negative
effective field Hp.
Evidence for the existence of such a field is
provided by the results for Co (Fig. 3) which
indicate the presence of a second field of -50 koe
with the same chemical shift. X-ray analysis of
the sample showed that both cubic and hexagonal
structures were present in the rough proportion
40:60. Since neither £ s nor p depends on the
structure, the two values of the field cannot be
associated with H c however, since the distribution of the 3d orbitals will probably differ for
12
Hp would also differ.
the two structures,
We have no estimate of Hp, but its magnitude
but also on the mean
should depend not only on
radius of the 3d shell and thus will decrease
more rapidly from Fe to Ni than does the field
H c which depends only on M. In the absence of
any further contributions, combination of such a
field Hp with a positive value of H would therec
fore provide a qualitative interpretation of the
present results.
It is interesting to compare the present results
for the field at a Sn nucleus in Fe with those of
Samoilov et al. 13 From measurements of the
nuclear polarization these authors obtain values
;

M

556

15,

of 250 koe and 280 koe, respectively, for the

portional to M.

in this situation.

December

our attention to the results of Samoilov et al.
and we are grateful to many people for valuable
discussion, particularly Dr. Lomer, Dr. W.

Marshall, Dr. S. F. Edwards, and Dr. H. E.
Hall. Much helpful advice in the preparation of
the alloys has been given by Dr. J. Stubbles.
We would also like to thank Dr. J. Zussman for
performing the x-ray analysis.

*Supported financially by the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research.
'For a review article see C. Herring, Suppl. J. Appl.
Phys. 31, 3S (1960).
2
W. Marshall, Phys. Rev. 110, 1280(1958).
3
S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J. Perlow, R. S. Preston, and D. H. Vincent, Phys. Rev.
Letters 4, 177 (1960).
4
S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, G. J. Perlow, R. S.
Preston, and D. H. Vincent, Phys. Rev. Letters 4,

513 (1960).
5
D. R. Teeters, thesis, University of California,
Berkeley, 1955 (unpublished).
Separated Sn 119 used in the preparation of the alloys
was supplied by the Chemistry Division, Atomic Energy
Research Establishment, Harwell.
7
R„ L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik 151, 125(1959).
8
A. J. F. Boyle, D. St. P. Bunbury, C. Edwards,
and H. E. Hall, Proc. Phys. Soc. (London) (to be published).
9

A. J. F. Boyle, D.

St.

P. Bunbury, and C. Edwards

(to be published).
,0

O. C. Kistner and A. W. Sunyar, Phys. Rev.
Letters 4, 412 (1960).
n D. A. Goodings and V. Heine, Phys. Rev. Letters

370 (1960).
J. B. Goodenough, Phys. Rev. 120, 67 (1960).
V. N. Samoilov, V. V. Skliarevsky, and E. P.
Stepanov, Soviet Phys. -JETP 11(38) 261 (1960).
5,

12
13

,

312

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 6, Number 9

May 1, 1961

HYPERFINE FIELD AND ATOMIC MOMENT OF IRON IN FERROMAGNETIC ALLOYS
C. E. Johnson, M. S. Ridout, T. E. Cranshaw, and P. E. Madsen

Atomic Energy Research Establishment, Harwell, England
(Received February 1, 1961; revised manuscript received April 10, 1961)

2
Mott and Stevens 1 and Lomer and Marshall
have proposed models of the ferromagnetic alloys
of the iron group metals, based on the assumption
that for dilute alloys a rearrangement of electrons
occurs around solute atoms only, while to a first
approximation the electronic structure of the matrix atoms remains unaltered from that in the
pure metal. Each atom carries a localized magnetic moment which contributes directly to the
total saturation moment and to the magnetic part
of the neutron scattering cross section, and inMarshall 3 has
directly to the hyperfine field H n
shown that the hyperfine field in a pure ferromagnetic metal should be proportional to the magnetization. This has been confirmed experimentally
5
4
for cobalt and for iron by varying the temperature, but the absolute agreement between theory
and measurement is poor. 6 The Mo'ssbauer effect 7
provides a method for measuring H n for iron in
alloys which may be used to test the localized
models and to investigate the relation between
hyperfine field and atomic moment.
We have measured the Mo'ssbauer absorption
spectrum at room temperature over the whole
range of Fe-Co and Fe-Ni alloys for the 14.4key y radiation of Fe 57 The source was prepared by electroplating Co 57 onto copper foil,
followed by diffusion by annealing. Rapid electron spin exchange resulted in a single line which
had the natural width associated with the lifetime
of the emitting state: The line was shifted by 0.20
mm/sec with respect to the center of the iron
spectrum. The alloys were prepared by arccasting spectroscopically standardized materials
supplied by Johnson Matthey, Ltd. and were cold
rolled into foils about 1 mil thick. Alloys containing 30% or less iron were enriched in Fe 57 by
plating and annealing. Data for pure cobalt and
nickel were obtained with Co 57 sources plated
onto foils of each metal, using stainless steel as
a monoenergetic absorber. 8 Motion of the source
was provided by a moving coil vibrator driven by
an amplifier and a triangular wave generator. A
moving iron transducer gave a voltage proportional to the source velocity, and this waveform
was fed back to the input of the amplifier, so that
the velocity of the source closely followed the input waveform. Counts were fed into a single.

.

,

450

channel pulse-height analyzer to select the 14.4kev radiation, and the output pulses were modulated with the velocity waveform and fed into a
100-channel kicksorter. The resulting spectrum 9

showed six lines arising from the Zeeman splitand the hyperfine field was computed from their separations.
The spectra for the alloys showed no appreciable
line broadening or shifts compared with the pure
iron spectrum. Hence, the variations in hyperting of the nuclear levels of Fe 57

,

fine field due to local inhomogeneities are small

(less than 3%), and there is no large change in

s- electron density at the iron nuclei due to alloying.

The variation of the magnetic field at iron nuexpressed as a fraction of the
is shown in Fig. 1, where
Hn {x)/H n {0) is plotted against the excess electron
number x over that of iron. A remarkable feature
is the general similarity in form with the corresponding region of the Slater -Pauling curve 10 for
the saturation moments: For both alloy systems
Hn and the saturation moment show a maximum
near x = 0.3. Even for small additions of solute
it seems that large changes in the hyperfine field
clei in the alloys,

field in metallic iron,

of the iron atoms result, in contrast to the local-

ized theories.
If it is

assumed that the hyperfine field is pro-

portional to the atomic moment in the alloys, then
the moment on iron is given by fi(Fe) =2.22# w (x)/

H n (0) Bohr magnetons. The field on cobalt nuclei
in Fe-Co alloys has been determined from lowtemperature specific heat measurements by Arp,
Edmonds, and Petersen, 11 and in contrast to the
field on iron nuclei it shows no maximum but
increases steadily from 217 xlO 3 gauss in pure
cobalt to about 320 xlO 3 gauss in iron. From
these data a curve for m(Co) may be derived,
taking the moment in pure cobalt to be 1.71 Bohr
magnetons. If these moments are averaged so

that Ji =(l-c)u(Fe) + cju(Co),

concentration,

/i

is

where c is the cobalt

found to lie on a curve which

is close to the Slater -Pauling curve.

There are no data on the hfs of nickel in Fe-Ni
alloys, but Shull and Wilkinson 13 have measured

the atomic moments in some of these alloys by

For ordered Ni 3 Fe they find
whereas our data, combined with the

neutron diffraction.
pt(Fe) =2.8,

.

313

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

Volume 6, Number 9

e.g.,

if the

May 1, 1961

component due to the conduction elec-

tron polarization were a function of the average

I.IO -

r^°Q
/
/

\r

moment JL. Since p for NL,Fe is smaller than that

A

o Fe - Co

»

• Fe-Ni

for iron and#n is negative, 13 this explanation re-

quires the polarization to be negative in accord

with a suggestion of Anderson and Clogston 14 and
with measurements of the field at tin nuclei in alloys with iron. 15

An estimate of the effect of such
a term in the Fe-Co alloys shows that, owing to
the smaller variation of ju throughout the series,
it would not destroy the agreement between /I
derived from hfs and saturation magnetization

A

I.OO

\

data.

We thank Dr. W. Marshall and Dr. W. M. Lomer
for many valuable discussions, Dr. J. H. Stephen
for performing the electroplating,

and Dr. E.
Bretscher for his generous support.

0.90

*N. F. Mott and K. W. H. Stevens, Phil. Mag. 2,
1364 (1957).
2
W. M. Lomer and W. Marshall, Phil. Mag. 3, 185

0.80

(1958)
3
4

Co

W. Marshall, Phys. Rev. 110, 1280 (1958).
A. M. Portis and A. C. Gossard, J. Appl. Phys.

31, 205S (1960).
5
D. E. Nagle, H. Frauenfelder R. D. Taylor,
D. R. F. Cochran, and B. T. Matthias, Phys. Rev.
Letters 5, 364 (1960).
8
S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, G. J. Perlow, R. S.
Preston, and D. H. Vincent, Phys. Rev. Letters 4,
513 (1960).
7
R. L. Mdssbauer, Z. Physik 151 124 (1958).
8
G. K. Wertheim, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 403 (1960).
9
S. L. Ruby, L. M. Epstein, and K. H. Sun, Rev.
Sci. Instr. 31, 580 (1960).
10
See, e.g., C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid-State
Physics (John Wiley & Sons, Inc. New York, 1953),
,

FIG. 1. The magnetic field at iron nuclei in Fe-Co
and Fe-Ni alloys relative to the field in metallic iron,
plotted as a function of electron number. The data in
the range Fe 0=8 Ni 0o2 to Fe 5 Ni 0#5 where the Curie
points are low have been corrected to take account of
incomplete saturation at room temperature. Points
for Co and Ni agree well with the results given by
Wertheim. 8 Alloys near Fe ,5Co 5 are very brittle
and difficult to roll and the points on the dashed curve
were taken with small and cracked specimens. Alloys
were also prepared in this range by electroplating and
they gave higher values for Hn which lie on the continuous curve.
.

.

,

,

Chap. XII.
U V. Arp, D. Edmonds, and R. Petersen, Phys. Rev.
Letters 3, 212 (1960).
12
C. G. Shull andM. K. Wilkinson, Phys. Rev. 97,
304 (1955).

assumption that atomic moment is proportional
to Hn give about 1.8. This implies that the proportionality between atomic moment and H is
n
not strictly valid in alloys. The discrepancy
could be explained by a contribution to H which
n
depends on the nickel as well as the iron moments,

13

In collaboration with Dr.

G. J. Perlow we have shown

that the sign of the field is negative for Fe 02 Ni 0#8 as

,

well as for iron.
14
P. W. Anderson and A. M. Clogston, Bull. Am.
Phys. Soc. 6, 124 (1961).
16
A. J. F. Boyle, D. St. P. Bunbury, andC. Edwards,
Phys. Rev. Letters 5, 553 (1960).

451

314

VOLUME 122. NU:

PHYSICAL REVIEW

Internal Magnetic Fields in Manganese-Tin Alloys*
Luise Meyer-Schutzmeister, R. S. Preston, and S. S. Hanna
Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois
(Received February 13, 1961)

The hyperfine fields at the tin sites in two manganese-tin alloys have been studied as a function of temperature to above the Curie points. In addition to the Zeeman splittings, observed and analyzed previously,
a possible quadrupole interaction of about 27 Mc/sec is observed in
2 Sn. In
4 Sn the hyperfine field

Mn

is

small and negative, about

Mn

—45 koe; in Mn2Sn it is large and positive, about +200 koe. As in the case

of the pure ferromagnetic transition elements, it seems necessary to invoke a positive term associated with

conduction-electron polarization and a negative one arising from core polarization to explain these results.

THE

ferromagnetic alloys of manganese and tin,
which were used previously 1 in observing the
Zeeman splitting of the nuclear levels of Sn 119 by means
of resonant absorption, 2 have now been studied more
extensively to determine the nature of the internal
magnetic field at the tin nucleus. The magnitude of
the field has been measured as a function of temperature, and the measurements have been carried above the
Curie point in order to observe possible quadrupole
or other interactions in the absence of complications
produced by magnetic splitting. In addition, the sign

9^165° C

/o-^e

approximately equal to the magnetic splitting of the
ground state. In Fig. 1 we can see this splitting decrease

,l,il
1.00

39 mg/cm 2

\

0.99
1

f 130° C

0.99

"°5\
0.99

-

1.00

0.99

X^/

-

-

oo ° c

"

-

0.98

V

"s

-8-4
1

V

VJz:
\

"

1.00

0.99

—

Jr*- —

1

1.00

/

y /l35° C

\
-^

0.99

with iron. 3

Except as noted below, the experimental technique
was the same as used in I. In Fig. 1 are shown measurements on Mn 4 Sn at several temperatures from room
temperature to above the Curie point at about 150°C. 4
For these observations the Mn 4 Sn absorbing sample
was clamped in vacuum in a frame which was warmed
by an electrically heated coil of tungsten wire. The
temperature was measured by a thermocouple in contact with the absorber. The Sn 119 source, which emits
an unsplit line, was maintained at the temperature of
liquid nitrogen. It will be recalled from I that the basic
resonant absorption spectrum for Mn 4 Sn (with unsplit
Sn source) consists of a doublet, each member of which
is an unresolved triplet. The doublet separation is

of the field in each alloy was established by observing

Mn 4 Sn

the change in the hyperfine structure on application
of a large external magnetic field, as in our earlier work

1

1

^o

tyo

-

-

"\A°° c
i

i
i

1

4

Fig.

8

2.

Temperature variation of the internal field at the tin

nucleus in Mn 4 Sn. A Curie temperature
assumed. Data taken from Fig. 1.

SPEED (mm/sec)

T c of 423°K has been

Mn

119
Fig. 1. Resonant absorption in
4 Sn, with a metallic Sn
source at 77°K, for various absorber temperatures above and
below the Curie point. Absorber thickness is 39 mg/cm2
.

* Work performed under the auspices of the U. S. Atomic
Energy Commission.
S. S. Hanna, L. Meyer-Schutzmeister, R. S. Preston, and D.
H. Vincent, Phys. Rev. 120, 2211 (1960), hereafter referred to as I.
2
R. L. Mossbauer, Z. Physik 151, 124 (1958).
1

3
S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, G. J. Perlow, R. S. Preston, and D.
H. Vincent, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 513 (1960).
<H. H. Potter, Phil. Mag. 12, 261 (1931). The Curie temperature is given as 178°C by Ochsenfeld (reference 5). We continue
to call this alloy Mn 4 Sn in accordance with much of the literature.
However, the structure is close-packed hexagonal of the NisSn
type (DO19). Actually, single phase samples appear to have a
composition intermediate between Mn 3 Sn and Mn 4 Sn. We are

greatly indebted to M. V. Nevitt for this information.

1717

315

MEYER-SCHUTZMEISTER, PRESTON, AND HANNA

1718

the spectrum collapses into a strong central absorption.
Actually there is possibly a doublet structure in this
central line as

shown on an expanded velocity scale

in Fig. 4. This structure is not strongly temperature

dependent and would correspond to a quadrupole
-7
splitting of about 10
ev or 27 Mc/sec.

To obtain the sign of the internal field in these alloys,
the powder sample, deposited on beryllium (0.010 in.
thick), was clamped between two pieces of Lucite (each

Y6 in. thick) and mounted in the gap (j in.) of an electromagnet capable of producing fields up to 20 koe.

A 0.001-in. foil of Pd was also inserted to reduce the
400

25-kev x ray from tin. The magnetic splittings in the
absorption spectrum were then compared with the field
off and on. Because of the small aperture provided by

o
v>

the absorber in the gap

750

it

was desirable in obtaining

the absorption spectra to have the source oscillate as
close as possible to the absorber in order to increase

the counting rate. Since

it

was essential to keep the

source cold, it was mounted in vacuum on a horizontal

744

copper bar attached to a horizontal reservoir of liquid
nitrogen. With this arrangement it was possible to bring
the source to within about 1 in. of the absorber mounted
vertically in the gap. The value of the fringing field at
the average position of the source was about one sixth
the field in the gap.

732

In the case of

Mn Sn the measurements could be
4

carried out with the absorber at

•20

room temperature,

at which temperature the internal field at the tin nucleus

10

1

has a value of about 40 koe. Relative to this field the

SPEED (mm/sec)

Mn

119
Fig. 3. Resonant absorption in
2 Sn, with a metallic Sn
source at 77°K, at absorber temperatures below and above the
Curie point. At 370°K the absorber thickness is 54 mg/cm2 ; at
80°K it is 91 mg/cm2
.

and then vanish as the temperature is raised to the
Curie point. At these relatively high temperatures the
absorption is very small and high precision has not been
achieved in the data. The temperature variation of
the internal field, as obtained from these and similar
measurements, is displayed in Fig. 2. The data are

normalized to the point obtained in I at the temperature
of liquid nitrogen. The solid curve in the figure is a
theoretical Weiss curve which is in rather good qualitative agreement with the experimental points. The value
of the field at 0°K is estimated to be roughly 45 koe.

In Fig. 3 the absorption spectrum of

Mn Sn is shown
2

at two temperatures, one well below and the other

above the Curie point at — 11°C. S At the lower
temperature one observes the Zeeman spectrum analyzed in I. The value of the internal field at 0°K is
estimated to be about 200 koe. Above the Curie point

well

6
C. Guillaud, thesis, Strasbourg, 1943; quoted in R. M.
Bozorth, Ferromagnetism (D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc.,
Princeton, New Jersey), p. 340; R. Ochsenfeld, Z. Metallkunde
49, 472 (1958). This alloy is reported to have a structure of the
filled NiAs type, W. Hume-Rothery and G. V. Raynor, The Structure of Metals and Alloys (The Institute of Metals, London,
England).

-2

2

SPEED (mm /sec)

Mn

119
Fig. 4. Resonant absorption in
2 Sn, with a metallic Sn
source at 77°K, at two absorber temperatures above the Curie
Absorber
in
Fig.
3.
point. The velocity scale is expanded over that
thickness is 54 mg/cm 2
.

316

INTERNAL MAGNETIC FIELDS

MnSn ALLOYS

IN

applied external field of about 17 koe should produce

I

an easily detectible shift. The observations are shown

806-

'

I

'

'

I

I

'

'

I

I

1719

'

'
I

I

'

I

in Fig. 5. On application of the external field the doublet

separation is seen to decrease. Hence the internal field
at the nucleus in

Mn Sn is negative. The amount of
4

the shift is compatible with the linear relation,

Hn — HnQ — He^ty

H

where
n and Hn are the hyperfine fields with and
without the external field Z7ex tIn the case of Mn 2 Sn it was necessary to cool the
absorber below the Curie point (— 11°C) while keeping
it in the gap of the electromagnet. To produce a convenient internal field of about 40 koe the absorber was
maintained at a temperature of about — 23 °C. This
was accomplished by allowing a stream of nitrogen gas,
cooled by passage through a coil immersed in liquid
nitrogen, to strike each side of the Lucite holder con-

taining the absorber. It was found that the temperature,
measured with a thermocouple, could be held constant
to within about 1° by carefully regulating the stream
of cold nitrogen gas. It was necessary, however, to
enclose the complete assembly (source, absorber, and

pole pieces) in a plastic sheet in order to prevent moisture from condensing on the cold surfaces. The measurements were made by alternating many runs with field
on and field off. The final averages are shown in Fig. 6.

In this case the doublet separation is seen to increase
on application of the field. Hence the hyperfine field
at the tin nucleus in Mn 2 Sn is positive. The amount

1.1,1,1,1

676 JLJL

-8-6-4-202468
SPEED (mm/sec)

Mn

Fig. 6. Resonant absorption in
2 Sn at approximately 250°K
without an external magnetic field (above) and with an applied
field of 17.5 koe (below). The splitting is increased by application
of the field. Absorber thickness is 45 mg/cm 2 Source temperature
.

is

240

77°K.

of shift is compatible with the relation,

H n =Hno-\-H f
eX

•Thus, a possible demagnetizing effect of the applied
field in the sample
measurements.

Since

the

is

hyperfine

not noticeable in the above
field

is

large

and negative

(~— 300 koe) in the pure ferromagnetic transition
elements,

w234
O

3,6 7
'

it is of considerable interest

to find such a

large positive field (+200 koe) at the tin site in the case

Mn Sn. Moreover, this field is very sensitive to the
Mn Sn ratio, since it changes sign in going to Mn Sn.
of

2

4

:

It is significant, perhaps, that the saturation magneti-

zation is some four times as great in

Mn Sn as in Mi^Sn.

4

2

The hyperfine field produced by the conduction electrons
is

-4-2

2

given by Marshall 8 in the form

4

ff.-(&r/3)»|*(0)|V,

SPEED (mm/sec)
Resonant absorption in Mn 4 Sn at room temperature
(~300°K) without an external magnetic field (above) and with
an applied field of 17.5 koe (below). The splitting is decreased by
application of the field. Absorber thickness is 42 mg/cm 2 Source
temperature is 77 °K.
Fig.

5.

.

6

A. C. Gossard and A.

M. Portis, Phys. Rev. Letters 3, 164

(1959).

Hanna, J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J. Perlow, R. S.
Preston, and D. H. Vincent, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 177 (1960).
7

S. S.

8

W. Marshall, Phys. Rev. 110, 1280 (1958).

317

ME YER-SCHt)TZMEISTER, PRESTON, AND HANNA

1720

where n is the number of conduction electrons per atom,
2
is the probability density of a conduction elec|^(0)
tron at the nucleus, n is the Bohr magneton, and p is
the polarization of the conduction electrons. It would
appear that «|^(0)| 2 is roughly the same in the two
alloys, since they show about the same isomer shift 9
9a
If, on the other hand, the polariza(see Figs. 1 and 3).
tion of conduction electrons (produced by the adjacent
magnetic electrons) increases with saturation magneti-

As for the pure transition elements, 3 10 11 it is neces'

sary to postulate, in addition to

|

zation, then the polarization and so also

H

c

is

greater

Mn Sn than in Mn Sn. The simplest
explanation of the large positive field in Mn Sn is
numerically in

2

4

2

that

H

c

is a positive field.

H

'

the presence of a

c,

negative field, presumably associated with polarization
of the core electrons of tin. In

Mn Sn this field pre4

dominates. That this field is smaller, if different at all,
in
2 Sn is consistent with the fact that the Weiss
field is smaller, since the Curie temperature is lower
and the magnetization larger in
2 Sn than in Mn 4 Sn.
These effects observed in the manganese-tin alloys
are somewhat analogous to those obtained by Boyle
n in dilute solutions of tin in the ferromagnetic
et al.
transition elements. It is gratifying that essentially the
same mechanisms 12 can be invoked to explain qualita-

Mn

Mn

tively the observations on all these tin alloys.
9

O. C. Kistner and A. W. Sunyar, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 412

(1960).

Note added in proof. We are indebted to V. Jaccarino for pointing out that equality of the isomer shifts does not necessarily
insure the above argument, since the polarization effect is localized
at the top of the conduction band.
9s

10

D. A. Goodings and V. Heine, Phys. Rev. Letters

5,

370

(1960).
11

A. J. Freeman and R. E. Watson, Phys. Rev. Letters 5, 498

(1960).
12

A. J. F. Boyle, D. St. P. Bunbury, and C. Edwards, Phys.

Rev. Letters 5, 553 (1960).

318

VOLUME T2 2, NUMBER 3

PHYSICAL REVIEW-

Study of the Internal Fields Acting on Iron Nuclei in Iron Garnets, Using the Recoil-Free
Absorption in Fe 67 of the 14.4-kev Gamma Radiation from Fe 57m f
R. Bauminger, S. G. Cohen, A. Marinov, and S. Ofer
Department of Physics, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel
(Received December 22, 1960)

The shape of the recoil-free absorption spectrum obtained in iron garnet absorbers has been investigated,
using, as a source, a Co 57 source embedded in stainless steel. The results confirm the existence of two iron

sublattices each showing a Zeeman structure characterized by different parameters.

No significant differ-

ences have been detected between the Zeeman structure in yttrium iron garnet and dysprosium iron garnet.
The values obtained for the effective magnetic field at the Fe 57 nuclei at room temperature are 3.90X10 5 oe

and 4.85 X10 5 oe for the d and a iron lattice sites, respectively. At liquid air temperature the corresponding
5
5
fields are 4.6X10 oe and 5.4X10 oe, respectively. The mean value of the chemical shift for the d sites relative to stainless steel is about 0.04±0.005 cm/sec and about 0.06±0.005 cm/sec for the a sites.

INTRODUCTION

have a body-centered cubic structure, space group Oh 10
the unit cell containing 96 oxygen ions in the general
lattice positions, with 16 Fe 3+ ions in the a special
positions (octahedral sites) and 24 Fe 3+ ions situated
in the d special positions (tetrahedral sites). These
constitute the two iron sublattices. The yttrium or
rare earth ions occupy the 24 c dodecahedral sites.
The unit cell edge is about 12 A.
Two representative garnets of the above type were
studied, yttrium iron garnet and dysprosium iron
garnet. The yttrium ion is diamagnetic, whereas the
dysprosium ion is strongly paramagnetic. It is known
that in these garnets there is an exchange field which
tends to align the rare earth ions relative to the magnetization of the iron ions. Although this exchange
interaction is known to be small relative to the dominant exchange interaction, which occurs between the
two iron sublattices (10 5 oe compared to 6X10 6 oe), 7
it was thought of interest to see whether this could
,

THE

phenomenon of recoil-free resonance absorp-

tion

(Mossbauer effect)

1

of nuclear

gamma rays

has already been shown to constitute a powerful tool
for investigating the properties of the internal fields

acting on nuclei in solids. In particular, the 14.4-kev

gamma rays of Fe 57m have been employed in a striking
way to study the internal fields at iron nuclei in ferro
and antiferromagnetic materials. 2-4
In these cases the Zeeman splitting patterns obtained
can be simply interpreted. 5
From a knowledge of the nuclear magnetic moment of
in the absorption spectra

the nuclear ground state, values for the effective mag-

and
some cases the magnitude of the quadrupole

netic fields at the iron nucleus can be obtained
also in

interactions.

In the magnetic materials investigated so

far,

the

iron atoms occupy equivalent lattice positions and the

by a
In the present investigation,

local fields at the iron nuclei are characterized

single set of parameters.

a study has been made of the local fields in a ferrimagnetic material in which the iron atoms occupy
two nonequivalent sets of positions. It was thought
that this might result in a difference in the effective
magnetic fields at the iron nuclei in the two sites. The
ferrimagnetic materials studied were the iron garnets
(stoichiometric formula 5 Fe203-3M 2 3 where
indicates a rare earth ion or yttrium). The magnetic
,

Pauthenet has shown that in

order to explain these properties

it

is

sponding iron nuclei for the yttrium and dysprosium
garnets, respectively, at a given temperature.

Since the magnetization of the garnets is a function

temperature 6 it was also considered interesting to

of

try to correlate the effective fields at the nucleus with

temperature.

M

properties of these materials have been studied intensively in recent years. 6

give rise to a difference in the effective field at corre-

necessary to

assume that the two iron sublattices in this structure
have opposite and unequal magnetizations. The garnets
by the U. S. Air Force, Air Research and
Development Command through its European Office.
1
R. L. Mossbauer, Z. Phvsik, 151, 124 (1958).
2
S. S. Hanna, J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J. Perlow, R. S.
Preston, and D. H. Vincent, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 177 (1960).
3
G. K. Wertheim, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 403 (1960).
4
0. C. Kistner and A. W. Sunyar, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 412
f Supported in part

(1960).
6
G. DePasquali, H. Frauenfelder, S. Margulies, and R. N.
Peacock, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 71 (1960).
6
R. Pauthenet, Ann. Phys. 3, 424 (1958).

EXPERIMENTAL
In these experiments the absorption of the 14.4-kev
gamma ray of Fe 57m bound in stainless steel was measured in polycrystalline garnet absorbers, containing
iron enriched in

Fe 57

,

as a function of the relative

velocity between source and absorber. A stainless steel

source containing Co

57

has already been shown to give
34 Such a
line.
source can be used very effectively to explore the absorption spectrum of an absorber containing Fe 57 A
large argon-filled proportional counter was used to detect the 14.4-kev radiation and provided a better resolution of this radiation against background than a thin

a relatively narrow unsplit emission

.

7

P.-G de Gennes, C. Kittel, and A. M. Portis, Phys. Rev.

116, 323 (1959).

743

319

744

BAUMINGER, COHEN, MARINOV, AND OFER
monic motion, the time the source spends

in

each

velocity channel is itself a function of velocity. In order
to

obtain the true spectrum of counting .rate as a

function of velocity, the spectrum recorded on the

Fig. 1. The absorption by stainless steel of the 14.4-kev gamma
ray emitted in the decay of Fe 67m embedded in stainless steel, as
a function of relative velocity between source and absorber.

Nal(Tl) scintillation counter. As absorbers, two types
of garnets were used in this work, yttrium iron garnet

and dysprosium iron garnet. These were synthesized
from Y2O3 or Dy 2 03 and Fe203, containing iron enriched in Fe 57 (70%) in order to maximize the Mossbauer absorption relative to competing processes. X-ray
photographs taken by Mr. Kallman of this laboratory
showed a unique crystal structure for the samples.
The samples were ground fine, spread out to an average
thickness of about 10 mg/cm 2 and held rigidly between thin Lucite disks, and in this form used as
absorbers.

At first, the Doppler shift between source and absorber was provided by a mechanical device 8 consisting

a uniformly rotating eccentric wheel driving a
the source, whose speed could be
varied via a coupling. Later an instrument was developed which enabled the counting rate to be automatically recorded as a function of the relative velocity, 9
and the final results presented here were carried out in
this way. The source was mounted on a loudspeaker
membrane and vibrated sinusoidally at 65 cycles/sec.
The amplitude of the output of the pulse-height selector, channelled on the 14.4-kev peak recorded in the
of

carriage bearing

analyzer was normalized in the following way. The
output pulses from an independent scintillation counter
and radioactive source were treated in an identical
fashion as described above for the pulses from the
proportional counter and displayed on the second half
of the multichannel analyzer. The output of the two
counters were alternately switched every half-minute
into the single-channel analyzer equipped with modulated output and the two spectra stored in the two
halves of the analyzer. Identical counting rates were
arranged in order to insure similar counting losses in
the two halves of the multichannel analyzer. The
normalized spectrum was obtained by dividing the
number in a given channel of the first half of the
analyzer by the number in the corresponding channel
in the second half. This method of normalization ensured good stability over long periods of time against
drift in the electronic instrumentation. In practice, a
scale of velocities was established by using as a calibration the absorption spectrum of antiferromagnetic
Fe 2 03 and relying on the velocity assignments to the
peaks in the Zeeman pattern obtained by Kistner and

Sunyar4 and as confirmed,

also,

by measurements in

this laboratory, using the mechanical device providing

uniform relative velocity mentioned at the beginning
of this section. In both the latter measurements the
relative velocities were measured directly. A typical
absorption spectrum of Fe 2 3 using Co 57 embedded in
stainless steel, is shown in Fig. 2. Figure 1 shows the
results obtained using a stainless steel absorber with
the same source and confirms that an unsplit emission
line is indeed obtained. The width of the absorption
line is about four times the natural linewidth. Assuming
an emission and absorption line of the same shape in
,

the stainless steel source and stainless steel absorber,
respectively,

one concludes that the width of the

emission line is about twice the natural width.

Measurements were carried out for both types of
garnet absorbers at room temperature and also at the
temperature of liquid air. The latter experiments were
carried out with

the garnet absorbers immersed in

liquid air contained in a Styrofoam container.

proportional counter, was modulated in appropriate

phase with the sinusoidal motion, so that the modulated part of the amplitude would be proportional to
the source velocity at the time of emission of the corresponding photon. The spectrum of modulated pulses
was displayed on the first 128 channels of a 256-channel
pulse-height analyzer. As a consequence of the har8
S. Ofer, P. Avivi, R. Bauminger, A. Marinov, and S. G.
Cohen, Phys. Rev. 120, 406 (1960).
•The instrument used was similar to a device constructed
recently by Dr. E. Sunyar of Brookhaven National Laboratory.
We are indebted to him for information concerning his instrument, particularly the electronic circuits.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figures 3 and 4 show the results obtained with the

yttrium garnet absorber at room and liquid air temperatures, respectively. These spectra should be compared with the spectrum obtained with antiferromagnetic Fe 2 3 shown in Fig. 2. The latter spectrum has
already been investigated by Kistner and Sunyar 4 and
analyzed in terms of a Zeeman splitting of the nuclear
levels produced by a single magnetic field at the iron
nucleus (5.15X10 5 oe) somewhat modified by a quad-

320

INTERNAL FIELDS ACTING ON Fe NUCLEI

GARNETS

IN Fe

745

8 mm/see
Fig. 2. The absorption at room temperature by Fe 2 Oj of the 14.4-kev gamma ray emitted in the decay of Fe""
embedded in stainless steel, as a function of relative velocity between source and absorber.

rupole interaction of the Fe 87 nucleus with a finite

obtain a superposition of two patterns, whose intensi-

electric field gradient at the nucleus.

are in the ratio of 3:2 (ratio of iron atoms in the
two nonequivalent sites) and each resembling in shape
that of Fe 2 03 to a first approximation, but characterized by spacings determined by different parameters.
The spectra have been analyzed in accordance with

It is seen that there

is

ties

an essential difference between

the garnet spectra and the Fe 2 03 spectrum, the garnet

spectra consisting of a series of doublets, but otherwise

resembling the Fe2C>3 spectrum. An actual splitting is not

apparent in the lines close to zero velocity (i.e., for the
two "3" and "4" lines in Fig. 3 and for the three "2",
"3" and "4" lines in Fig. 4) but these lines are wider

this interpretation.

In the cases when the doublets are resolved, the
is assigned to the d sites (which
are more numerous than the a sites in the ratio 3:2)
stronger component

than would be expected assuming a single field. This

and are labeled d in the figures, and the weaker component is assigned to the a sites. For the spectrum
taken at room temperatures (Fig. 3) the positions of
the four resolved lines "Id," "2d" "5d," and "6d"
were used to calculate the four parameters determining

pattern in the garnets is in fact exactly that to be ex-

pected if the conjecture mentioned in the Introduction
is correct, namely, that the iron nuclei situated in the
two different lattice sites experience local fields which
are appreciably different. One would then expect to

o

o
o

1.00

°o\

9

o

IS

y°\
1 0.96
z
3
8 0.94

A°
01

o

°f\

/•

°\°

/I

/°

6

\°

6°

F

°\

/

°\°

°

a.

/

/

\°

/

o\

J

j

2«

RELATIVE

10
1

1

-8

uV
i

-7

-5

i

3

la
i

-3

-2-10

sd
1

1

1

/

°\

6a

5a
1

1

8 mm/sec

VELOCITY
Fig. 3. The absorption at room temperature by yttrium iron garnet of the 14.4-kev gamma ray emitted in the decay of
Fe 67m embedded in stainless steel, as a function of relative velocity between source and absorber.

;

321

BA.UMINGER, COHEN, MARINOV, AND OFER

746

-a°

1.00

o

o

£

o o

£0.98 -

/

°\
\

°i

o

pO.<J6

*7"^
'

\

7

\

7°

°\

/

o

a

f

\

o

po

•

o
o o

o

,0

Ao

of

°

10

/

z
3

\

0.94

4-

3

Ul

>0.<?2

6d

/

°lol

sa

10

5dV

od

2

<

/

1°

H

° V

f

<a
/ 1

1

o

id

cJo.po

i

l

r

I

I

-6

I

I

I

I

I

-2

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

8

2

mm/sec

VELOCITY
Fig. 4. The absorption at liquid air temperature by yttrium iron garnet of the 14.4-kev gamma ray emitted in the decay
of Fe 57m embedded in stainless steel, as a function of relative velocity between source and absorber.

the Zeeman pattern of the iron nuclei in the d sites,
and the positions of the four corresponding a lines to
calculate the parameters of the nuclei at the a sites. As
described in the work of Kistner and Sunyar, 4 the

Zeeman spectrum is characterized by four parameters
and these are uniquely determined by the position of
four peaks. The parameters are, in the notation of
Kistner and Sunyar: g and gi, the magnetic splitting
parameters for the \ and f nuclear levels, respectively
AE, the shift between the center of gravity of the absorption lines and the emission lines of Fe 67 in stainless
steel; and e, the quadrupole interaction parameter,
shifting only the substates belonging to the upper f

value of 1.77 for go/gi and using the position of the
three resolved lines appropriate to each lattice site,
i.e., "Id," "5d," and "6d" for the d sites, and "la,"
"5a," and "6a" for the a sites. As in the previous
example, the expected positions of the remaining lines
were calculated from these parameters thus obtained
and found to be in good agreement with the position
of the observed unresolved peaks "2," "3," and "4."

When the parameters were found in this way, the
expected positions of the lines "3a" and "3d," "4a"
and "Ad" were calculated, and found to be in very
good agreement with the position of the experimentally
unresolved lines "3" and "4," thus demonstrating the

The spectra obtained with the dysprosium garnet
absorber are not shown since they so closely resemble
those obtained with yttrium garnet at the same temperature. They were analyzed in a similar way. The
final values of the characteristic parameters go, g\, AE,
and e for the two sites in the various experiments are
given in Tables I and II. Table I, showing the results
obtained at room temperatures, also shows the values
01 go/gi obtained directly from the experiments in each
case. The value of the effective magnetic field at the

consistency of the analysis. Moreover, the values of

nucleus,

level.

go/gi (equal to the ratio of the nuclear g factors in the

J and f states) obtained are in satisfactory agreement
with the value obtained by Hanna et al? and Kistner
and Sunyar. 4
In the analysis of the spectrum taken at liquid air
temperature (Fig. 4) in which only three clearly resolved doublets are seen, the four characteristic parameters for each site were calculated, assuming a

H

e u, in each case was calculated from the
value obtained for g using a value 10 of +(0.0903
±0.0007) nm for the magnetic moment of the nuclear
ground state of Fe 57 The values of Z7e ff, determined in
.

this way, are given in Tables I and II.

The results demonstrate that the a and d sites are
indeed characterized by considerably different values
of
ef f at room teme a. Thus the values obtained for

H

H

perature are 3.9X10 6 oe at the d sites and 4.85 X10 6

Table I. Results of analysis of measurements on yttrium and dysprosium iron garnets at room temperature.

Y Fe 0i2 (yttrium iror garnet) at 300°K
3

go (cm/sec)
gi

(cm/sec)

AE (cm/sec)
e

(cm/sec)

go/gi

UM (oe)

5

Dy Fe 5 0i2 (dysprosium iron garnet) at 300 C K
3

Strong spectrum

Weak spectrum
a sites

Strong spectrum
d sites

Weak spectrum

d sites
0.46±0.02
0.270±0.015
0.035±0.010
0.00±0.01
1.7±0.1
(3.90±0.1)X10 5

0.58±0.02
0.325±0.015
0.055±0.010
0.00±0.01
1.8±0.1
(4.85±0.15)X10 6

0.460±0.025
0.275±0.020
0.05±0.01
0.00±0.01
1.7±0.1
(3.95±0.15)X10 6

0.580±0.025
0.325±0.020
0.06±0.01
0.00±0.01
1.75±0.1
(4.85±0.20)X10 6

G. W. Ludwig and H. H. Woodbury, Phys. Rev. 117, 1286 (1960).

a sites

322

INTERNAL FIELDS ACTING ON Fe NUCLEI

IN Fe

GARNETS

747

Table II. Results of analysis of measurements on yttrium and dysprosium garnets at liquid air temperature.

Y Fe 0i2 (yttrium iron garnet) at 85°K
3

go (cm/sec)

(cm/sec)

g,

AE (cm/sec)
«

(cm/sec)

#ett (oe)

Strong spectrum

a sites

d sites

a sites

0.550±0.015
0.31±0.01
0.04±0.01
0.00±0.01
(4.60±0.15)X10 5

0.635±0.015
0.36±0.01
0.06±0.01
-0.010±0.01
(5.35±0.15)X10 6

0.545±0.020
0.310±0.015
0.030±0.015
0.00±0.015
(4.6±0.2)X10 6

0.64±0.02
0.360±0.015
0.060±0.015
-0.010±0.015
(5.4±0.2)X10 6

H

— 4.6X10

5

oe and 5.35 oe for the d and a

sites, respectively.

Nagle et al. n have recently shown that in ferromagnetic iron,

H u, which has a well-defined value for
e

temperatures below the Curie temperature, shows the
same functional dependence on the temperature as the
from temperarelative saturation magnetization
tures at which the magnetization is almost saturated
up to the Curie temperature. This remarkably simple
result seems to demand that the fluctuations in the
value of the nuclear field at a particular iron nucleus
must take place in a time short compared to the
Larmor precession period of the nucleus in the magnetic

M„

field produced by the extranuclear electrons.

These fluctuations

may be expected to follow the

fluctuations of the magnetic

nuclear electrons.

6

Weak spectrum

oe at the a sites. The results at liquid air temperature
give higher values for
e u, but still different for the

two sites

Dy 3Fe 0i2 (dysprosium iron garnet) at 85°K

5

Strong spectrum
d sites

moment of

the extra-

The temperature dependence of the

expectation value of the extranuclear moment in the
direction of magnetization will then determine the tem-

perature dependence of both the microscopic

H a at
e

the nucleus and the macroscopic magnetization. It is
of interest to test these ideas in the case of the garnets

H

and

to see whether the values of
e a at different
temperatures are proportional to the values of the
partial spontaneous magnetizations of the appropriate
sublattice. The partial magnetizations cannot of course
be directly measured for ferrimagnetic materials.
Pauthenet, however, starting from the experimental
results for the relative saturation magnetization of the
garnets as a function of temperature, and using the
Neel two-sublattice model, 12 has calculated the partial
spontaneous magnetization for yttrium ion garnet as
a function of temperature for the two iron sublattices. 13
Table III shows a comparison between the ratio of
85 °K and 300°K in yttrium iron
the values of
e a at
garnet for the a and d sites and the corresponding ratio
of the spontaneous magnetization per ion (m) as calculated by Pauthenet. 6
The agreement is seen to be quite good and suggests

H

that in this case, also,

H u follows the variation in

Weak spectrum

lations of Pauthenet, based on the Neel model, indicate

that at liquid air temperatures the partial magnetizations of the a and d lattices should both be very close
indeed to saturation, corresponding to a value of 5 hb
per ferric ion. Nevertheless, the values of
e u remain
different for the a and d sites. Assuming saturation
really occurs at liquid air temperature, this behavior
implies a difference in the extranuclear electronic configurations determining the nuclear field in the two sites.
As seen from the results in Tables I and II, no
significant difference in the values of
e a and the other
parameters between the corresponding sites in yttrium
and dysprosium garnets has been detected. The local
fields at the corresponding sites in the two garnets
cannot differ by more than a few percent. This is not
unreasonable in view of the relatively small value of
the exchange interaction acting between the rare earth

H

H

ions and the ferric ions.
It is not to be expected that a reliable value of the
quadrupole interaction can be obtained from measurements on polycrystalline materials, since the shift in
the sublevels due to the quadrupole interaction is a
function of the angle between the magnetic field and
the direction of the field gradients which are well
defined with respect to the crystallographic axis. In
fact, for the case of an axially symmetric field gradient
and completely random orientation between the direc-

tion of magnetic field and the field gradient, the average

quadrupole shift, to first order, would be zero, and only
a line broadening would be produced. In ferromagnetic
and ferrimagnetic materials the correlation which in
general will exist between the orientation of a crystallite

and the orientations of the domains within this crystallite may very well lead to an average value of the
quadrupole shift different from zero. The present results show no evidence of an appreciable quadrupole
Shift, but in view of the above, little can be deduced

H

Table III. Comparison of ratio of value of e u at 85°K and
at 300°K, with ratio of partial magnetizations at these temperatures as calculated by Pauthenet, for yttrium iron garnet.

e

magnetization. It should be pointed out that the calcud sites
11

D. E. Nagle, H. Fraunfelder, R. D. Taylor, D. R. F. Cochran,
and B. T. Matthias, Phys. Rev. Letters 5, 364 (1960).
12
L. Neel, Ann. Phys. 3, 137 (1948).
13

See reference 6, Fig. 12 and p. 454.

o

tfeff(85

K)/tfeff (300°K)

w(85°K)/w(300°K)

1.16

1.11

1.17

1.08

323

BAUMINGER, COHEN, MARINOV, AND OFER

748

concerning an upper limit for the quadrupole interac-

isotope shift should certainly be influenced by changes

tion at the iron nucleus.

in the value of s wave functions at the nucleus and it is

Concerning the chemical shifts, there is no evidence
of any temperature dependence. The values of the
chemical shift however, do seem to be consistently
greater at the a sites than the value at the d sites.
Noting that
et( is greater at the a sites than at the
d sites, one might speculate on a possible correlation
between chemical shift and the saturation value of

possible

H

H n. If an appreciable part of the chemical shift

is due
an isotope shift, as has been suggested by Kistner
and Sunyar, 4 such a correlation may arise since the
e

to

that

H

e!{

will

also

be influenced by these

changes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank M. Schieber of the
department of electronics, the Weizmann Institute, for
preparing the garnets, E. Sunyar of Brookhaven
National Laboratory for information concerning electronic circuits, E. Segal for help in constructing the
apparatus, and A. Mustachi for help in chemical
problems.

324

ON THE USE OF THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT
FOR STUDYING LOCALIZED OSCILLATIONS
OF A TOMS IN SOLIDS

ized oscillation) a quantum of the localized oscillation.

Thus, the spectrum of emitted y quanta

will consist of an unshifted line corresponding to

the energy of the transition and of a continuous
S. V.

MALEEV

Leningrad Physico- Technical Institute,

Academy of Sciences, U.S.S.R.
Submitted to JETP editor June 29, 1960
Theoret. Phys. (U.S.S.R.) 39, 891-892
(September, 1960)

J. Exptl.

1HE Mossbauer effect consists in the emission
(or resonant absorption) by a nucleus in a solid
y quantum with an energy which is precisely

of a

equal to the energy of the transition, because of
the fact that the recoil momentum is transferred
to the crystal as a whole.

Usually the nucleus which radiates the y quan-

tum is formed by the decay of some other nucleus.
As a result of this process, the nucleus can with
a very high probability leave its place in the lattice and get stuck somewhere at an interstitial

position.

But, even if the nucleus does not move

about, if it should change its atomic number as

a result of the decay the forces holding it in the
lattice will change. Thus the nucleus emitting the
Mossbauer quantum must be a lattice defect.
On the other hand it is well known (cf. reference 1) that the spectrum of oscillations of a defect atom in a lattice consists of a continuous

spectrum, coinciding with the spectrum of oscillations of the ideal lattice, and of discrete frequencies which do not coincide with any of the
frequencies of normal vibrations of the atoms of
the ideal lattice.

cies

(

Vibrations with such frequen-

localized oscillations ) cannot propagate

through the lattice over any sizeable distance.
At the same time there is a finite probability
y quantum there is simultaneously emitted or absorbed (the latter,
naturally, only for sufficiently high temperatures,
T Z Ho)l, where u>l is the frequency of the localthat in the emission of a

background corresponding to the emission and
absorption simultaneously with the y quantum of
phonons from the continuous part of the spectrum
of oscillations of the atom; on this background,
there will be individual discrete peaks due to the
emission and absorption of quanta of the localized
oscillations.

These peaks can be observed in almost the

same way as the unshifted line is observed.
Namely, an absorber containing atoms in the
ground state should be moved with such a velocity that the Doppler shift of its undisplaced absorption line will be equal to the frequency of the

One then will observe a
stronger absorption than for neighboring frequencies. The velocity needed for this is obviously
determined by the condition col = vw/c, where
u> is the frequency of the y line.
If the energy
of the transition is of the order of tens of kev,
4
3
and hcoL ~ 0.01 ev, v ~ 10 — 10 cm/sec. Such
a velocity is not difficult to obtain by placing the
absorber on the rim of a rotating disk.
localized oscillation.

^aradudin, Mazur, Montroll, and Weiss, Revs.
Modern Phys. 30, 175 (1958).
Translated by M. Hamermesh

325

Polarization of Co" in Fe Metal*
G. DASH.t R. D. Taylor, D. E. Nagle, P. P. Craig, and W. M. Visscher
Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, University of California, Los Alamos, New Mexico

J.

(Received December 16, 1960)

A study has been made of the effect of low temperatures on the resonant emission and absorption of
14.4-kev Mossbauer radiation from Fe 57 in Fe metal. Analysis of intensity changes in the hyperfine spectrum
made in terms of the Zeeman level splittings of the ground states of Fe 57 absorbing nuclei and of the
ground states of Co 57 parent nuclei. The theory for the temperature dependence is developed in terms of
the properties of the Co 67 decay and of the subsequent gamma transitions. Experiments were carried out
with a source of Co 67 nuclei in Fe metal at temperatures between 4.5° and 0.85°K. The experimental results,
analyzed in terms of the theory, yield a value of the hyperfine magnetic field at the Co 67 nuclei. Comparison of the result with other pertinent experimental values indicates that depolarization of the nuclei by the
/sT-capture decay of Co 67 is not evident in the present material.
is

I.

THE

INTRODUCTION

14.4-kev gamma rays of Fe 67 nuclei are known

to have, in suitable crystals, a high proportion /
of recoil-free, or "Mossbauer" radiation. 1-4 Interest in

the Fe 67 system is enhanced by the relatively narrow
linewidths characteristic of the excited state (lifetime

10~ 7 sec) and the clearly resolvable hyperfine com-

ponents of the Mossbauer pattern. Experiments with

Fe crystal sources and absorbers are facilitated by the
large value of / even at room temperature as a conse-

quence of the high Debye characteristic temperature
(0~42O°K) and the low nuclear recoil temperature
(rR^40°K). A source of Co 67 nuclei dissolved in a Fe
lattice at room temperature has /c^O.7
cooling the
source to 0°K increases / to 0.92. This limit is achieved
to within 0.1% by 20°K, and similar "saturation" ob1

tains for the fraction /' of recoil-free absorption by an
absorber of Fe 67 in Fe metal. Further cooling will
result in a negligible increase of / and /'; cryogenic

studies of the system might appear unprofitable.

At

sufficiently

low temperatures, however, a

re-

distribution of the populations of the Zeeman sublevels

takes place, and the nuclei become polarized.

5

This

polarization can be quantitively studied through the
effect

upon the hyperfine Mossbauer spectrum. While

nuclear polarization in ferromagnets has been observed
before, 6 the present technique offers certain advantages.

In this type of experiment the magnitude and sign of
the magnetic field at the Co nucleus may be determined.
The effects of the nuclear polarization are the concern

;

of this paper.
II.

*Work performed under the auspices of the U. S. Atomic
Energy Commission.
t Present address, University of
1

The ground state of Co 57 with a half-life of 270 days,
decays by -fiT-electron capture and neutrino emission to
the second excited state of Fe 57 The decay is probably
an allowed transition, since its value of log// =6 lies
,

Washington, Seattle, Wash-

ington.

R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev. Letters 3, 554

(1959).
*J. P. Schiffer
(1959).

Fe" IN Fe METAL

.

and W. Marshall, Phys. Rev. Letters 3, 556

*G. de Pasquali, H. Frauenfelder, S. Margulies, and R. N.
Peacock, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 71 (1960).
* S. S. Hanna,
J. Heberle, C. Littlejohn, G. J. Perlow, R. S.
Preston, and and D. H. Vincent, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 177 (1960).

6
J. G. Dash, R. D. Taylor, P. P. Craig, D. E. Nagle, D. R. F.
Cochran, and W. E. Keller, Phys. Rev. Letters 5, 152 (1960).
6
M. J. Steenland and H. A. Tolhoek, Progress in Low-Temperature Physics, edited by C. J. Gorter (Interscience Publishers,
Inc., New York, 1957), Vol. II, Chap. X, p. 292.

326

POLARIZATION OF

1117

METAL

Co 67 IN Fe

known allowed transiaccepted spin assignments
and considerations based on the shell model. The
nuclear spin 7 3 of Co 57 is 7/2, and its magnetic moment
57
8
H 3 is 4.65 nm. The second excited state of Fe has
-9
9
spin 1 2 of 5/2 and a mean lifetime of about 9X 10
sec.
This state decays, by emission of a 123-kev gamma ray,
to the first excited state of Fe 57 A minor fraction (9%)
of the decays involve a transition from the second excited state directly to the ground state, with the
emission of a 137-kev gamma ray. 10 The multipolarity
of the 123-kev radiation is 96% Ml, 4% £2. 911 The
first excited state has spin Ii = 3/2, and moment ^i of
0.153 nm. 4 This state has a half-life of 1.1X10- 7 sec,
and decays by pure Ml emission of a 14.4-kev gamma
within the limits of log// for

Co=

tions, 7 and this agrees with

:28 *.*'*
-

3/2

fi =+4.65

nm

3

--I/2

--3/2

EC (ALLOWED)

.

ray, to the ground state of Fe 57

.

,-9-»j-°;

I, =

together with the properties of the higher states, are

shown in Fig. 1. We also show the normal order of sub,

deduced from preliminary results 5 of the

study reported here.

The hyperfine magnetic field H acting on equivalent
nuclei in a ferromagnetic crystal has a single direction

space over the region of a ferromagnetic domain.
Coupling between the nuclear magnetic moments and
the hyperfine field removes the degeneracy of nuclear
spin orientation and produces a set of equally spaced

in

spin sublevels of energies &.Eus=ingn n H,

—I<m<I,

where m is the magnetic quantum number, g is the
nuclear gyromagnetic ratio, and n„ is the nuclear
magneton. In cubic Fe metal, all nuclei occupy equivalent lattice positions

;

hence, there 'is a single preferred

direction in space and a single set of energy sublevels

Fe nuclei in each ferromagnetic domain. An
unmagnetized sample has its domains oriented in
several directions, such that there is no net spatial
for the

polarization of the entire sample, but all of the nuclei

(excepting those in the neighborhood of imperfections

and impurities, and possibly those near domain walls)
have the same hyperfine level splittings. The splittings
of the first excited and ground states of Fe 57 are greater
than the linewidth of the 14.4-kev resonance radiation.
Gamma-ray transitions between the 14.4-kev sublevels
of magnetic quantum number
} to the ground-state

m

AE=l.07xlO" ev

+3/2

Ml

V=+0.0903 m
l/2

12

...1. -AE

Experiments on the Mossbauer effect have been used
to obtain a detailed description of the first excited and
ground states of Fe 57 in Fe metal. 4 Results of this study,

levels of Co 57

/i,»-O.I53nm

+1/2

7

-,|

The spin of the ground

state, Jo, is 1/2, and it has a moment mo of 0.0903 nm.

-

3/2

-1/2

n

fj.

7

AE„* 1.90 x I0" ev

]

»57
Fig.

Energy level diagram of Co 67 and daughter nuclei.

1.

sublevels m k (m k = mj,nij±l), therefore result in a
gamma-ray spectrum of six hyperfine components. The
relative intensity of the transition

(ntj —>

mk

)

is

pro-

portional to the probability Wjk specified by the rules

governing magnetic dipole radiation. Figure 2 is a
schematic diagram of the radiation, similar to a diagram
given by Hanna et al} The radiation widths are suppressed, and relative intensities are appropriate to the
case of unpolarized radiation from a source having no
net magnetization. 12a Positions of the line centers are
given in terms of Doppler velocity shifts (positive velocity taken as increasing separation between source
and detector) equivalent to shifts from the energy

and ground

difference

between

states. The

m values of the upper and lower state sub-

levels are

degenerate

excited

shown at the top and bottom of each line.

>1-

i "« -

-

3/2

-3/2

1
§"

1/6 -

-1/2

-

1/2

z
H
to 1/12
z
<

o

-1/2

1/2

<r
7
B. L. Robinson and R. W. Fink, Revs. Modern Phys. 32, 117
(1960).
8
J. M. Baker, B. Bleaney, P. M. Llewellyn, and P. F. D. Shaw,
Proc. Phys. Soc. (London) A69, 353 (1956).
9
G. F. Pieper and N. P. Heydenburg, Phys. Rev. 107, 1300
(1957).
10
D. E. Alburger and M. A. Grace, Proc. Phys. Soc. (London)
A67, 280 (1954).

w

-1/2

\z

-1/2
-i.( 9

1/2

4/2,

-Q« 6

0.«)6

1/2
3.( te

1/2
5.: 2

DOPPLER VELOCITY v mm /SEC

11
G. R. Bishop, M. A. Grace, C. E. Johnson, A. C. Knipper,
H. R. Lemmer, J. Perez y Torba, and R. G. Scurlock, Phil. Mag.

Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the recoil-free 14.4-kev radiation
in Fe metal. Individual linewidths are not shown.
Relative transition probabilities are appropriate to the case of
domains oriented at random. Energy displacements are in terms of
Doppler velocity, positive velocity being taken as increasing separation between source and observer. Magnetic sublevel quantum
numbers for the first exxited and ground states are shown at top

46, 951 (1955).

and bottom, respectively, of each line.

a G. W. Ludwig and H. H. Woodbury, Phys. Rev. 117, 1286
(1960).

from Fe 67

See "note added in proof.'

)

:

:

327

DASH, TAYLOR, NAGLE, CRAIG, AND VISSCHER

1118

An absorber of Fe 67 in Fe metal has a similar hyperfine
pattern of resonant cross sections. If Fig. 2 is translated

matrices for the two transitions preceding the arrival at

over an identical pattern, the overlaps at velocity dif-

We can therefore obtain the pj of the 14.4-kev state by

v= v (source) — v (absorber)

ferences

represent

the ab-

the 14.4-kev state, and

p j= const Y, piQu-

Substituting Eqs. (2) and (3) in Eq. (1), we obtain the
relative intensity of an emission line (m ; —*
k ) of a

m

source,

W =w £ m '«'W(£ ™>« L m «' TQij).

essential to the present study, and the relative velocities
v

jk

from 8v.

e

e

jk

jk

l

be understood to represent the displacements

will

(3)

i

to an absorber, resulting in a Mossbauer-type intensity

ences between source and absorber, the emission and
absorption spectra are shifted relative to each other
by a small Doppler velocity 8v. 13M This shift is not

presented in the Appendix.

summing contributions from the parent sublevels

sorption dips obtained when a source is moved relative
pattern. As a result of chemical or temperature differ-

is

(4)

I

We have assumed that spin lattice relaxation causes
m. THEORY

The intensity of the emission line (mj — m

K

of

capture and subsequent

gamma emissions. A second

possible

Polarization and Depolarization

the spins during the

negligible depolarization

mechanism for depolarization is due to perby extranuclear fields resulting from K

turbations
pro-

capture. A study of the angular distribution of the 123-

portional to the transition probability Wjk and to the

population pj of the sublevel at which the transition
originates. We define Wj k as the normalized relative

kev radiation from partially aligned Co 67 nuclei in a
Tutton salt 11 indicated considerable depolarization of
the second excited state, presumably as a result of the

intensity

AT-capture process. Depolarization to the extent ob-

>

k ) is

Wj k = pfOjk/H pju>jk.

(1

In thermal equilibrium the populations Pj are propor-

served in the Tutton salt would cause a marked decrease in the population asymmetries. We believe at the
outset, however, that the large electron mobilities in

tional to the Boltzmann factors of the nuclear sublevels.

the Fe metal provide a rapid extinction of the per-

The nuclear spins of the first excited state of Fe",
however, are not in thermal equilibrium. Gossard and

turbing

Portis 16 have measured a spin relaxation time of 10

Transmitted Intensities

sec for Co 69 nuclei in Co metal, and one may expect the

T~

relaxation time to increase as
tures.

16

The

relaxation

l

at lower tempera-

mechanisms

for

Co and Fe

nuclei in Fe metal should be quite similar to those in

Co metal, and we may therefore treat the spin
populations of the 14.4-kev state of Fe" as unchanged
the

during the 10-7 sec state lifetime. Since the lifetime of
the second excited state is even shorter than 10~ 7 sec,
the pj of a source of 14.4-kev radiation are functions of
the populations of sublevels in the 270-day Co 57 parent.
The equilibrium population pi of the Co 57 sublevel, in
the case of pure magnetic hfs,

is

given by the Boltz-

mann factor

Pi=C expimtfT- ),
1

where

£=gnnHkr

making depolarization much smaller

fields,

than in the salt.

-4

We consider a resonance emission spectrum composed of several lines of Lorentzian shape, each line
having the width T. The relative intensity of a line
centered at energy Ejk is
When the source of
jk
radiation is moving away from the observer at speed v,

W

.

the intensity distribution of the
given by
/r/27r
*>*(»)

(mj—^mk)

=

line

is

(5)

.

(E-E k+Ej k v/c¥+r>/4
}

where / is the total intensity,

I=T.Wjkf $j k (v)dE.

(2)

(6)

J

ik

mi is the magnetic quantum member of the sublevel,

T is the temperature, g/z» is the moment of the Co 57
the

The hyperfine emission spectrum of a source can be
analyzed by filtering the radiation through an absorber

nucleus, k is Boltzmann's constant, and C is a constant.

containing ground-state nuclei: in the present case,

nucleus,

H

is

the hyperfine magnetic

field

at

A Co 67 nucleus in the mi sublevel decays to the mj sub-

Fe 67 Absorbing nuclei are excited from ground-state

Fe" with a probability

sublevels to sublevels of the first excited state, and the

level of the 14.4-kev state of

Qij. The matrix Q is the product of Clebsch-Gordan

u R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 274
(1960).
14

16

B. D. Josephson, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 341 (I960).
A. C. Gossard and A. M. Portis, Phys. Rev. Letters 3, 164

(1959).

.

W

transitions {m k —> trig) have relative "intensities"
k 'y,
where the primed symbols represent the absorber. The
hyperfine resonant absorption cross section is composed
of lines of cross section
k 'j>(Xk'j', where
>

W

rr 2 /4

16

G. E. Pake, in Solid State Physics, edited by F. Seitz and
D. Turnbull (Academic Press, Inc., New York, 1956), Vol. 2,

(£-£* T ) 2 +r 2/4

(7)

:

:

:

:

328

POLARIZATION OF

1119

and a is the total resonant absorption

cross section.

If such an absorber is placed between a source of radia-

tion as is represented by Eq. (5), the intensity trans-

mitted at relative Doppler speed v is

I t (v) =

ZW,
Xexpl-naf £ Wvr *vr¥Et

no-overlap contributions can be distinguished by a func
tion Av having the properties

A v = 1,

when

Ejk {\ - V/c) = Ek >y,

Av=0,

when

\Ejk (l-V/c)-E k j >\>5T.

(ID

>

The intensity transmitted at one of these discrete
speeds can then be obtained by summing the contributions of overlapping and nonoverlapping lines
(8)

k'y

£ W

I t (V) = I

jk

jkk'i'

where n is the total number of atoms/ cm2 in the absorber, a is the abundance of the isotope which absorbs
resonantly, and /' is the fraction of recoil-free resonant
absorptions.

METAL

Co 67 IN Fe

X{l-AK[l-/o(i^ 'W2)exp(-^ r x/2)]>.
fc

(12)

17

The overlap integral of Eq. (8) is implicitly limited
to the case of unpolarized spectra obtained with unmagnetized sources and absorbers. In the event of a
net magnetization it is necessary to take account of the
relative orientations of the magnetic fields acting on
the source and absorber nuclei. We will, however, limit
this treatment to the case of unpolarized radiation,
such as is represented in Fig. 2. The integral in Eq. (8)
can be solved in closed form for two special cases:

The hyperfine radiation is, in practice, associated with
a broad background of nonresonant gamma rays, and
the absorber has a certain amount of nonresonant absorption. The nonresonant background to the Mossbauer pattern can be formally eliminated by comparing
transmitted at high speed.

R(v)=u~-i<(vn/u~-i<(-vn

(i3)

The latter case is equivalent to no

resonant absorption,
being given by Eq.

The results of our experi-

ment are expressed as a ratio,

either perfect overlap of emission and absorption lines,

or for no overlap.

V with the intensity

transmitted intensities at speed

the transmitted intensity then

In the case of perfect overlap,
when an emission line energy Ejk is Doppler shifted so
that Ejk(l — v/c) = Ek'j>, the transmitted jk line intensity It(jk) can be written
(6).

where /«, is the intensity transmitted at speeds high
enough so that no lines overlap, and h(V) and I (— V)
and —V, reare the intensities transmitted at
spectively. The explicit dependence of R(V) on the
t

+V

relative

intensities

of

source and absorber

lines

is

obtained by substituting Eq. (12) in Eq. (13)

I

Itijk)-

-Wjk \r
7T

where y=2(EEq. (9) is

<°

r-W .?x-l

dy

J-ool+y2

k

exp

R(V)= Z A v WikK k r {x)/ Z A-vWjkK k .j.(x),
.

(9)

L

1+y2

E k .y)/Y, and x=naf'a. The solution of

(14)

jkk'j'

jkk'i'

J

where
tf*v(*) = l-J (iW k ^x/2) exp(-Wk >i>x/2).

I (jk)=IWjkJ (iW k ^x/2) exp(-W k r x/2),

(10)

We wish to obtain the explicit dependence of R(V) on

where J is the Bessel function of zeroth order. We shall
assume that the 14.4-kev spectrum given in Fig. 2
represents both the emission spectrum of the source

case will be treated separately in the following sections.

.

t

the temperature of the source or of the absorber. Each

and the absorption pattern of the absorber. The over-

Cold Source

Mossbauer, pattern of such a source-absorber
combination has several discrete Doppler speeds V at
which the transmitted intensity due to all emission
lines can be expressed in terms of the two special cases
given above. Although the Lorentzian form of the lines
vanishes only at infinity, a separation of 5r between

We assume the absorber to be sufficiently warm so

lap, or

source and absorption line energies is sufficient to
reduce the resonant absorption to less than 1% of that
at perfect overlap.

We shall adopt this separation as

a practical criterion for the absence of overlap. There
are then four speeds V at which we can evaluate the
transmitted intensity with good accuracy These speeds
:

that we can neglect differences between sublevel populations in

the absorber:

Wvy = Wk'j'/2~lk'j'Wk'i'. The

temperature dependence of R(V) then arises from the
differences in Boltzmann factors of the

Co 67 sublevels

and their influence on relative line intensities, Eq. (4).
Before making the indicated substitution for
}k in
Eq. (14), we note a symmetry property of the hyperfine

W

spectrum, Fig. 2

:

If emission line (j,k) overlaps absorp-

tion line (k',f) at relative velocity V, then

overlaps (— k',

(— j, —k)

— /) at velocity —V. Furthermore, the

transition probabilities of symmetric lines are equal

are 2.23, 6.18, 8.41, and 10.46 mm/sec. The overlap and

Wjk = w-j- k
17
P. P. Craig, J. G. Dash, A. D. McGuire, D. Nagle, and R. D.
Reiswig, Phys. Rev. Letters 3, 221 (1959).

,

and

w k = W- k --y.
'}'

Making use of these relations, substituting Eq. (4) in

:

:

329

DASH, TAYLOR, N A G L E
'1

,

_

5

CRA G
I

AND VISSCHER

,

1120

The temperature coefficient a M \{V,x) for each speed
V is shown as a function of the thickness parameter in

1

10.64 mm/ seo

9.40
-5

-

Fig. 3.

a E i(V,x) are approximately one-

Coefficients

half to one-third of the corresponding factor for the

>"

Ml radiation: The coefficient representing all of the

O

8.41 mm/see

4

5.90

"

transitions can therefore be estimated as

a

m

98% of the

(V,x).

3.60

Cold Absorber

_

_
6. 1 8

mm /sec

2.79

The temperature dependence of R(V) for a warm
2^23 mm/ sec

««*'

-

source and a cold absorber is related to the splitting
67
in the absorber, and
of the ground-state levels of Fe

1.80

is

"

"

independent of the hfs of the ground state of Co 67

.

Therefore, this case does not depend on the matrix

elements Qi,, and the analysis is accordingly simpler.
Also, no depolarization or coherence effects are present
30

20

as considered above. Since

we have not investigated

1

1

40

50

this arrangement experimentally, we will only approxi-

x

mate the temperature dependence. The approximation

ABSORBER THICKNESS IN UNITS OF

Fig. 3. Calculated temperature coefficients of several relative
absorption-emission velocities as a function of the thickness pa-

rameter x.

considered is that of a thin absorber, %Wwj'/2<£i. Ex-

panding

K >j>{x) to first order in x, and expressing the
k

relative strength

W

k >j>

of

an absorption line in terms

of the population p k of the ground-state sublevel,
>

Eq. (14) yields

KvA%y=*xWvt

E A vK >Ax)w j: em «> TQij
k

R(V) =

./2--

jk

jkk'j'

i

E AvK 'Ax)u> Zem ^ TQi-j
k

jk

jkk'j'

i

£ AvK >Ax)w £ m
k

v

e

jk

«' T

+

Qii
(15)

E LyK vr {x)w E e—f'Qti'
ik

jkk'j'

The most convenient overlap speeds for exploring the
dependence of R(V) on absorber temperature are those
at 7=6.18, 8.41, and 10.46 mm/sec. At these moderV are due
ately strong absorption dips, all overlaps at
to absorption lines arising from the
1/2 ground-state
sublevel, and all at — V originate from the — 1/2 sublevel. Equation (14) reduces, for these cases, to the
particularly simple form

i

since @y=()_i_y. Equation (15) takes a simple form at

+

R(V) = p i /p. i =exI>aoT-^,

relatively high temperatures, when I-/T<K1. Expanding

(20)

the Boltzmann factors to first order in %/T, we obtain

where £ & is the energy splitting of the ground-state

the high-temperature approximation,

sublevels.

R(V)=l+a(V,x)!;T-\

(16)

TO H e TRANSFER
Ht s MANOMETERS
GAS AND VACUUM / AND PUMPS

where
2

E Ar£*'j' (*)»,* E fnjQi/

a(P» =

.

(17)

E &vKk>i'(x)wjkT,Qij
jkk'j'

i

The decay from the first excited state to the ground
state of Fe 67 is pure Ml. There is, however, a mixture
of
1 and E2 gamma rays in the decay from the second
to first excited states. If we assume that the mixture

M

is

KEL-F SPRINGS

incoherent, as for the unpolarized spectra from un-

magnetized sources, the temperature
have a similar mixture

coefficient

will

R(V)=l+[p.96a 1n(V,t)+0.04a E *(.Vj)lST-\

(18)

SOURCE
-SUPPORT TUBE
(COPPER)

MOTION

where ajif i and a^2 are the coefficients corresponding to
Eq. (17) with the proper matrix elements Qv for Ml

.001'

and E2 radiation, respectively.

Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of the experimental arrangement.

ALUMINIZED MYLAR

330

POLARIZATION OF Co"

1121
IV.

EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS

A schematic diagram of the experimental arrangement is shown in Fig. 4. The cryostat has a somewhat
unconventional design in that no liquid extends down
to the height of the sample. The source is thermally
protected by three concentric copper shields, the tops
4
and
of which are maintained at liquid N 2 liquid He
,

liquid

,

He3 temperatures. These features permit the

14-kev radiation to leave the cryostat with an attenuation due only to thin windows in the shields; namely,
0.001-in. Al at

He

3

temperatures, 0.001-in. aluminized

Mylar plastic at 1.4°K and 80°K, and 0.020-in. Be at
room temperature. The source was connected directly
to the He 3 reservoir via a heavy copper tube held
rigidly in place within the He 4 shield by means of compressed leaf springs made of Kel-F plastic. The flange
4
at the top of the He 4 shield was sealed to the He
reservoir by means of a Sn-In O-ring.
The desired temperature was reached and maintained by controlling the pumping rate on the He3
bath. Temperatures were determined from the observed

He

3
bath vapor pressures and a carbon resistance
thermometer attached to the source holder.
The 10-millicurie source was prepared in the manner
described by Pound and Rebka. Co 67 was plated from
a Co 57 Cl 2 solution on a 0.007-in. thick of Armco iron
which was then annealed in vacuum for approximately
one hour at 900°C to cause diffusion of the Co 67 into
the Fe lattice. The thin sheet was soft soldered to a
copper holder for rigidity and good thermal contact.
Absorbing foils of Fe 67 metal were prepared either by
plating the enriched isotope on 0.1-mil Ni foil or by
rolling sheets of the enriched Fe metal. The rolled foils
were made by a technique used by Karasek of the
Argonne National Laboratory. 18 A button of 78% Fe 67
22% Fe 66 was rolled to approximately 1-mil thickness
in successive stages during which the sheets were
1

,

,

annealed several times. The 1-mil sheet was further
reduced by "pack rolling" between ferrotype plates, to
approximately 0.1 mil. The foil was clamped between
thin sheets of Mylar plastic by a soft iron frame holder.

The

detector consisted of a

crystal sealed to

an

1-mm thick Nal(Tl)

RCA 6342 photomultiplier tube.

Scintillation pulses corresponding to energies in the

neighborhood of 14 kev were counted by means of a
Franklin Model 358 amplifier and single-channel analyzer, a modified Berkeley Model 7161-3 counter and a

IN Fe

METAL

cm, the microswitches automatically reset and started
the counter. The timing interval on the counter could
be preset to four significant figures, so that counting
could be made over almost the same absorber path at
any given speed. This procedure averaged the measured
intensities over nearly the same path length for positive
and negative velocities, and was found to be necessary
because of a 1% difference in counting rates between
the extremes of absorber travel. The gear box and three
interchangeable worm gear reducers allowed a choice of
120 Doppler speeds, ranging from 0.0143 to 14.94
mm/sec at a motor speed of 1800 rpm. Intervals between the speed settings were adequate to explore the
shape of the central absorption peak, but were in some
cases too coarse to examine the details of other lines.
We therefore used a vernier control on the speed by
running the synchronous motor at power frequencies
between 50 and 70 cps. The variable frequency power
was generated by two audio oscillators and a power
amplifier; the two oscillators were used alternately for
positive and negative absorber velocities. This scheme
made compensation possible for the small temperature
and chemical shifts of the resonance patterns by setting
the oscillators to different frequencies.
frequencies were measured

The oscillator

and found to be stable to

better than 0.1%. A 100-kc/sec crystal driven chronograph and optical gating system showed the absorber
speeds to be uniform and stable to better than 0.03%
over the whole length of travel when the motor was
driven by the 60-cps power line. When two frequencies
were used to drive the motor, the path length for the
velocity corresponding to the lower drive frequency was
slightly shorter because the preset timer on the counter

was not alternated The effect on the data is discussed
Unwanted relative motion of the
source with respect to the absorber due to lateral
vibration of the source within the cryostat was reduced
by means of the Kel-F spacers. With this internal
bracing, the assembly approached the rigidity of the
outer casing of the cryostat; this in turn was fixed to
the platform which supported the absorber carriage.
Rigidity and good thermal isolation of the colder regions of the cryostat are somewhat incompatible; it
was necessary to reach a compromise between the two
:

in the next section.

extremes.

Experimental Results

digital recorder.

The absorber foils were mounted on a sliding carriage
whose mean position was 20 cm in front of the scintillator crystal. A cable system drove the carriage at fixed
linear speeds over a

6-cm horizontal path. This drive

worm gear
speed reducers, and a 40-speed lathe gear box. Microswitches at each end of the carriage path reversed the
motor, and after an initial absorber travel of about 1
consisted of a 1/25-hp synchronous motor,

The absorbers used were a plated foil of 2 mg/cm2 Fe 57
and a rolled foil of 1.73 mg/cm2 Fe 67 Although both
foils had comparable resonance absorptions, the rolled
foil was better in two respects; it had a narrower line
and a smaller resonance pattern shift when both source
and absorber were at room temperature. This shift was
approximately 1.2X10-2 mm/ sec, equivalent to a fractional resonant frequency difference between source and
absorber of Av/v=4XlO~ l& and could be accounted
for by a difference between the characteristic Debye
.

,

S. S.

Hanna (private communication).

331

DASH, TAYLOR, NAGLE, .CRAIG, AND VISSCHER

1122

absorber were magnetized. The latter condition could
result from the method of preparation of the absorber.

A combination of the two circumstances would change
the relative intensities of the absorption dips at the
several source-absorber speeds V, as a result of the net

polarization of individual spectral components. 4

To a

first-order approximation, a net polarization does not

influence the relative contributions of individual lines,

and hence,

the

temperature

dependence

R(V).

of

Nevertheless, an experimental check of the net polarization of the spectra was made; the absorber orientation
was rotated by 90 degrees about an axis normal to its
plane. This rotation caused no perceptible changes in

transmitted intensities, ensuring that the spectrum of
Experimental overlap pattern of Fe 67 in Fe metal, for
and 3 mm/sec. The source is Co 67 in
Doppler speeds between
Fe metal at 4.5°K, and the resonant absorber is a 1.7-mg/cm2 Fe 67
rolled foil at room temperature. Intensities correspond to total
counting rates of gamma rays having energies between 10 and
Fig.

5.

18 kev.

Fig. 2 was appropriate to the experiment.

Experimental values of R (2.23 mm/ sec) for temperaand 0.85°K are shown in Fig. 6.
Data points were taken over a period of several hours
for each temperature, in order to accumulate the necessary number of counts, ~10 7 for adequate statistics.
That the line does not pass through 1.00 at 1/T=0 is
probably due to a geometry effect. The counting rate
with the absorber placed at the extremes of the normal
travel was shown to be slightly different as also noted
earlier the absorber path length was slightly different
tures between 4.5°

,

temperatures of source and absorber of 6°K. 19 The
central absorption peak of the rolled foil had a width
at half height of 0.42 mm/sec and a depth 53% (uncorrected for background) below the intensity at high
velocities. This width is approximately two times that
expected for a thin absorber, and corresponds closely
to the width expected for the thick foil used. The first
strong satellite absorption lines at 2.23 mm/sec were

and had the theoretical ratio, 0.57, of
depth compared to the central peak. Upon cooling the
source to low temperatures, the central resonance peak
broadened to 0.60 mm/sec. The shift is in close agreement with that observed previously for an absorber at
room temperature and a source at the temperature
well resolved,

of liquid air. 13

The increased resonance width can be

attributed to differences between the hfs of the source

and absorber, due to the variation of hfs with temperature; this effect has been studied in more detail at
higher temperatures, 2021 and will not be discussed here.

;

for positive

and negative velocities in this particular

experiment. A systematic 0.3% change in the counting
rate at one of the satellites used in obtaining the ratio

would shift the ordinate in Fig. 6 by 0.015.

The experimental slope, dft/dr-^ 0.03 13±0.0021
obtained by a least squares analysis is directly proportional to the magnitude of the field
at the Co 57
nuclei. In order to deduce H, it is necessary to evaluate

H

the coefficients in Eq. (18) for the actual foil thickness.
The total resonance cross section is given by the

formula 17

2I{+1
<t=2ttX2

(

)

2/o+lVl+c
lVl+a/

= 1.48X10- I8 cm

2
,

(21)

The resonance pattern obtained with the rolled foil
and with the source at 4.5 °K is shown in Fig. 5. Vibration associated with the accelerations at the ends of the

absorber travel became excessive at higher speeds;
consequently, the first strong satellite lines were judged

most suitable for examining the intensity asymmetry
at low temperatures.
Preliminary experiments 6 conducted with the present
source required the application of a large external magnetic field in the plane of the source foil. An appreciable

remanent magnetization of the source could possibly
lead to errors in the present work if, in addition, the
19

R. V. Pound and G. A. Rebka, Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 335

(1960).
20

S. S. Hanna, Proceedings of the Allerton Park Conference on
the Mossbauer Effect, University of Illinois, 1960 (unpublished),
pp. 39-40; D. H. Vincent, R. S. Preston, J. Heberle, and S. S.
Hanna, Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 5, 428 (1960).
21
D. E. Nagle, H. Frauenfelder, R. D. Taylor, D. R. F. Cochran,
and B. T. Matthias, Phys. Rev. Letters 5, 364 (1960).

Fig. 6. Intensity ratio R for the 2.23-mm/sec resonant absorption
dip at several temperatures between 4.5°K and 0.85°K.

332

POLARIZATION OF Co 67

1123

where X is (27r) _1 times the wavelength of the 14.4-kev
radiation, I\ and I are the spins of the excited and
ground states, respectively, and 22 a =15 is the internal
conversion coefficient.

The

calculated

thickness pa-

rameter for the 1.73-mg/cm2 foil is x= 27. The effective
thickness for the absorption lines having the intensity
factors w*'.,-'=l/12, 1/6, and 1/4 which overlap in the
2.23-mm/sec resonance are therefore xwk' } '/2=1.13,
2.26, and 3.39,. respectively. The temperature coefficients are calculated to be

a M1 (V=2.23 mm/sec, *= 27) = 2.19,
a £2 (F=2.23 mm/sec, z=27)=1.13.

The resulting formula for the ratio of intensities is,
by Eq. (18),

R(V)=l+2.15ZT-\

(22)

METAL

IN Fe

Tutton salt results arise after the -fiT-capture
decay of the Co 87 and are probably due, in the Tutton

for the

,

salt,

to long-lived holes in the outer electron shells.

These holes are filled rapidly by the conduction electrons of the metal, in times that are short compared to
the 10~ 8-sec lifetime of the 136-kev state of Fe 57
Finally, we note that the magnitude of
for Co in
Fe metal is much closer to the field value of 333 kilogauss for Fe in Fe metal4 than to the value 219 kilo.

H

gauss for Co in Co metal. 15 It is not surprising that for
these materials the effect of environment appears to

dominate those interactions which may be ascribed to
the individual atoms. Co differs from Fe in that it has
one additional 3d electron, which is probably accepted
into the unfilled 3d band of the Fe metal, thus leaving
the Co nucleus in an environment characteristic of the
surrounding Fe.

Comparison of Eq. (22) and the experimental value of
R(V) leads to the measured value of the Co 67 level

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We

splitting,

gratefully

acknowledge

contributions

the

of

£=(14.6± 1.0) X lO-^K.

several people. L. Wilets of the University of Washing-

The hyperfine magnetic field H corresponding to this
splitting is 300±20 kilogauss. 12*

of the decay scheme. R. Keil provided the thin rolled

ton helped us to clarify our understanding of details
absorbers, and J. M. Dickinson assisted in the preparation of samples. W. E. Keller and D. R. F. Cochran, who
V.

DISCUSSION

collaborated on the initial experiments, encouraged and

The hfs magnetic field H acting on Co nuclei at low

assisted us in the present work. R. R.

apparatus,

concentrations in Fe metal has been measured previ-

structed portions of

ously by other methods. Table I lists the values obtained

assisted in many of the measurements.

the

Rylander con-

and R. Hanft

to date. All measurements were made at low temperatures.

The experimental

uncertainties in

all

of

APPENDK

the

determinations are probably within a factor of 2 of the

7% estimated for the present work. There is no evident
disagreement among the several measurements. Since
the earlier studies could not be subject to the depolarization mechanisms discussed earlier in this paper, it is

apparent that depolarization does not play an important
role in the present technique. It is clear that we have
observed no major depolarization such as occurs for
Co 67 in a Tutton salt. 11 We can conclude that the perturbing fields which are considered to be responsible
Table I. Hyperfine field H at Co nuclei in Fe metal.

H
Reference

Method

(kilogauss)

Specific heat
Specific heat

300
320
315
350

Present work
(23)
(24)
(25)

Gamma-ray (Co 60) anisotropy

22
H. R. Lemmer, O. J. A. Segaert, and M. A. Grace, Proc. Phys.
Soc. (London) A68, 701 (1955).
23
V. Arp, D. Edmonds, and R. Petersen, Phys. Rev. Letters 3,
212 (1959).
24
N. Kurti, Suppl. J. Appl. Phys. 30, 2155 (1960).
26
A. V. Kogan, V. D. Kul'kov, L. P. Nikitin, N. M. Reinov,
I. A. Sokolov, and M. F. Stel'makh, J. Exptl. Theoret. Phys.
(U.S.S.R.) 39, 47 (1960) [translation Soviet Phys.—JETP 12(39),
:

34 (1961)].

Here we calculate the

coefficients

Qu which were

introduced in Eq. (3). Qij is the probability that, if the

Co

67

quantum number

nucleus initially has magnetic

mi, the decay will proceed to the Fe

67

first excited state

with magnetic quantum number tn:: It depends, in
addition to the spins of the nuclear states involved,

upon the character of the K capture, and on the multipolarity of the 7 ray emitted in the transition between

the second and first excited states. 26 As has been dis-

cussed in the text, the

K capture

is

almost certainly

Gamow-Teller allowed, and we will calculate the coefficients for both of the possible multipolarities,
namely, Ml and E2. In case the radiation is not pure,
but, as is realized for this y ray, is a mixture of Ml and
E2, there will in general be interference between the
two components. However, the interference term vanishes when averaged over angle, so that if the source is

unmagnetized it will have no effect, and the result obtained by adding the two contributions [see Eq. (18)]
is

correct.

67
and the
If we denote the wave functions of Co
second and first excited states of Fe 57 by ^7/2"", ^5/2m ',
and ^3/2my respectively, then the cobalt decay may be
,

26

It also

depends on depolarizing forces, if any, which act in
We calculate it on the assumption that

the intermediate state.
there are none.

333

DASH, TAYLOR, NAGLE, CRAIG, AND VISSCHER
Table II. Q h for £=1 (Ml y ray).

Table III. Q tj for Z.= 2 (El y ray).

\wy
mi\

\f»,

Wj\

3/2

7/2
5/2
3/2
1/2

-3/2

-1/2

1/2

7/2

1

4/7
2/7
4/35
1/35

-1/2
-3/2
-5/2
-7/2

3/7
4/7
18/35
12/35

5/2
3/2

1/7
12/35
18/35
4/7
3/7

1/7

1/35
4/35
2/7
4/7

1/2

-1/2
-3/2
-5/2
-7/2

1

represented by
1

t

m

'xr

6/ 2

,

-ro ',

(Al)

where C is the usual Clebsch-Gordan coefficient and x
a triplet S-wave function describing the emitted
neutrino plus the absorbed electron. In turn, the decay

is

of the second excited state is written
'

2~L

1/2

4/7
9/49
4/49
38/245
72/245
19/49
16/49

-1/2

-3/2

16/49
19/49
72/245
38/245
4/49
9/49
4/7

4/49
51/245
12/35
22/49
24/49
3/7

XC(5/2,m'\3/2,mj

m -m')

x^

m —»

3/2

3/7
24/49
22/49
12/35
51/245
4/49

Qu=?:m>\C(7/2,mi\S/2,m';l,mi-m')

ml
fr/2
-» Em' CO/2, mi 5/2, m' ; 1,

^ 6/2

1124

C(5/2,m'\3/2, m,; L. m'—m3)
'Xh/2m 'yLm m

(A2)

'\

:

where y L represents the emitted y ray of multipole order
L. Upon substituting (A2) into (Al),

fan-^Jl H C(7/2, mi\5/2m'; 1, nti—m')
XC(5/2, w' 3/2, mj; L, m'-m,)
1

Xxim m 'yLm
~

h)Y

:

specifying the hyperfine field more precisely within the

'~mi

h/2mi

L, m'-

The Clebsch-Gordan coefficients may be easily calculated, or found in tables, and the sum (which never
contains more than 3 terms) evaluated numerically.
The results are shown in Table II for L=\ (dipole y
ray), in Table III for L=2 (quadrupole y ray).
Note added in proof. Recent examination of the hyperfine spectra of source and absorber by an unsplit absorber and source, respectively, has yielded relative intensities in the ratio 3 3.2 1, indicating that the samples
were partially magnetized. Calculations based upon the
revised spectrum increases the deduced value of the
hyperfine field at Co 57 nuclei to 375 kgauss. Further
deviation of the actual intensity distribution from the
distribution assumed in the text does not cause a further
increase in the calculated field. Uncertainty in the intermediate magnetic history of the specimens prevents

,

limits of

we find that the sum of squares of the contributions to
the coefficient of ^ 3 /2m; is

300 and 375 kgauss. Experiments now in

progress should resolve the uncertainty in the near
future.

COMMENTS AND CORRECTIONS
The authors of the papers listed below have requested that the
following corrections to their papers be noted:

Diffusion des photons sur les atomes et les noyaux dans les cristaux,
by C. Tzara« J. phys. radium, 22, 303 (1961)

205

2nd col., 4th line under head: For "[4] " read "[3]
2nd col., 11th line under head: For "[5]" read "[4] >5

206

1st col., 11th line:
1st col., 13th line:

207

For "dN(w)/aw" read "dN(u})/du>"
For "(5)" read "[4]"

1st col., line above eq. (1): For "[6]" read "[5]"
Eq. (1): The numerator should read
iK= u/K
iKlU/K

Hn s }){n s }le

(Os}|e

|

{

a s }>

Last equation on page:
Numerator should start 1( { etc.
208

1st col., eq. (3): Square the whole term in the first line of
the equation

1st col.: Equation below (3) should read
1/2
k = K € 2MNn
is

i

s(

^s)"

Polarized Spectra and Hyperfine Structure in Fe 57 by S. S. Hanna
et al.^Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 177 (1960)
,

226

Figure 2: Reverse the signs of all the magnetic quantum

numbers
335

336

#2

*

.Line 33.

Sente

;e

;OMMENTS AN

RECTIONS

should read

-.ings between

'

'Thus, the

lines 1 and 2, 4 and 5, and 5 and 6 should be equal to the
splitting of the excited state."

Temperature -Dependent Shift of y Rays Emitted by a Solid, by B. D,
Josephson • Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 341 (1960)
252

1st col.:

The last equation should read

6E =(6H> = (6(p 2 /2m ))
i

i

=

-3mi<pf/2ml>

= - {bm

i

/m i )T i = (E/miC 2 )^

Recoilless Rayleigh Scattering in Solids, by C. Tzara and
R. Barloutaud«Phys. Rev. Letters, 4, 405 (1960)

279

1st col.:

^T

Equation (1) should read

= exP

3

x

Er

"2iS

1

+

st^u

The Mossbauer Effect in Tin from 120°K to the Melting Point, by
A. J. F. Boyle et al. •Proc. Phys. Soc. (London), 77, 129 (1961)
291

Eqs. (6), (7), and (8): A minus sign should precede the
right-hand side of each equation

292

Eq. (10) should read

r
/
review,
fleet a

3 1HW2

sy

W»h a engr

0E20H ltH3

c,;&

-77-?

OS

r

A Series of Lecture Note

i
IS"

Z

and Reprint Volumes
NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RELAXATION: A Reprint
Volume

CD

by N. Bloembergen

192 pages

$3.95

S-MATRIX THEORY OF STRONG INTERACTIONS:
A Lecture Note and Reprint Volume
$3.95
192 pages
by Geoffrey F. Chew

QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS: A Lecture Note

CD

and Reprint Volume
by R. P. Feynman

208 pages

$3.95

THE THEORY OF FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES:
A Lecture Note Volume
by R. P. Feynman

184 pages

$3.95

THE MOSSBAUER EFFECT: A Collection of Reprints with an Introduction

by Hans Frauenfelder

352 pages

$3.95

THE MANY-BODY PROBLEM: A Lecture Note and
Reprint Volume
by David Pines

472 pages

$3.95

QUANTUM THEORY OF MANY-PARTICLE SYSTEMS: A Lecture Note and Reprint Volume
by L. Van Hove, N. M. Hugenholtz,
264 pages
and L. P. Howland

W. A.

$3.95

BENJAMIN, INC., PUB LISHERS

