Y        ■       i 


111  (0 

O  q; 
Z  UJ 

a:  h 

I-  Q£ 
OQ- 


U  UI        t    I    M 


Mossbauer 


k 


(J 


y^  r^    HANS  FRAUENFELDER 


BENJAMIN,     INC.,     PUB     L    I    S    H    E    R|» 


L 


UNIVERSITY 
OF  FLORIDA 
LIBRARIES 


ENGINEERING    AND    PHYSICS 
LI  BRARY 


The  Mbssbauer  Effect 


Frontiers  in  Physics 

A  Lecture  Note  and  Reprint  Series 

DAVID  PINES,  Editor 


N.  Bloembergen  NUCLEAR  MAGNETIC  RELAXATION:  A  Re- 
print Volume 

Geoffrey  F.  Chew  S-MATRIX  THEORY  OF  STRONG  INTER- 
ACTIONS: A  Lecture  Note  and  Reprint  Volume 

R.  P.  Feynman  QUANTUM  ELECTRODYNAMICS:  A  Lecture 
Note  and  Reprint  Volume 

R.  P.  Feynman  THE  THEORY  OF  FUNDAMENTAL  PROC- 
ESSES: A  Lecture  Note  Volume 

Hans  Frauenfelder  THE  MOSSBAUER  EFFECT:  A  Collection 
of  Reprints  with  an  Introduction 

David  Pines  THE  MANY-BODY  PROBLEM:  A  Lecture  Note 
and  Reprint  Volume 

L.  Van  Hove,  N.  M.  Hugenholtz,  and  L.  P.  Howland  PROB- 
LEMS IN  THE  QUANTUM  THEORY  OF  MANY-PARTICLE 
SYSTEMS 


The 

Mossbauer 

Effect 


A  Review— with  a  Collection  of  Reprints 


HANS  FRAUENFELDER 

University  of  Illinois 


W.  A.  BENJAMIN,  INC. 

New  York         1962 


&  PHYSICS 

the  mosssba«:r  effect 

A  Review— with  a  Collection  of  Reprints 

Copyright  ©  1962  by  W.  A.  Benjamin,  Inc. 
All  rights  reserved 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  61-18181 
Manufactured  in  the  United  States  of  America 


W.  A.  BENJAMIN,  INC. 

2465  Broadway,  New  York  25,  New  York 


EDITOR'S  FOREWORD 


The  problem  of  communicating  in  a  coherent  fashion  the  recent 
developments  in  the  most  exciting  and  active  fields  of  physics 
seems  particularly  pressing  today.  The  enormous  growth  in  the 
number  of  physicists  has  tended  to  make  the  familiar  channels  of 
communication  considerably  less  effective.  It  has  become  increas- 
ingly difficult  for  experts  in  a  given  field  to  keep  up  with  the  cur- 
rent literature;  the  novice  can  only  be  confused.  What  is  needed  is 
both  a  consistent  account  of  a  field  and  the  presentation  of  a  definite 
"point  of  view"  concerning  it.  Formal  monographs  cannot  meet 
such  a  need  in  a  rapidly  developing  field,  and,  perhaps  more  im- 
portant, the  review  article  seems  to  have  fallen  into  disfavor.  In- 
deed, it  would  seem  that  the  people  most  actively  engaged  in  devel- 
oping  a  given  field  are  the  people  least  likely  to  write  at  length 
about  it. 

"Frontiers  in  Physics"  has  been  conceived  in  an  effort  to  im- 
prove the  situation  in  several  ways.  First,  to  take  advantage  of  the 
fact  that  the  leading  physicists  today  frequently  give  a  series  of 
lectures,  a  graduate  seminar,  or  a  graduate  course  in  their  special 
fields  of  interest.  Such  lectures  serve  to  summarize  the  present 
status  of  a  rapidly  developing  field  and  may  well  constitute  the  only 
coherent  account  available  at  the  time.  Often,  notes  on  lectures  ex- 
ist (prepared  by  the  lecturer  himself,  by  graduate  students,  or  by 
postdoctoral  fellows)  and  have  been  distributed  in  mimeographed 
form  on  a  limited  basis.  One  of  the  principal  purposes  of  the 
"Frontiers  in  Physics"  series  is  to  make  such  notes  available  to 
a  wider  audience  of  physicists. 

I 


.. 


vi  EDITOR'S    FOREWORD 

It  should  be  emphasized  that  lecture  notes  are  necessarily  rough 
and  informal,  both  in  style  and  content,  and  those  in  the  series  will 
prove  no  exception.  This  is  as  it  should  be.  The  point  of  the  series 
is  to  offer  new,  rapid,  more  informal,  and,  it  is  hoped,  more  effec- 
tive ways  for  physicists  to  teach  one  another.  The  point  is  lost  if 
only  elegant  notes  qualify. 

A  second  way  to  improve  communication  in  very  active  fields  of 
physics  is  by  the  publication  of  collections  of  reprints  of  recent  ar- 
ticles. Such  collections  are  themselves  useful  to  people  working  in 
the  field.   The  value  of  the  reprints  would,  however,  seem  much  en- 
hanced if  the  collection  would  be  accompanied  by  an  introduction  of 
moderate  length,  which  would  serve  to  tie  the  collection  together 
and,  necessarily,  constitute  a  brief  survey  of  the  present  status  of 
the  field.  Again,  it  is  appropriate  that  such  an  introduction  be  in- 
formal, in  keeping  with  the  active  character  of  the  field. 

A  third  possibility  for  the  series  might  be  called  an  informal 
monograph,  to  connote  the  fact  that  it  represents  an  intermediate 
step  between  lecture  notes  and  formal  monographs.  It  would  offer 
the  author  an  opportunity  to  present  his  views  of  a  field  that  has 
developed  to  the  point  at  which  a  summation  might  prove  extraor- 
dinarily fruitful,  but  for  which  a  formal  monograph  might  not  be 
feasible  or  desirable. 

Fourth,  there  are  the  contemporary  classics— papers  or  lectures 
which  constitute  a  particularly  valuable  approach  to  the  teaching 
and  learning  of  physics  today.  Here  one  thinks  of  fields  that  lie  at 
the  heart  of  much  of  present-day  research,  but  whose  essentials 
are  by  now  well  understood,  such  as  quantum  electrodynamics  or 
magnetic  resonance.  In  such  fields  some  of  the  best  pedagogical 
material  is  not  readily  available,  either  because  it  consists  of  pa- 
pers long  out  of  print  or  lectures  that  have  never  been  published. 

"Frontiers  in  Physics"  is  designed  to  be  flexible  in  editorial 
format.  Authors  are  encouraged  to  use  as  many  of  the  foregoing 
approaches  as  seem  desirable  for  the  project  at  hand.  The  publish- 
ing format  for  the  series  is  in  keeping  with  its  intentions.   Photo- 
offset  printing  is  used  throughout,  and  the  books  are  paperbound,  in 
order  to  speed  publication  and  reduce  costs.  It  is  hoped  that  the 
books  will  thereby  be  within  the  financial  reach  of  graduate  students 
in  this  country  and  abroad. 

Finally,  because  the  series  represents  something  of  an  experi- 
ment on  the  part  of  the  editor  and  the  publisher,  suggestions  from 
interested  readers  as  to  format,  contributors,  and  contributions 
will  be  most  welcome. 


DAVID  PINES 
Urbana,  Illinois 
August  1961 


PREFACE 

Only  four  years  ago,  Rudolf  Mossbauer  discovered  what  is  now 
known  as  the  Mossbauer  effect:  Nuclei  that  are  embedded  in  solids 
can  emit  and  absorb  low- energy  gamma  rays  which  display  the  natu- 
ral line  width  and  possess  the  full  transition  energy.  No  recoil  en- 
ergy is  transferred  to  lattice  vibrations.  Mossbauer' s  experiment 
seemed  at  first  to  pass  unnoticed,  but  within  two  years  it  was  re- 
peated and  extended.  Physicists  soon  realized  that  they  had  at  hand 
a  new  and  beautiful  tool— simple  in  its  basic  ideas,  requiring  only  a 
minimum  of  equipment,  and  allowing  ingenious  applications  not  only 
in  nuclear  physics,  but  also  in  relativity  and  in  solid-state  physics. 
The  early  trickle  of  publications  became  a  stream.  The  rapidly 
growing  body  of  knowledge  was  discussed  and  information  exchanged 
in  two  international  conferences  in  1960  and  1961.  In  1961,  Rudolf 
Mossbauer  received  the  Nobel  prize. 

In  the  present  volume,  a  number  of  reprints  on  the  Mossbauer  ef- 
fect are  collected.  I  have  tried  to  select  those  publications  which  are 
either  essential  to  the  understanding  of  the  development  of  this  field 
or  which  are  useful  as  references  for  further  work.  As  an  introduc- 
tion to  these  reprints,  the  first  six  chapters  contain  a  review  of  the 
Mossbauer  effect. 

During  the  preparation  of  the  introductory  notes  I  have  enjoyed 
many  discussions  with  friends  and  colleagues.  I  should  like  to  thank 
particularly  K.  Bleuler,  J.  D.  Jackson,  W.  E.  Lamb,  Jr.,  R.  L.  Moss- 
bauer, D.  E.  Nagle,  D.  G.  Ravenhall,  J.  R.  Schrieffer,  and  A.  H.  Taub 
for  stimulating  remarks.  P.  Debrunner,  D.  W.  Hafemeister,  S.  Mar- 
gulies,  R.  J.  Morrison,  and  D.  N.  Pipkorn  have  read  through  many 
versions  of  the  manuscript  and  I  am  grateful  to  them  for  forcing  me 


vn 


to  make  it  more  readable  than  it  might  otherwise  have  been.   Finally, 
I  should  like  to  thank  Mrs.  M.  Runkel  for  her  unfailing  help  in  the 
preparation  of  the  manuscript. 


HANS   FRAUENFELDER 


Urbana,  Illinois 
December  1961 


ACKNOWLE  DGMENTS 


The  publisher  wishes  to  acknowledge  the  assistance  of  the  follow- 
ing organizations  in  the  preparation  of  this  volume: 

The  American  Institute  of  Physics,  for  permission  to  reprint  the 
articles  from  the  Physical  Review,  Physical  Review  Letters,  Soviet 
Physics  JETP,  The  Review  of  Scientific  Instruments,  and  the  Journal 
of  Applied  Physics. 

Academic  Press,  Inc.,  for  permission  to  reprint  the  articles  from 
the  Annals  of  Physics. 

Gauthier-Villars  Imprimeur- Libra  ire,  for  permission  to  reprint 
the  articles  from  Comptes  rendus  hebdomadaires  des  seances  de 
l'academie  des  sciences. 

The  Physical  Society,  for  permission  to  reprint  the  articles  from 
their  Proceedings. 

The  Italian  Physical  Society,  for  permission  to  reprint  the  article 
from  II  Nuovo  cimento. 

Springer  Verlag,  for  permission  to  reprint  the  article  from 
Zeitschrift  fur  Physik. 

Verlag  der  Zeitschrift  fur  Naturforschung,  for  permission  to 
reprint  the  article  from  Zeitschrift  fur  Naturforschung. 

North-Holland  Publishing  Co.,  for  permission  to  reprint  the  ar- 
ticle from  Nuclear  Instruments  and  Methods. 

Macmillan  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  for  permission  to  reprint  the  article  from 
Nature. 


Vlll 


CONTENTS 

Editor's  Foreword  v 

Preface  vii 

1.  Introduction 

1-1    Resonance  fluorescence  1 

1-2    Cross  section  for  resonance  processes  7 

1-3    Mossbauer's  discovery  11 

1-4    Literature  and  reprints  13 

2.  Theory 

2-1    Preliminary  remarks  14 

2-2    Lattice  vibrations  15 

2-3    The  classical  theory  17 

2-4    The  physical  picture  20 

2-5    Sketch  of  the  theory  26 

3.  Experimental  Apparatus  and  Problems 

3-1    Survey  33 

3-2    Isotopes  36 

3-3    Sources  and  absorbers  39 

3-4   Apparatus  40 


ix 


x  CONTENTS 

3-5  Corrections  44 

3-6  Useful  information  47 

4.  Nuclear  Properties 

4-1  Introduction  50 

4-2  Lifetime  and  conversion  coefficient  51 

4-3  Nuclear  moments  51 

4-4  Isomeric  shifts  53 

4-5  Parity  experiments  57 

5.  General  Physics 

5-1  Survey  58 

5-2  Gravitational  red  shift  58 

5-3  Accelerated  systems  62 

5-4  Second-order  Doppler  shift  63 

5-5  Frequency  and  phase  modulation  65 

5-6  The  uncertainty  relation  between  energy  and  time  66 

5-7  Recoilless  Rayleigh  scattering  69 

5-8  Coherence  and  interference  71 

5-9  Polarization  73 

6.  Solid-State  Physics 

6-1  Survey  76 

6-2  Lattice  properties  78 

6-3  Internal  fields  82 

6-4  Impurities  and  imperfections  83 

6-5  Low  temperatures  84 

7.  Bibliography  on  the  Mossbauer  Effect 

7-1  Review  articles  86 

7-2  Research  papers  87 

7-3  Conference  reports  96 


CONTENTS  xi 

Reprints  and  Translations 

Section  1 

The  Effect  of  Collisions  upon  the  Doppler  Width  of  Spectral 

Lines,  by  R.  H.  Dicke  •  Phys.  Rev.,  89,  472  (1953)  99 

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  von  Gammastrahlung  in  Ir191, 

by  R.  L.  Mossbauer  •  Z.  Physik,  151,  124  (1958)  101 

Theoretical  part  of  the  preceding  paper  in  English  translation        121 

Kernresonanzabsorption  von  y-Strahlung  in  Ir191,  by  R.  L. 
Mossbauer  •  Naturwissenschaften,  45,  538  (1958) 
(English  translation)  127 

Kernresonanzabsorption  von  y-Strahlung  in  Ir191,  by  R.  L. 

Mossbauer  •  Z.  Naturforsch.,  14a,  211  (1959)  130 

Capture  of  Neutrons  by  Atoms  in  a  Crystal,  by  W.  E.  Lamb,  Jr. 

•  Phys.  Rev.,  55,  190  (1939)  136 

Section  2 

Study  of  Lattice  Vibrations  by  Resonance  Absorption  of 
Nuclear  Gamma  Rays,  by  W.  M.  Visscher  • 
Ann.  Phys.,  9,  194  (1960)  144 

Some  Simple  Features  of  the  Mossbauer  Effect,  by 

H.  J.  Lipkin  •  Ann.  Phys.,  9,  332  (1960)  161 

Resonance  Radiation  of  Nuclei  Bound  in  a  Lattice, 

by  D.  R.  Inglis  (original  paper)  169 

Resonance  Absorption  of  Nuclear  Gamma  Rays  and  the 
Dynamics  of  Atomic  Motions,  by  K.  S.  Singwi  and 
A.  Sjolander  •  Phys.  Rev.,  120,  1093  (1960)  194 

Diffusion  des  photons  sur  les  atomes  et  les  noyaux  dans 
les  cristaux,  by  C.  Tzara  •  J.  phys.  radium,  22, 
303  (1961)  204 

Section  3 

Diffusion  resonante  du  rayonnement  y  de  23.8  kev  de  Sn119 
6mis  sans  recul,  by  R.  Barloutaud,  J.  L.  Picou,  and 
C.  Tzara  •  Compt.  rend.,  250,  2705  (1960)  2Q9 

Zeeman  Effect  in  the  Recoilless  y-Ray  Resonance  of  Zn67, 
by  P.  P.  Craig,  D.  E.  Nagle,  and  D.R.  F.  Cochran  • 
Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  561  (1960)  212 

Mossbauer  Effect  in  Ferrocyanide,  by  S.  L.  Ruby,  L.  M. 

Epstein,  andK.H.Sun  •  Rev.Sci.  Instr.,  31,580(1960)  216 


xii  CONTENTS 


Transmission  and  Line  Broadening  of  Resonance  Radiation 
Incident  on  a  Resonance  Absorber,  by  S.  Margulies 
and  J.  R.  Ehrman  •  Nuclear  Instr.  and  Methods,  12, 
131  (1961)  218 


Section  4 

Polarized  Spectra  and  Hyperfine  Structure  in  Fe57,  by 

5.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J.  Perlow, 
R.  S.  Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vincent  •  Phys.  Rev. 

Letters,  4,  177  (1960)  225 

Evidence  for  Quadrupole  Interaction  of  Fe57m  and  Influence 
of  Chemical  Binding  on  Nuclear  Gamma-Ray  Energy, 
by  O.  C.  Kistner  and  A.  W.  Sunyar  •  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters,  4,  412  (1960)  229 

Electric  Quadrupole  Splitting  and  the  Nuclear  Volume 
Effect  in  the  Ions  of  Fe57,  by  S.  DeBenedetti, 
G.  Lang,  and  R.  Ingalls  •  Phys.  Rev.  Letters, 

6,  60  (1961)  233 

Interpretation  of  the  Fe57  Isomer  Shift,  by  L.  R.  Walker, 
G.  K.  Wertheim,  and  V.  Jaccarino  •  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters,  6,  98  (1961)  236 

Section  5 

Apparent  Weight  of  Photons,  by  R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A. 

Rebka,  Jr.  •  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  337  (1960)  240 

Measurement  of  the  Red  Shift  in  an  Accelerated  System 
Using  the  Mossbauer  Effect  in  Fe57,  by  H.  J.  Hay, 
J.  P.  Schiffer,  T.  E.  Cranshaw,  and  P.  A.Egelstaff 
•  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  165  (1960)  245 

Absence  of  Doppler  Shift  for  Gamma  Ray  Source  and 

Detector  on  Same  Circular  Orbit,  by  D.  C.  Champeney 

and  P.  B.  Moon  •  Proc.  Phys.  Soc.  (London),  77,  350 

(1961)  247 

Variation  with  Temperature  of  the  Energy  of  Recoil-free 
Gamma  Rays  from  Solids,  by  R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A. 
Rebka,  Jr.  •  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  274  (1960)  250 

Temperature -Dependent  Shift  of  y  Rays  Emitted  by  a 

Solid,  by  B.  D.  Josephson  •  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4, 

341  (1960)  252 

Acoustically  Modulated  y  Rays  from  Fe57,  by  S.  L.  Ruby  and 

D.I.  Bolef  •  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  5,  5  (1960)  253 


CONTENTS  xiii 

Measurement  of  the  Refractive  Index  of  Lucite  by 

Recoilless  Resonance  Absorption,  by  L.  Grodzins 

and  E.  A.  Phillips  •  Phys.  Rev.,  124,  774  (1961)  256 

Time  Dependence  of  Resonantly  Filtered  Gamma  Rays 
from  Fe57,  by  F.  J.  Lynch,  R.  E.  Holland,  and 
M.  Hamermesh  •  Phys.  Rev.,  120,  513  (1960)  259 

Effect  of  Radiofrequency  Resonance  on  the  Natural  Line 
Form,  by  M.  N.  Hack  and  M.  Hamermesh  •  Nuovo 
cimento,  19,  546  (1961)  267 

Recoilless  Rayleigh  Scattering  in  Solids,  by  C.  Tzara  and 

R.  Barloutaud  •  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  405  (1960)  279 

Sur  la  possibilite  de  mettre  en  evidence  la  coherence  de 
phase  dans  la  diffusion  de  resonance  des  rayons  y 
par  des  noyaux  atomiques,  by  A.  Kastler  •  Compt. 
rend.,  250,  509  (1960)  281 

Resonant  Scattering  of  the  14-kev  Iron- 57  y-Ray  and  Its 
Interference  with  Rayleigh  Scattering,  by  P.  J. 
Black  and  P.  B.  Moon  •  Nature,  188,  481  (1960)  284 

Section  6 

The  Mossbauer  Effect  in  Tin  from  120°K  to  the  Melting 
Point,  by  A.J.  F.  Boyle,  D.  St.  P.  Bunbury, 
C„  Edwards,  and  H.  E.  Hall  •  Proc.  Phys.  Soc. 
(London),  77,  129  (1961)  288 

Mossbauer  Effect:  Applications  to  Magnetism,  by  G.K. 

Wertheim«  J.  Appl.Phys.,  Suppl.,  32,  No.  3, 110S  (1961)  295 

Direction  of  the  Effective  Magnetic  Field  at  the  Nucleus 
in  Ferromagnetic  Iron,  by  S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle, 
G.  J.  Perlow,  R.  S.  Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vincent  • 
Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  513  (1960)  303 

Temperature  Dependence  of  the  Internal  Field  in  Ferro- 
magnets,  by  D.  E.  Nagle,  H.  Frauenfelder,  R.  D. 
Taylor,  D.  R.  F.  Cochran,  and  B.  T.  Matthias  • 
Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  5,  364  (1960)  306 

Polarization  of  the  Conduction  Electrons  in  the  Ferro- 
magnetic Metals,  by  A.  J.  F.  Boyle,  D.St. P.  Bunbury, 
and  C.  Edwards  •  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  5,  553  (1960)  308 

Hyperfine  Field  and  Atomic  Moment  of  Iron  in  Ferromag- 
netic Alloys,  by  C.E.Johnson,  M.S.Ridout,  T.E. 
Cranshaw,  and  P.E.  Madsen  •  Phys.  Rev.  Letters, 
6,  450  (1961)  312 


xiv  CONTENTS 

Internal  Magnetic  Fields  in  Manganese -Tin  Alloys,  by 
L.  Meyer -Schtitzmeister,  R.  S.  Preston,  and 
S.  S.  Hanna  •  Phys.  Rev.,  122,  1717  (1961)  314 

Study  of  the  Internal  Fields  Acting  on  Iron  Nuclei  in  Iron 
Garnets,  Using  the  Recoil-free  Absorption  in  Fe57 
of  the  14.4-kev  Gamma  Radiation  from  Fe57m,  by 
R.  Bauminger,  S.  G.  Cohen,  A.  Marinov,  and 
S.  Ofer  •  Phys.  Rev.,  122,  743  (1961)  318 

On  the  Use  of  the  Mossbauer  Effect  for  Studying  Localized 
Oscillations  of  Atoms  in  Solids,  by  S.  V.  Maleev  • 
JETP,  39,  891  (1960)  (in  Russian);   Soviet  Physics 
JETP,  12,  617  (1961)  (in  English).    English  transla- 
tion reprinted  here  324 

Polarization  of  Co57  in  Fe  Metal,  by  J.  G.  Dash, 
R.  D.  Taylor,  D.  E.  Nagle,  P.  P.  Craig,  and 
W.  M.  Visscher  •  Phys.  Rev.,  122,  1116  (1961)  325 

Comments  and  Corrections  335 


THE  MOSSBAUER 
EFFECT 


L 


INTRODUCTION 

1-1    RESONANCE   FLUORESCENCE 

The  beauty  and  fascination  of  physics  rarely  becomes  more  ap- 
parent than  when  one  follows  a  particular  topic  through  the  various 
stages  of  its  development.    The  history  of  the  neutrino,  the  most 
elusive  of  all  particles,  is  an  example.    Another  is  the  story  of  res- 
onance fluorescence,  the  subject  of  the  present  volume.    In  this  chap- 
ter, we  outline  briefly  some  phases  in  the  history  of  atomic  and  nu- 
clear resonance  fluorescence  and  the  Mossbauer  effect,  which  begin 
with  the  mechanical  interpretation  of  matter  and  end,  hopefully  only 
temporarily,  with  the  Mossbauer  effect. 

The  story  of  resonance  fluorescence  starts  at  the  end  of  the  last 
century  with  Lord  Rayleigh,  who  suggested  that  resonance  scattering 
should  occur  in  atomic  systems.    Considerable  time  elapsed  after 
this  prediction  before  R.  W.  Wood  discovered  resonance  radiation  in 
1904.    The  explanation  of  resonance  scattering  was  then  based  en- 
tirely on  mechanical  analogies.    The  scattering  resonators  were  as- 
sumed to  be  exactly  in  tune  with  the  frequency  of  the  incoming  radi- 
ation.  Wood's  discovery  led  to  other  experiments,  the  techniques 
were  rapidly  improved,  and  a  wealth  of  data  was  accumulated.1  4 1 


t  References  not  directly  connected  with  the  Mossbauer  effect  are 
designated  by  superscripts  and  listed  at  the  bottom  of  each  page. 
References  dealing  specifically  with  the  Mossbauer  effect  will  be 
found  listed  in  Chapter  7;  they  are  indicated  in  the  text  by  the  name 
of  the  first  author  and  the  year  of  publication.    Papers  reprinted 
are  denoted  by  "Reprint"  and  the  name  of  the  first  author. 

XR.  W.  Wood,  "Physical  Optics,"  Macmillan,  New  York,  1934, 
3rd  ed.,  Chap.  XVIII. 

2  A.  C.  G.  Mitchell  and  M.  W.  Zemansky,  "Resonance  Radiation 


2  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that,  in  the  mechanical  picture  underlying 
these  early  experiments,  incoming  and  outgoing  radiation  maintain 
a  fixed  phase  relation. 

Resonance  fluorescence  fitted  well  into  the  Bohr  theory,  which 
superseded  the  earlier  pictures:    An  atom,  decaying  from  an  excited 
state  B  to  its  ground  state  A,  emits  a  photon  of  well-defined  fre- 
quency <j)Y.    When  such  a  photon  passes  through  a  gas  consisting  of 
the  same  element  as  the  emitter,  it  can  be  absorbed  and  excite  a 
target  atom  into  the  state  B.    After  a  short  time,  this  excited  target 
atom  will  in  turn  decay  and  emit  a  photon  of  frequency  a>r.   Primary 
and  secondary  radiation  thus  have  the  same  frequency,  but  the  proc- 
esses of  absorption  and  reemission  are  independent  and  no  fixed 
phase  relation  exists  between  them. 

Many  of  the  aspects  of  resonance  radiation  were  correctly  de- 
scribed by  the  Bohr  theory  and  by  the  early  quantum  mechanics. 
However,  problems  connected  with  line  width,  radiation  damping, 
and  coherence  were  not  easily  explained.    The  Dirac  theory  of  radi- 
ation, in  the  hands  of  Weisskopf  and  Wigner,  finally  provided  a  com- 
plete description  of  the  processes  of  emission,  absorption,  and  res- 
onance fluorescence.5'8   All  the  fundamental  aspects  of  resonance 
radiation  seemed  to  be  solved,  interest  in  basic  investigations  of 
atomic  resonance  fluorescence  decreased,  and  research  moved  on  to 
more  complicated  problems  of  fluorescence  and  phosphorescence.3'4 
(incidentally  it  may  be  noted  that  atomic  resonance  has  recently 
played  an  important  role  once  more  in  the  optical  orientation  of  nu- 
clei.) 

Since  atomic  resonance  radiation  depends  essentially  on  the  ex- 
istence of  quantized  levels  and  since  quantized  levels  also  occur  in 
nuclei,  the  possibility  of  observing  nuclear  resonance  fluorescence 
was  obvious,  and  the  search  was  started  in  1929  by  Kuhn.7  However, 
even  though  problems  in  atomic  and  nuclear  resonance  seem  very 
similar,  there  exist  marked  differences  which  render  nuclear  ex- 
periments much  more  difficult.  In  order  to  outline  these  difficulties, 
the  process  of  resonance  fluorescence  must  be  discussed  in  more 

and  Excited  Atoms,"  Cambridge  University  Press,  Cambridge,  1934. 

3 P.  Pringsheim,  "Fluorescence  and  Phosphorescence,' '  Inter- 
science,  New  York,  1949. 

4  J.  G.  Winans  and  E.J.  Seldin,  Fluorescence  and  Phosphores- 
cence, in  E.  U.  Condon  and  H.  Odishaw  (eds.),  "Handbook  of  Physics,' ' 
McGraw-Hill,  New  York,  1958. 

5  V.  Weisskopf,  Ann.  Physik,  9,  23  (1931).    V.  Weisskopf  and 
E.  Wigner,  Z.  Physik,  63,  54  (1930);  65,  18  (1930). 

8W.  Heitler,  "Quantum  Theory  of  Radiation,"  Clarendon  Press, 
Oxford,  1949. 

7W.  Kuhn,  Phil.  Mag.,  8,  625  (1929). 


INTRODUCTION  3 

detail.  Consider  a  free  atomic  or  nuclear  system,  of  mass  M,  with  two 
levels  A  and  B,  separated  by  an  energy  Er-    If  the  system  decays  from 
B  to  A  by  emission  of  a  photon  of  energy  E    ,  momentum  conservation 
demands  that  the  momentum  p  of  the  photon  and  the  momentum  P  of 
the  recoiling  system  be  equal  and  opposite.    The  recoiling  system 
hence  receives  an  energy  R,  given  by 


P2       p2         Ey 
2M      2M      2Mc2 


(1) 


In  this  derivation,  it  is  assumed  that  the  recoiling  system  can  be 
treated  nonrelativistically— an  assumption  that  is  extremely  well 
satisfied  in  atomic  and  nuclear  spectroscopy.    Actually,  all  gamma 
rays  involved  in  atomic  and  nuclear  resonance  fluorescence  have  en- 
ergies that  are  small  compared  to  the  rest  energy  Mc2  of  the  emit- 
ting atomic  or  nuclear  system.    The  recoil  energy  is  thus  very  small 
compared  to  the  gamma- ray  energy. 

Energy  conservation  connects  Er,  Ey,  and  R: 

Er  =  Ey  +  R  (2) 

Since  R  is  very  small  compared  to  Ey,  and  since,  as  will  be  obvious 
later,  one  needs  to  know  R  only  to  moderate  accuracy,  Ey  can  be  re- 
placed by  the  transition  energy  Er  in  (l): 

R  =  E2/2Mc2  (10 

The  recoil  energy  R  is  plotted  in  Fig.  1-1  as  a  function  of  the  transi- 
tion energy  Er  for  a  quantum  system  of  mass  number  100. 

One  more  feature  now  enters  the  discussion,  namely,  the  width  of 
the  excited  state  B.    Assume  that  the  mean  life  against  decay  of  the 
state  B  is  r.    According  to  the  Heisenberg  uncertainty  relation,  the 
energy  in  state  B  then  cannot  be  measured  sharply,  but  only  within 
an  uncertainty  given  by 

r-r=R  (3) 

where  27rn"  is  Planck's  constant.    A  detailed  examination  employing 
perturbation  theory  shows  indeed  that  the  decaying  state  B  cannot 
be  characterized  by  one  well-defined  energy  Er  only,  but  that  the  en- 
ergy E  of  the  state  is  distributed  about  the  center  energy  Er  as  shown 
in  Fig.  l-2a.6  The  energy  of  the  stable  ground  state,  according  to  (3), 
is  sharp.  Photons  emitted  in  the  transition  from  B  to  A  thus  show  a 
distribution  in  energy  Ey,  centered  around  Er  -  R,  and  displaying  a 
" natural  line  shape"  of  width  T  (Fig.  l-2b).    To  give  an  order 
of  magnitude,  the  line  width  T  corresponding  to  a  mean  life  r  =  10~8 


THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 


10"1 


1  ev 


Y 


optical  transitions 


1  kev  1  Mev 

f- — atomic  X  rays — -| 

[• nuclear  gamma  rays — *- 


-E, 


Fig.  1-1    Recoil  energy  R  and  Doppler  broadening  D 
(for  a  gas  at  300 °K)  as  a  function  of  the 
transition  energy  Er  for  a  nucleus  of  mass 
number  100.    For  comparison,  the  natural 
line  width  T  corresponding  to  a  lifetime  of 
10  "8  sec  is  shown  also. 


sec  is  shown  in  Fig.  1-1.    Such  a  mean  life  is  typical  for  atomic 
states  and  net -unreasonable  for  low- lying  nuclear  levels. 

Returning  to  resonance  fluorescence  again,  when  a  photon  of  en- 
ergy Ey  and  momentum  p  strikes  a  target  of  mass  M,  which  is  ini- 
tially at  rest,  the  entire  momentum  p  is  transferred  to  the  target. 
The  target  thus  recoils  and  the  energy  of  recoil  R  is  again  given  by 
(l)  or  (!').    This  energy  must  be  supplied  by  the  gamma  ray.    Thus 


INTRODUCTION 


Er  -  R 


Fig.  1-2     Energy  distributions  involved  in  resonance 
fluorescence,    (a)  Energy  distribution  of  ex- 
cited state  B.    (b)  Energy  distribution  of 
photons  emitted  in  a  transition  B  —  A. 
(c)  Energy  spectrum  required  to  excite 
state  B  in  target  and  provide  center-of- 
mass  energy  R.    (d)  Overlap  of  M  and  (T. 


only  an  energy  Er  -  R  is  available  for  the  excitation  of  internal  de- 
grees of  freedom  (Fig.  l-2b).  In  order  to  excite  a  level  of  energy  Er, 
the  incoming  gamma  ray  must  have  an  energy  Er  +  R,  as  shown  in 
Fig.  l-2c.    Resonance  fluorescence  can  occur  only  if  some  of  the 
incoming  photons  possess  enough  energy  to  "reach"  the  state  B  and 
at  the  same  time  provide  the  energy  R  to  recoiling  system.    Thus, 


6  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

only  the  overlapping  part  of  the  spectra  2b  and  2c  is  responsible  for 
resonance  fluorescence  (Fig.  l-2d).    The  condition  for  overlap  is 

2R  <  T  (4) 

A  glance  at  Fig.  1-1  shows  that  optical  transitions  fulfill  condition  (4), 
but  that  nuclear  transitions  are  far  from  it. 

In  the  discussion  so  far,  the  emitting  and  the  absorbing  system 
were  assumed  to  be  at  rest.    Actually,  however,  source  and  target 
atoms  are  in  thermal  motion,  and  this  motion  introduces  an  additional 
widening  of  the  emission  and  absorption  lines,  called  Doppler  broad- 
ening.   In  order  to  see  this  effect  qualitatively,  consider  a  source 
with  initial  momentum  Pi?  which  emits  a  photon  of  momentum  p.  The 
momentum  of  the  source  after  the  emission  is  given  by  P^  -  p.  The 
energy  gained  by  the  source  and  hence  lost  by  the  gamma  ray  is,  in 
good  approximation,  t 

2M  2M        2M  M  vo; 

The  first  term  on  the  right-hand  side  of  (5)  is  the  recoil  energy  R 
[Eq.  (l)]  of  the  initially  stationary  system;  the  second  term  repre- 
sents the  Doppler  broadening.    Introducing  the  kinetic  energy 
e  =  P|/2M  of  the  quantum  system  before  the  photon  emission  and 
a  "Doppler  energy" 

D  =  2(8R)1/2  (6) 

this  second  term  can  be  written 

D  cos  <p 

where  <p  denotes  the  angle  between  p  and  P^    The  photon  energy  then 
becomes 

E     =  Er  -  R'  =  Er  -  R  +  D  cos  (p  (7) 

where  Er  =  Eg  -  E»  is  the  total  energy  released  in  the  transition 

B  —  A.    Generally  the  angle  <p  will  vary  from  0  to  277  and  the  Doppler 
term  in  (7)  causes  a  spread  in  the  photon  energy  E^  of  the  order  of  D. 

tin  (5)  it  is  assumed  that  the  mass  of  the  quantum  system  does 
not  change  during  the  emission.    Actually,  there  is  a  very  small 
change  in  mass,  because  the  photon  carries  away  energy.  This  effect 
has  been  observed  experimentally  (Sec.  5-4)  but  is  unimportant  in 
the  present  context. 


INTRODUCTION  7 

In  a  source  in  which  the  velocities  of  the  individual  emitters  are 
isotropic  in  direction  and  Maxwellian  in  magnitude,  this  additional 
broadening  is  of  the  order 

D  a  2(cR)1/2  (8) 

where  e  is  the  average  value  of  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  emitters.  In 
Fig.  1-1  curve  D  represents  such  a  Doppler  broadening,  correspond- 
ing roughly  to  that  of  a  gaseous  source  at  room  temperature.    Com- 
parison of  Fig.  1-2  and  the  three  curves  in  Fig.  1-1  shows  that  the 
natural  line  width  T  is  not  always  the  dominant  feature  in  resonance 
fluorescence;  the  Doppler  broadening  also  plays  an  important  role. 
For  optical  radiation,  the  recoil  energy  R  is  small  compared  to  the 
Doppler  broadening,  emission  and  absorption  lines  overlap,  and  res- 
onance conditions  are  obtained.    For  nuclear  gamma  rays,  however, 
the  recoil  energy  is  comparable  to,  or  greater  than,  the  Doppler 
broadening,  and  the  discussion  of  when  to  expect  a  measurable  res- 
onance fluorescence  effect  requires  an  investigation  of  the  cross 
section  for  resonance  fluorescence  under  various  conditions. 

1-2   CROSS  SECTION  FOR  RESONANCE  PROCESSES 

Resonance  experiments  with  gamma  rays  are  usually  performed 
by  either  measuring  the  scattered  intensity  (resonance  fluorescence 
or  resonance  scattering)  or  by  determining  the  attenuation  of  a  beam 
due  to  resonance  absorption.    The  cross  sections  for  these  two  proc- 
esses, for  an  incident  gamma  ray  of  energy  E  and  wavelength  27T*2 
can  be  calculated  in  a  straightforward  way8'8  and,  for  thin  absorbers, 
can  be  written 

r2 

(9) 

(10) 


In  these  expressions,  T  is  the  total  width  of  the  absorption  line,  Ty 
its  gamma- ray  width,  and  cr0  the  maximum  resonance  cross  section 
given  by 


*scatt(E) 
"abs(E)  = 

r2 

"  a°  4(E 

-  Er)2 

riy 

+  r2 

ao  4(E  - 

Er)2  + 

r2 

2IB  +  1 
2IA+1 


27T*2  (11) 


In  (11)  IA  is  the  spin  of  the  ground  state  A  and  Ig  the  spin  of  the  ex- 
cited state  B. 


J.  D.  Jackson,  Can.  J.  Phys.,  33,  575  (1955). 


8  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

Scattering  and  absorption  cross  sections  as  given  by  (9)  and  (10) 
show  a  characteristic  energy  dependence  of  the  form 

I(E)  =  2i    (E-Er)2  +  [(l/2)rp  (12) 

which  is  normalized  to 

oo 

/  1(E)  dE  =  1  (12') 

o 

Corresponding  curves  are  sketched  in  Fig.  1-2.    These  distributions 
are  said  to  show  a  Breit-Wigner  or  Lorentz  shape.    The  parameter 
T  gives  the  full  width  of  the  distribution  at  half  maximum. 

Since  expressions  (9)  and  (10)  are  fundamental  for  the  Mossbauer 
effect,  it  is  important  to  know  that  they  are  derived  under  the  fol- 
lowing assumptions: 

a.  Only  one  absorbing  or  scattering  level  exists.    If  more  than 
one  state  appears  at,  or  close  to,  the  energy  E  ,  or  if  the  state  at  Er 
is  split  into  sublevels,  for  instance  by  a  strong  magnetic  field,  then 
(9)  and  (10)  must  be  modified  (Margulies,  1962). 

b.  The  width  of  the  level  is  given  entirely  by  decay  processes.  In 
nuclei,  in  all  interesting  cases,  the  two  competing  modes  are  gamma- 
ray  emission  and  internal  conversion.    Total  width  and  gamma-ray 
width  are  then  related  by  the  equation 

rr=lhr  (13) 

where  a  is  the  coefficient  of  internal  conversion.    If  the  level  is 
broadened  by  other  influences,  the  line  shape  need  not  be  Lorentz ian. 

c.  The  incoming  photon  is  monoenergetic.  An  actual  source,  how- 
ever, will  possess  an  energy  spectrum  l(E),  where  l(E)  dE  denotes 
the  number  of  gamma  rays  emitted  with  energies  between  E  and 

E  +  dE.    The  observed  cross  sections  for  scattering  and  absorption 
then  become  integrals  of  the  form 

oo 


/a(E)l(E)  dE 


0  /  X 

55 (14) 

J  1(E)  dE 
o 

Here  in  the  introduction  only  two  special  cases  of  (14)  will  be  treated. 
Further  cases  appear  in  the  various  reprints. 

1.    The  incoming  gamma  ray  possesses  an  energy  Er;   its  width  is 
small  compared  to  the  width  T,  and  the  conversion  coefficient  a  is 
zero.    I(E)  in  this  case  is  essentially  a  delta  function  6(Er),  and  from 
(9),  (10),  (13),  and  (14)  one  finds 


INTRODUCTION 


°scatt     r         abs      r         ° 

This  result  explains  the  designation  "maximum  resonance  cross 
section"  for  a0. 

2.    The  incoming  gamma  ray  has  an  energy  spectrum  l(E)  de- 
scribed by  a  Lorentz  shape  [Eq.  (12)],  with  a  width  r  identical  to  the 
width  of  the  absorbing  state,  and  with  its  energy  centered  at  Er.    In 
a  resonance  fluorescence  experiment  these  assumptions  mean  that 
the  recoil  energy  R  is  either  negligible  or  has  been  compensated 
for,  and  that  emitting  and  absorbing  state  are  identical  and  are  not 
broadened  by  external  influences.    With  these  assumptions,  one  finds 
from  (10),  (12),  and  (14)  for  the  maximum  cross  section  for  the  res- 
onance absorption  of  a  gamma  ray  with  width  r  by  a  level  with  iden- 
tical width, 

r  a0 

aeff  abs  =  a°  2T  =  2(1+ a)  (l5) 

One  trivial  remark  must  be  added  here.    The  actual  width  of  the  in- 
coming gamma  ray  and  of  the  absorbing  level  are  both  given  by  r  and 
not  by  Ty .    TV  is  not  a  width  that  can  be  traced  experimentally,  but 
rather  a  quantity  F  which  characterizes  the  fraction  of  decays  pro- 
ceeding by  photon  emission. 

Equation  (15)  leads  back  to  resonance  fluorescence.    In  fact,  it 
describes  resonance  absorption  under  the  most  ideal  conditions, 
namely,  (i)  emission  and  absorption  line  possess  the  natural  line 
width,  and  (il)  emission  and  absorption  line  are  centered  at  the  same 
energy.    If  these  two  conditions  are  satisfied,  the  cross  section  for 
resonance  absorption,  given  by  (15),  is  very  large  provided  the  con- 
version coefficient  is  reasonably  small.    The  effective  maximum 
resonance  cross  section  is  plotted  against  photon  energy  in  Fig.  1-3. 
It  is  obvious  from  the  values  in  Fig.  1-3  that  resonance  experiments 
should  yield  large  effects  provided  the  two  conditions  I  and  n  can  be 
satisfied.    Another  glance  at  Fig.  1-1  shows  that  for  optical  reso- 
nance fluorescence,  the  second  assumption  is  valid,  but  the  first  is 
not  because  Doppler  broadening  considerably  widens  the  lines.    The 
correct  cross  section  for  resonance  scattering  in  the  presence  of 
Doppler  broadening  can  be  calculated  easily.    Even  without  calcula- 
tion, one  can  make  a  good  guess.   Assume  the  target  to  be  at  rest 
and  the  incoming  photons  to  have  an  energy  spectrum  characterized 
by  a  Doppler  width  D.    Only  a  small  part  of  the  widened  incoming 
spectrum  overlaps  with  the  resonance  level.    The  fraction  of  incom- 
ing photons  capable  of  undergoing  resonance  absorption  is  approxi- 
mately equal  to  r/D.    This  fraction,  however,  is  centered  at  the  res- 
onance energy  Er  and  hence  enjoys  approximately  the  maximum  res- 
onance cross  section  (J0  Ty/r  given  by  (10)  for  E  =  Er.    The  effective 
absorption  cross  section  thus  becomes 


10 


THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 


d  rr   r         r> 


(16) 


This  estimate,  which  is  borne  out  quite  well  by  the  exact  calcula- 
tion, shows  that  the  maximum  cross  section  is  reduced  by  a  factor 


7i*2,  cm2 


ev 


Fig.  1-3      Effective  maximum  resonance  absorption 

cross  section  n-k2  as  a  function  of  photon  en- 
ergy.   The  curve  is  valid  for  vanishing  con- 
version coefficient  and  for  identical  spins  in 
the  two  states  involved.    To  find  the  cross 
section  for  a  decay  with  spins  1^,  Ig,  and 
with  conversion  coefficient  a,  multiply  the 
value  obtained  from  the  curve  by 

2IB  +  1       1 


2IA  +  1   1  +  a 


INTRODUCTION  11 


IV /D.    For  optical  transitions,  internal  conversation  is  impossible, 
and  Ty  =  T.    From  Fig.  1-1  one  can  see  that  the  maximum  cross  sec- 
tion is  reduced  only  by  one  or  two  orders  of  magnitude  and  that  ex- 
periments with  optical  transitions  should  be  feasible— as  indeed  they 
are. 

In  nuclear  experiments,  both  conditions  are  violated,  but  the  sec- 
ond can  be  restored  by  several  means.    In  1950,  Moon  performed  the 
first  successful  experiment  by  plating  a  source  of  Au198  onto  the  tips 
of  a  steel  rotor  and  spinning  the  rotor  up  to  tip  speeds  of  800  m/sec.9 
Gamma  rays  emitted  tangentially  thus  gained  additional  energy  suf- 
ficient to  compensate  for  the  recoil  loss.    Other  possibilities  of  com- 
pensating for  the  recoil  energy  loss,  for  instance  the  use  of  the  recoil 
from  a  transition  preceding  the  gamma  ray  to  be  investigated,  or  the 
heating  of  source  and  absorber  to  increase  the  average  kinetic  en- 
ergy, have  also  been  used  with  positive  results. 

Despite  these  ingenious  experiments,  classical  nuclear  resonance 
fluorescence  experiments  are  never  easy,  since  condition  (I)  is  not 
fulfilled.    The  ratio  Ty/D  in  (18)  is  much  smaller  for  nuclear  than 
for  optical  transitions.    Figure  1-1  indicates  that  the  maximum  cross 
section  is  decreased  by  many  orders  of  magnitude.    Despite  these 
difficulties  many  good  experiments  have  been  performed  since  1950. 
These  experiments  and  the  underlying  theory  are  discussed  in  a  num- 
ber of  review  articles.10"12 


1-3    MOSSBAUER'S  DISCOVERY 

Comparing  (15)  and  (16)  one  is  struck  by  the  price  one  must  pay 
for  the  effects  of  thermal  motion.  The  question  arises  of  whether 
there  is  a  way  to  avoid  the  large  decrease  in  cross  section  which  is 
caused  entirely  by  nonnuclear  processes. 

Dicke  in  1952  theoretically  studied  the  reduction  of  Doppler 
broadening  by  collisions  in  a  dense  gas13  (Reprint  Dicke).    As  a 
simple  model  he  used  a  radiating  atom  enclosed  in  a  one-dimen- 
sional well  oscillating  back  and  forth  between  the  walls.    Actually, 
such  a  model  is  more  appropriate  to  the  description  of  a  solid.    In 
any  case,  he  found  a  normal  Doppler  distribution  plus  a  sharp,  non- 
Doppler  broadened  and  unshifted  line.    Today,  such  a  line  would  be 


9  P.  B.  Moon,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc,  63,  1189  (1950). 

10  K.  G.  Malmfors  in  K.  Siegbahn  (ed.),  "Beta-  and  Gamma-Ray 
Spectroscopy/'  North- Holland,  Amsterdam,  1955,  Chap.  XVIIl(ll). 

11  F.  R.  Metzger  in  O.  R.  Frisch  (ed.),  "Progress  in  Nuclear 
Physics,"  Pergamon,  New  York,  1959,  Vol.  7. 

12S.  Devons  in  Fay  Ajzenberg-Selove  (ed.),  "Nuclear  Spectro- 
scopy," Part  A,  Academic,  New  York,  1960,  Chap.  IV(B). 
13 R.  H.  Dicke,  Phys.  Rev.,  89,  472  (1953). 


12  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

called  a  Mossbauer  line.    No  successful  experiments  were  carried 
out,  however,  before  1957  and  Dicke's  calculation  had  no  influence  on 
the  later  development. 

R.  L.  Mossbauer,  in  1957,  started  the  dramatic  next  step  from  a 
completely  different  side,  by  an  accidental  discovery.  (Reprint  Moss- 
bauer 1958,  1959)    He  investigated  the  nuclear  resonance  scattering 
of  the  129-kev  gamma  ray  from  Ir191.    For  this  transition,  the  free 
recoil  energy  R  is  0.05  ev,  the  Doppler  broadening  at  room  temper- 
ature about  0.1  ev.    At  room  temperature  emission  and  absorption 
spectrum  thus  overlap  considerably,  and  resonance  scattering  can  be 
observed.    In  order  to  reduce  this  residual  scattering,  Mossbauer 
cooled  both  source  and  absorber  and  expected  a  decrease  in  effect. 
Instead,  the  resonance  scattering  increased!   After  carefully  ascer- 
taining that  this  increase  was  not  spurious,  Mossbauer  set  out  to 
investigate  the  nature  of  this  surprising  effect.    Following  a  sug- 
gestion by  Jensen,  he  found  a  paper  by  Lamb14  (Reprint  Lamb)  in 
which  the  effect  of  lattice  binding  on  the  capture  cross  section  of 
slow  neutrons  is  discussed.    The  figures  2  and  3  in  Lamb's  paper 
already  show  peaks  that  could  be  called  "Lamb- Mossbauer  peaks." 
(Compare  also  reference  15.)  By  adapting  Lamb's  calculation  to 
gamma  rays,  Mossbauer  was  able  to  explain  his  own  experimental 
results.    In  one  beautiful  experiment,  he  had  thus  found  the  solution 
to  both  problems  outlined  in  Sec.  1-2:    A  fraction  of  the  129-kev 
gamma  rays,  emitted  by  the  cooled  source,  did  not  show  a  measur- 
able recoil  energy  loss,  and  these  same  gamma  rays  also  did  not 
display  a  Doppler  broadening.    Their  line  width  corresponded  to  the 
natural  line  width. 

After  Mossbauer' s  first  publication  (Reprint  Mossbauer  1958), 
about  a  year  elapsed  before  other  laboratories,  particularly  Los 
Alamos  and  Argonne,  began  to  repeat  and  extend  his  experiments. 
(As  an  amusing  side  remark,  it  may  be  told  that  the  research  at  Los 
Alamos  was  started  by  a  bet.    Two  physicists  were  discussing  Moss- 
bauer's  discovery  and  one  of  the  two  did  not  believe  it.    The  other 
bet  a  nickel  that  the  effect  was  real  and  that  he  could  repeat  the  ex- 
periment.   He  won.)    All  these  early  experiments,  performed  with 
Ir191,  were  complicated  by  low- temperature  requirements  and  by  the 
smallness  of  the  effect. 

The  next  major  advance  came  through  the  discovery  of  the  Moss- 
bauer effect  in  Fe57,  made  independently  at  Harvard,  Harwell,  the 
University  of  Illinois,  and  Argonne.    The  ease  with  which  the  effect 
can  be  demonstrated  with  Fe57,  its  very  large  size,  its  persistence 
up  to  temperatures  of  over  1000 °C,  and  the  very  narrow  natural  line 
width,  immediately  changed  this  field  of  physics  from  one  accessible 


14W.  E.  Lamb,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev.,  55,  190  (1939) 
15  H.  Ott,  Ann.  Physik,  23,  169  (1935). 


INTRODUCTION  13 

to  only  a  few  laboratories  to  one  in  which  even  modestly  equipped 
groups  could  compete.    Moreover,  the  extremely  narrow  line  width 
of  Fe57  and  the  fantastically  large  value  of  Er/r  opened  possibilities, 
such  as  the  measurement  of  the  red  shift  of  photons  in  a  terrestrial 
laboratory,  which  were  thought  to  be  impossible  a  short  time  earlier. 

After  these  advances,  more  nuclei  showing  recoilless  resonance 
absorption  were  found  and  many  new  and  exciting  experiments  were 
performed.    The  various  phases  in  the  still  young  history  of  the 
Mossbauer  effect  are  summarized  in  Table  1-1,  due  to  H.  J.  Lipkin. 

Table  1-1    History  of  the  Mossbauer  Effect3, 


Period 

Date 

Remarks 

Prehistoric 

Before  1958 

Might  have  been  discovered, 
but  wasn't 

Early  iridium  age 

1958 

Discovered,  but  not  noticed 

Middle  iridium  age 

1958-1959 

Noticed,  but  not  believed 

Late  iridium  age 

1959 

Believed,  but  not  interesting 

Iron  age 

1959-1960 

Wow!! 

H.  J.  Lipkin,  private  communication. 


1-4    LITERATURE  AND  REPRINTS 

The  description  of  resonance  fluorescence  in  this  chapter  should 
give  some  of  the  background  which  is  usually  hard  to  find  in  re- 
search papers.    Chapters  2  to  6  are  more  condensed,  since  they 
are  intended  mainly  as  guides  to  the  collected  reprints  and  to  the 
literature.    Only  aspects  that  seem  most  important  to  the  understand- 
ing of  the  physics  of  Mossbauer  effect  are  given.    Further  details  and 
summaries  can  be  found  in  the  review  papers  on  recoilless  emission 
of  gamma  rays,  listed  in  Chapter  7. 

The  reprints  collected  in  the  back  have  been  selected  either  be- 
cause they  have  been  essential  in  the  development  of  the  field  or  be- 
cause they  illustrate  important  aspects  and  are  useful  for  contem- 
plating new  experiments  or  extensions  of  the  theory.    Any  such 
selection  is  arbitrary  and  subject  to  Dyson's  law:    "If  a  book  is  to 
be  published  at  a  time  T,  and  if  it  is  supposed  to  be  up-to-date  to  a 
time  T  -  t,  then  it  will  inevitably  be  out-of-date  at  the  time  T  +  t."16 
However,  it  is  hoped  that  within  the  limits  of  this  law  the  selection 
and  the  introductory  chapters  will  prove  to  be  useful. 


16 


F.  J.  Dyson,  Physics  Today,  8  (6),  27  (1955) 


THEORY 

2-1    PRELIMINARY  REMARKS 

Mossbauer,  after  his  experimental  discovery  of  recoilless  gamma- 
ray  emission  and  absorption,  successfully  explained  these  phenomena. 
He  did  so  by  adapting  to  gamma  rays  Lamb's  theory  of  neutron  cap- 
ture by  atoms  bound  in  a  crystal  (Reprint  Lamb,  Reprint  and  Transla- 
tion Mossbauer).  Since  then  a  number  of  theoretical  papers  have  ex- 
tended and  elaborated  the  basic  aspects.  Despite  the  number  of  pub- 
lications, however,  some  unsolved  and  unclear  questions  remain,  as 
illustrated  for  instance  by  two  quotes  from  recent  papers:  "It  turns 
out  that  the  existence  of  the  Mossbauer  line  is  a  purely  classical  ef- 
fect,'' and  "The  Mossbauer  effect  can  only  be  understood  quantum 
mechanically.  The  classical  picture  fails  completely  if  one  wants  to 
understand  the  behavior  of  the  emitter."  Obviously,  these  two  state- 
ments are  not  in  complete  agreement.  However,  they  can  be  recon- 
ciled by  showing  that  the  classical  treatment  indeed  yields  some  of 
the  essential  features,  particularly  the  existence  of  an  unshifted  line, 
but  that  the  complete  treatment  of  the  Mossbauer  effect,  including  re- 
coil phenomena,  requires  quantum  mechanics. 

Indeed,  a  complete  treatment  of  the  Mossbauer  effect  requires 
nearly  all  of  quantum  mechanics  and  it  is  then  not  surprising  to  ob- 
serve that  the  apparent  paradoxes  of  quantum  theory,  such  as  the 
famous  double-slit  experiment,  appear  again,  in  a  somewhat  changed 
form.  In  discussing  the  formulas  describing  recoilless  emission  and 
absorption,  one  must  watch  out  not  to  quarrel  about  aspects  that  can- 
not be  measured  in  principle.  No  better  warning  can  be  given  than 
Pauli's:17  "It  is  essential  to  observe  that  a  statement,  according  to 


17W.  Pauli,  Die  allgemeinen  Prinzipien  der  Wellenmechanik, 
"Encylopedia  of  Physics,"  Springer,  Berlin,  1958,  Vol.  V,  Part  1, 
p.  69  (note  also  page  136). 

14 


THEORY  15 

which  a  system,  independent  of  a  determination  by  a  measurement, 
contains  a  well-defined  internal  energy  En,  or  equivalently  is  in  a 
well-defined  stationary  state,  easily  leads  to  contradictions.  This  is 
true  particularly  where  the  older  quantum  theory  talks  of  'transition 
processes'  among  the  various  stationary  states  of  the  system." 

In  this  chapter  a  short  outline  of  the  main  features  of  lattice  vibra- 
tions (Sec.  2-2)  is  followed  by  a  discussion  of  the  classical  theory 
(Sec.  2-3).  A  primitive  picture  underlying  the  quantum  mechanical 
treatment  is  sketched  in  Sec.  2-4.  Some  aspects  of  the  theory  usually 
assumed  to  be  known  are  presented  in  Sec.  2-5.  Finally,  some  re- 
marks about  the  De bye- Waller  factor  are  added. 

In  all  sections,  the  emphasis  is  placed  on  outlining  the  physical 
features  and  providing  some  elementary  discussions  which  are  omit- 
ted in  the  published  papers.  The  complete  treatment  can  be  found  in 
the  reprints  on  theory. 


2-2    LATTICE  VIBRATIONS 

Some  knowledge  of  the  theory  of  lattice  vibrations  is  essential  for 
an  understanding  of  the  mechanism  of  recoilless  gamma-ray  emis- 
sion. The  very  simplest  aspects  are  presented  here  as  a  reminder. 
Detailed  treatments  are  contained,  for  instance,  in  Refs.  18-21. 

One  of  the  puzzles  of  classical  physics  was  the  decrease  of  the 
specific  heat  of  solids  below  a  certain  critical  temperature.  Einstein, 
in  1907,  first  explained  this  decrease  by  assuming  that  a  solid  con- 
sisted of  a  large  number  of  independent  linear  oscillators,  each  vi- 
brating with  a  frequency  u^.  Tne  corresponding  spectrum  of  lattice 
vibrations  is  shown  in  Fig.  2- la. 

Einstein's  theory  explained  the  decrease  of  specific  heats  qualita- 
tively, but  the  exponential  behavior  at  very  low  temperatures  pre- 
dicted by  his  theory  differed  from  the  experimentally  observed  T3  de- 
pendence. Debye,  in  1912,  derived  the  T3  dependence  and  thus  im- 
proved the  agreement  between  theory  and  experiment  by  introducing 
a  continuum  of  oscillator  frequencies,  ranging  from  zero  to  a  maxi- 
mum frequency  oo^  and  obeying  a  distribution  function. 

c(u>)  =  const,  u>2  (17) 


18 M.  Blackman  in  "Encyclopedia  of  Physics,"  Springer,  Berlin 
1955,  Vol.  VII,  Part  1. 

19  J.  DeLauney  in  F.  Seitz  and  D.  Turnbull  (eds.),  "Solid  State 
Physics,"  Academic,  New  York,  1956,  Vol.  2,  p.  219. 

20 C.  Kittel,  "Introduction  to  Solid  State  Physics,"  Wiley,  New 
York,  1956,  Chaps.  5  and  6. 

21E.  W.  Montroll  in  E.  U.  Condon  and  H.  Odishaw  (eds.),  "Hand 
book  of  Physics,"  McGraw-Hill,  New  York,  1958,  Sec.  5-150. 


16 


THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 


c(w) 


»c(w) 


(a) 


(J0^ 


c(w) 


wn  oo 


5x  lO^sec-1^ 


Fig.  2-1    Spectrum  of  lattice  vibrations  in  a  solid:  (a)  Einstein 
model,  (b)  Debye  model,  (c)  Born- von  Karman  model. 
[After  G.  Leibfried  and  W.  Brenig,  Z.  Physik,  134,  451 
(1953).] 

Such  a  distribution,  shown  in  Fig.  2- lb,  can  be  derived  by  assuming 
the  solid  to  be  a  homogeneous  and  isotropic  medium,  the  group  ve- 
locity of  waves  of  all  frequencies  to  be  the  same,  and  the  total  num- 
ber of  (one-dimensional)  linear  oscillators  to  be  equal  to  three  times 
the  number  N  of  atoms  in  a  solid. 

Debye's  theory  explained  the  experimental  data  very  well.  How- 
ever it  was  soon  realized  that  the  actual  vibrational  spectra,  while 
obeying  a  go2  dependence  at  low  frequencies,  markedly  deviate  from 
it  at  higher  frequencies  and  calculations  to  find  more  detailed  spec- 
tra were  performed.  The  way  to  perform  these  calculations  had  al- 
ready been  pointed  out  in  1913  by  Born  and  von  Karman.  They  deter- 
mined the  spectrum  by  first  finding  the  normal  modes  of  a  lattice 
consisting  of  mass  points  connected  by  springs  and  by  deriving  the 
spring  constants  from  the  interatomic  force  law.  A  result  of  a  typi- 
cal calculation  is  shown  in  Fig.  2-lc.  The  deviation  from  the  Debye 
model  is  apparent. 

One  often  assumes  for  simplicity  that  the  Debye  model  is  correct 
and  then  defines  a  characteristic  temperature,  called  Debye  temper- 
ature Or>  by  the  equation 


ED=1iu>D  =  keD 


(18) 


Here  cod  is  the  cut-off  frequency  shown  in  Fig.  2- lb,  which  in  the 
Debye  theory  is  given  by  the  condition  that  the  total  number  of  all  os- 
cillators be  equal  to  3N.  Experimentally,  one  can  determine  the  Debye 
temperature  from  specific  heat  measurements,  from  X-ray  reflection, 
or  from  elastic  constants.  Values  range  from  88°Kfor  Pb  to  1000°K 
for  Be.  However,  one  must  be  careful  not  to  identify,  without  detailed 
investigations,  the  Debye  temperature  measured  in  a  conventional  way 
with  the  constant  that  enters  calculations  of  the  Mossbauer  effect. 


THEORY  17 

2-3    THE  CLASSICAL  THEORY 

A  classical  expression  for  the  intensity  of  the  Mossbauer  line  has 
been  given  by  Shapiro  (Shapiro  1961)  and  Van  Kranendonk  (Van  Kran- 
endonk  1961,  and  unpublished  lecture  notes).  Since  no  relevant  re- 
prints are  reproduced  in  this  volume,  the  derivation  will  be  sketched 
in  the  present  section. 

The  vector  potential  of  an  electromagnetic  wave,  emitted  by  a 
classical  oscillator  of  constant  frequency,  can  be  written  as 

A(t)  =  Aq  exp(io)0t) 

where  without  loss  of  generality,  Aq  is  normalized  to   |A0|2  =  1.  If  the 
frequency  is  a  function  of  time,  this  equation  is  replaced  by 

t 
A(t)  =  A0exp  [i  /w(t')dt']  (19) 

o 

Assume  for  simplicity  that  the  emitting  oscillator  moves  in  the  x 
direction,  with  a  velocity  v(t)  which  is  small  compared  to  the  light 
velocity  c.  The  Doppler  effect  changes  the  frequency  of  the  emitted 
wave 

w(t/)  =  a)0[l+v(t')/c]  (20) 

Inserting  (20)  into  (19)  and  integrating  yields 

A  =  Aq  exp(iw0t)  exp[iw0x(t)/c] 
or 

A  =  Aq  exp(iu>0t)  exp[ix(t)/X]  (21) 

The  essential  features  can  now  be  discussed  by  letting  the  source  of 
the  electromagnetic  wave  execute  a  simple  harmonic  motion,  with 
frequency  to  and  amplitude  Xq, 

x(t)  =  x0  sin  m  (22) 

The  vector  potential  becomes 

A  =  Aq  exp  (iw0t)  exp  (ix0    sin  fit/*)  (23) 

Such  expressions  are  well  known  from  the  theory  of  frequency  modu- 
lation in  radio  transmission.  The  spectrum,  which  originally  just  con- 
tained the  carrier  frequency  co0,  splits  up  into  lines  of  frequencies  u>0, 


18  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

a)0±fi,  cu0±2£2  ....    This  splitting  is  derived  in  the  following  way.  Using 
the  expansion22 

oo 

exp  (iy  sin  0)  =     £]      Jn(y)  exp  (in0)  (24) 

n=-  °° 

Eq.  (23)  becomes 

oo 

A  =  Ao    £      Jn(xo/*)  exp  [i(w0  +  nO)t]  (25) 

n=-oo 

Equation  (25)  indeed  describes  an  electromagnetic  wave  which  is  a 

superposition  of  partial  waves  with  frequencies  u>0,  a>0  ±  £2,  oo0  ±  2J2 

The  amplitude  of  each  wave  is  given  by  the  Bessel  function  Jn(x0/x). 
The  unshifted  line  can  be  identified  with  the  Mossbauer  line.  Its  inten- 
sity is  given  by 

f=  |A(n  =  0)|2  =  J2(x0/X)  (26) 

Since  A0  is  normalized,  f  directly  yields  the  probability  of  emission 
of  the  unshifted  component. 

So  far,  it  has  been  assumed  that  the  emitted  wave  is  modulated  by 
one  frequency  only.  Applied  to  solids,  this  assumption  corresponds 
to  the  Einstein  model  (Fig.  2- la).  In  order  to  use  the  previous  dis- 
cussion for  real  solids,  one  must  generalize  (22),  (23),  and  (25)  to 
correspond  to  the  correct  frequency  spectrum.  The  frequency  Q,  and 
the  amplitude  Xq  are  replaced  by  a  sum  over  frequencies  £2m  with 
amplitudes  xm.  One  finds  instead  of  (26) 


3N 

n     Jj(xm/*)  (27) 

m  =  l 


The  number  3N  of  frequencies  in  a  solid  is  extremely  large.  Each 
of  the  factors  J2  in  (27)  is  only  very  slightly  different  from  unity 
since  the  maximum  amplitude  xm  of  each  individual  frequency  com- 
ponent is  extremely  small.  Thus  J0  can  be  expanded 

J0(y)  =  l  -  (l/4)y2+-- 

and  (27)  can  be  written 


22  H.  Jeffreys  and  B.  S.  Jeffreys,  "Methods  of  Mathematical  Phys- 
ics, "  Cambridge  University  Press,  New  York,  1956,  Sec.  21.10. 


THEORY  19 


In  f  =  2  E  In  J„  -  2    £    In  [1  -  (l/4)(x2m/*2)] 
m  m 


--2    £     (1/4)04,/**)  (28) 

m 

In  this  expression,  In  f  is  a  function  of  the  maximum  excursions  xm. 
Usually  one  introduces  the  mean- square  deviation  of  the  vibrating 
atom  from  its  equilibrium  position  by  the  definition 

<x2>  =  (1/2)2    x2m  (29) 

m 

and  writes  instead  of  (28) 

lnf  e-  -<x2>/X2 

This  equation  is  exact  in  the  limit  N— *>  (Van  Kranendonk  1961),  so 
that  the  final  result  can  be  written 

i  =  exp(-<x2>/*2)  (30) 

Equation  (30)  leads  to  some  interesting  remarks: 

1.  It  is  not  surprising  that  the  classical  treatment  yields  an  un- 
shifted  line.  The  exact  agreement  between  the  classical  expression 
(30)  and  the  quantum  mechanical  result,  as  given  in  Sec.  2-5,Eq.  (56), 
is  unexpected,  however. 

2.  Equation  (30)  allows  a  simple  physical  interpretation.  The  con- 
tinuously emitted  electromagnetic  wave  comes  from  a  region  of  lin- 
ear dimensions  <x2>.  If  this  linear  dimension  increases  beyond  the 
wavelength  fr=  A/27T,  pieces  of  the  wave  train  emitted  from  different 
points  in  this  region  interfere  destructively,  and  the  fraction  f  of 
photons  emitted  without  energy  loss  decreases  rapidly. 

3.  The  condition  for  appreciable  emission  without  energy  loss, 
namely,  that  the  amplitude  of  the  emitting  atom  is  small  compared  to 
the  wavelength  of  the  emitted  photon,  means  that  small  spatial  zero- 
point  vibrations  are  essential  for  a  large  Mossbauer  effect.  The  un- 
certainty relation  then  asserts  that  large  zero-point  momenta  must 
be  present. 

4.  The  wave  train  described  by  (23)  is  infinitely  long  and  the  cor- 
responding emission  line  is  infinitely  narrow.  In  decays  with  a  mean 
life  r,  the  lines  possess  a  width  T,  Eq.  (3),  and  the  spectrum  corre- 
sponding to  (25)  then  is  of  the  form  shown  in  Fig.  2-2.  From  this 
spectrum  it  is  obvious  that  the  Mossbauer  line  is  clearly  recogniz- 
able only  if  the  line  width  T  is  smaller  than  the  separation  tifi  from 
the  first  satellite,  i.e.,  if  the  nuclear  lifetime  t  is  larger  than  the 
characteristic  lattice  time  I/O.  This  latter  time  is  of  the  order  of 
10"13  sec. 


20 


THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 


O)0  +  2Q 

Fig.  2-2    Spectrum  of  a  classical  electromagnetic  wave  of  finite 
length  emitted  by  an  Einstein  solid. 

5.  Figure  2-2  gives  a  somewhat  misleading  impression  since  it  is 
based  on  an  Einstein  solid  without  interaction  among  the  various  os- 
cillators. In  an  actual  solid,  whether  described  by  an  Einstein  model 
with  interaction  (Van  Kranendonk  1961)  or  by  a  Debye  model,  only  the 
unshifted  line  shows  the  natural  width  T;  all  the  satellites  are  broad- 
ened, overlap  each  other,  and  give  rise  to  a  continuum  (Reprints  on 
theory). 

6.  The  treatment  outlined  in  this  section  can  also  be  applied  to  ex- 
periments where  the  Mossbauer  effect  is  observed  with  the  source 
mounted  on  a  crystal  that  oscillates  with  a  frequency  J2.  Such  an  ex- 
periment is  described  in  a  reprint  (Reprint  Ruby  and  Bolef). 

2-4   THE  PHYSICAL  PICTURE 

Before  sketching  the  quantum  mechanical  theory  of  the  Mossbauer 
effect,  a  discussion  of  the  physical  picture  may  elucidate  some  of  the 
aspects  which  can  be  lost  easily  in  the  formalism.  Much  of  the  dis- 
cussion is  based  on  the  unfailing  war  horse  of  physicists,  the  uncer- 
tainty principle.  Part  of  the  treatment  follows  lectures  by  Weisskopf 
(Weisskopf  1961). 

Three  separate  questions  will  be  considered;  momentum  conserva- 
tion, energy  conservation,  and  the  time  sequence  and  duration  of 
events. 


2-41    Momentum  Conservation 

Assume  that  the  nucleus  of  an  atom  which  is  imbedded  in  a  solid 
decays  by  gamma  emission.  If  free,  the  nucleus  would  receive  a  re- 
coil momentum  p  and  a  recoil  energy  R,  given  by  (1).  How  does  the 
binding  of  the  atom  in  the  solid  affect  recoil  momentum  and  recoil 
energy  ?  The  answer  to  the  first  question  is  straightforward:  The 


THEORY  21 

momentum  is  unchanged,  but  it  is  eventually  taken  up  by  the  solid  as 
a  whole.  In  order  to  justify  this  statement,  consider  the  two  other 
possibilities,  trans lational  motion  of  the  nucleus  and  phonons  (lattice 
vibrations).  The  momentum  cannot  go  into  translational  motion  of  the 
nucleus.  The  energy  required  to  leave  a  lattice  site  is  at  least  of  the 
order  of  10  ev;  the  energy  available,  however,  never  exceeds  a  few 
tenths  of  an  ev.  (Even  if  the  recoil  were  larger,  the  nucleus  would 
finally  come  to  rest  and  transfer  its  momentum  to  the  solid.)  Lattice 
vibrations,  on  the  other  hand,  cannot  take  up  momentum.  They  can  be 
represented  as  standing  waves  or  as  the  sum  of  running  waves.  To 
each  wave  with  its  momentum  pointing  in  one  direction  will  be  a  cor- 
responding one  with  its  momentum  pointing  in  the  opposite  direction. 
The  expectation  value  of  the  momentum  for  lattice  vibrations  van- 
ishes. (Even  if  the  recoiling  nucleus  initially  starts  a  Shockwave  that 
travels  through  the  lattice,  the  Shockwave  will  finally  be  damped  out, 
and  one  is  led  back  to  the  equilibrium  situation  discussed  here.)  The 
momentum  hence  must  go  into  translational  motion  of  the  entire  crys- 
tal. If  the  crystal  is  glued  to  a  larger  body,  for  instance  the  earth, 
this  larger  body  takes  up  the  momentum.  The  momentum  conservation 
is  taken  care  of  and  one  can  now  turn  his  attention  to  the  energy  con- 
servation. (Incidentally,  the  nearly  complete  separation  of  the  energy 
transfer  from  the  momentum  transfer  which  occurs  in  the  Mossbauer 
effect  appears  also  in  many  classical  problems,  such  as  when  one 
shoots  a  bullet  into  a  very  heavy  pendulum.) 

2-42   Energy  Conservation 

The  discussion  of  the  energy  conservation  is  more  complicated, 
since  the  transition  energy  can  be  shared  among  the  gamma  ray,  the 
individual  atom,  lattice  vibrations,  and  the  solid  as  a  whole.  Two  of 
these  four  parts  can  be  dispensed  with  quickly.  The  individual  atom 
does  not  leave  its  lattice  site  (see  Sec.  2-41)  and  hence  cannot  acquire 
translational  energy.  The  energy  that  goes  into  motion  of  the  entire 
solid  is  extremely  small  and  will  be  neglected.  The  transition  energy, 
for  all  practical  purposes,  is  thus  shared  between  the  gamma  ray  and 
the  phonons.  A  Mossbauer  transition  occurs  if  the  state  of  the  lattice 
remains  unchanged,  and  the  gamma  ray  gets  the  entire  transition 
energy. 

The  fact  that  transitions  can  occur  in  which  the  lattice  remains  in 
its  initial  state  and  the  gamma  ray  receives  the  full  energy  follows 
from  the  quantum  mechanical  treatment  (Sec.  2-5).  A  naive  picture 
can  be  given  which  makes  this  result  plausible  for  the  Einstein  solid, 
as  well  as  for  a  solid  with  a  continuously  distributed  frequency  spec- 
trum. For  the  Einstein  solid,  the  problem  is  very  simple.  The  smal- 
lest amount  of  energy  that  can  be  given  to  the  solid  is  equal  to 
Eg  =-ncoE  =  keg-  ^  tne  enerSY  R  U-e»>  the  recoil  energy  of  zfree 
nucleus)  is  small  compared  to  this  excitation  energy,  the  probability 


22  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

of  emission  of  a  phonon  will  be  small,  the  lattice  will  not  be  excited 
and  the  gamma  ray  will  escape  with  the  full  transition  energy.  The 
calculation  (Sec.  2-5)  shows  indeed  that  the  probability  f  for  a  tran- 
sition without  energy  loss  is  given  by 

f  =  exp(-R/k0E)  (31) 

For  the  Debye  solid,  the  situation  is  more  complicated.  Assume 
first  that  the  decay  proceeds  in  such  a  way  that  a  lattice  vibration  of 
the  shortest  possible  wavelength,  i.e.,  the  maximum  energy  E^  =  "hwD 
=  k0j),  is  excited.  The  wavelength  of  this  shortest  lattice  wave  is 
A.«2d,  where  d  is  the  lattice  constant.  In  a  continuum  theory,  such 
as  the  Debye  theory,  the  corresponding  energy  is 

ED  f  fiwD  =  flu/*  «  2irftu/2d  (32) 

where  u  is  the  sound  velocity  in  the  solid.  If  this  particular  lattice 
wave  were  the  only  one  that  could  be  excited,  one  would  be  in  the  same 
case  as  before  and  (31)  would  hold,  with  0E  replaced  by  0r>  How- 
ever, lattice  modes  with  longer  wavelength  and  hence  smaller  energy 
exist,  and  one  would  expect  that  these  vibrations  can  be  excited  easily, 
thus  making  a  Mossbauer  effect  impossible.  The  fact  that  these  modes 
with  smaller  energy  cannot  be  excited  too  easily  can  be  seen  as  fol- 
lows. The  highest  mode  corresponds  approximately  to  a  situation 
where  two  adjacent  atoms  move  out  of  phase.  Such  a  wave  can  be  ex- 
cited most  efficiently  if  the  decaying  atom  is  assumed  to  be  free,  re- 
ceives its  full  share  R  of  the  recoil  energy,  and  then  bumps  into  a 
neighboring  atom.  A  simple  mechanical  analog  is  the  well-known  dem- 
onstration experiment  in  which  a  number  of  spheres  hang  from  a  frame 
and  touch  each  other.  Lifting  the  outermost  sphere  and  letting  it  bump 
into  the  row  excites  a  wave  which  travels  through  the  chain  and  causes 
one  sphere  at  the  other  end  to  jump  off.  In  order  to  excite  longer 
waves  in  this  mechanical  model,  one  lifts  N  spheres  at  one  end,  re- 
leases them,  and  N  will  bounce  off  at  the  other  end.  Similarly,  a 
longer  wave  can  be  excited  most  efficiently  in  the  solid  if  initially  N 
atoms  move  together.  The  wavelength  then  is  approximately  2Nd,  and 
the  energy  of  this  wave  is,  according  to  (32),  about  Erj/N.  However, 
in  order  most  efficiently  to  excite  this  longer  wave,  N  atoms  must 
move  together  at  the  onset,  and  the  recoil  energy  must  be  transferred 
to  these  N  atoms  "simultaneously."  The  decaying  system  is  no 
longer  one  atom  alone  but  the  N  atoms  together.  The  mass  of  this 
system  is  NM,  and  the  recoil  energy  given  to  it  is  R/N.  So,  even 
though  this  wave  requires  only  Ep/N  as  excitation  energy,  only  R/N 
is  available. 

The  proper  calculation  (see  Reprints  on  theory)  justifies  these  con- 
siderations and  shows  that  the  fraction  f  of  transitions  without  change 


THEORY  23 

in  the  lattice  states  is  given  by  an  expression  similar  to  (31),  but  with 
0E  replaced  by  (2/3)6d: 

f  =  exp(-  3R/2k0D)  (33) 

Equations  (31)  and  (33)  are  valid  only  at  zero  absolute  temperature, 
where  all  lattice  oscillators  are  in  their  ground  state.  At  finite  tem- 
peratures, some  of  the  oscillators  are  excited  and  transitions  with  in- 
duced emission  of  phonons  become  possible.  These  transitions  con- 
tribute an  additional  term  in  the  exponents  of  (31)  and  (33). 

The  foregoing  discussion  is  obviously  oversimplified  and,  in  addi- 
tion, treats  a  quantum  mechanical  problem  in  a  classical  way.  How- 
ever the  essence  is  correct.  Even  though  the  energies  characteristic 
for  the  solid  are  much  smaller  than  the  nuclear  transition  energy,  and 
the  nuclear  decay  occurs  in  one  nucleus  only,  the  entire  crystal  must 
be  considered  as  the  quantum  mechanical  system  in  which  the  decay 
occurs.  Any  statement  according  to  which  one  can  separate  the  decay 
into  a  first  step,  in  which  the  nucleus  decays,  and  a  second  step,  in 
which  the  recoil  energy  is,  or  is  not,  given  to  the  solid,  is  misleading. 
The  process  is  indivisible  and  if ,  by  a  measurement ,  one  separates 
the  two  steps,  the  Mossbauer  effect  is  destroyed.  These  statements 
are  justified  in  the  next  section. 

2-43   Time  Considerations 

Before  discussing  the  times  involved  in  the  Mossbauer  effect,  a 
few  words  about  the  uncertainty  relation  between  energy  and  time  are 
in  order.  It  has  been  pointed  out  quite  early,  for  instance  by  Pauli,23 
that  this  uncertainty  relation  has  two  different  physical  contents.  The 
one  of  interest  here  refers  to  a  measurement:  If  a  system  has  two 
states,  En  and  Em,  then  any  measurement  to  decide  whether  the  sys- 
tem is  in  state  n  or  in  state  m  requires  at  least  a  time  T  given  by 

T«V(En-Em)  (34) 

This  careful  definition  avoids  some  of  the  difficulties  that  have  led  to 
many  discussions  (for  instance,  see  Ref.  24). 

Consider,  as  a  special  case,  the  14.4-kev  transition  from  the  first 
excited  state  to  the  ground  state  of  Fe57.  According  to  (34),  the  min- 
imum time  necessary  to  decide  whether  a  Fe57  nucleus  is  in  its 
ground  state  or  its  first  excited  state  is  4xl0"20  sec.  The  question 
then  arises  as  to  whether  this  time  is  characteristic  for  this  transi- 
tion so  that  one  can  say  that  the  individual  decay  always  occurs  faster 
than  4 x  10'20  sec. 


23  W.  Pauli,  Die  allgemeinen  Prinzipien  der  Wellenmechanik, 
Handbuch  der  Physik,"  Springer,  Berlin,  1933,  Vol.  24:1,  p.  146. 

24  Y.  Aharonov  and  D.  Bohm,  Phys.  Rev.,  122,  1649(1961). 


24  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

To  answer  this  question,  a  gedanken  experiment  can  be  performed 
in  which  the  nucleus  is  observed  at  intervals  of  4x  10" 20  sec,  and  thus 
the  moment  of  decay  is  determined  within  this  time.  Has  one  then 
shown  that  a  transition  time  of  4  x  10" 20  sec  or  less  exists,  or  has  the 
measurement  forced  the  nucleus  to  decay  within  this  short  time  ?  As 
Pauli's  statement  in  Sec.  2-1  shows,  this  question  had  obviously  been 
discussed  very  thoroughly  when  quantum  mechanics  was  new,  and 
the  second  alternative  was  found  to  be  correct.  One  of  the  beautiful 
aspects  of  the  Mossbauer  effect  is  that  it  gives  a  direct  experimental 
confirmation  of  these  quantum  mechanical  ideas.  With  Fe57  one  can 
indeed  perform  an  experiment  similar  to  the  ' 'thought' '  experiment 
described  above,  if  only  with  intervals  considerably  longer  than  10"19 
sec  but  still  much  shorter  than  10" 7  sec,  the  lifetime  of  the  first  ex- 
cited state  of  Fe57  (see  Reprint  Lynch  1960  and  Sec.  5-6).  The  spec- 
trum of  gamma  rays  emitted  in  such  an  experiment  no  longer  dis- 
plays the  natural  line  width  but  is  considerably  broadened.  To  a  good 
approximation,  this  broadening  is  given  by  (3),  with  r  now  standing 
for  the  interval  of  measurement.  This  experimental  result  agrees 
with  the  quantum  mechanical  calculations  (Harris  1961)  and  also  with 
the  classical  considerations6:  If  the  emitted  wave  train  is  shortened 
in  time,  its  energy  distribution,  which  is  given  by  the  Fourier  trans- 
form of  the  time  distribution,  must  be  wider.  In  the  thought  experi- 
ment above,  with  time  intervals  of  4  x  10"20  sec  one  would  find  out 
whether  the  nucleus  has  decayed  or  not,  but  the  gamma  ray  would 
show  a  width  of  about  15  kev  instead  of  the  natural  line  width  of  about 
10"8  ev.  Any  Mossbauer  effect  would  clearly  be  impossible.  These 
considerations  show  that  it  is  meaningless  to  talk  about  a  ''transition 
time"  or  about  an  "instantaneous  transition.' '  The  times  that  enter 
are  those  characteristic  for  the  measurement. 

After  these  preliminary  remarks,  the  discussion  of  the  Mossbauer 
effect  is  straightforward.  If  one  wants  to  ascertain  whether  or  not  a 
transition  with  energy  transfer  AE  to  the  lattice  has  occurred,  one 
must  measure  the  energy  of  the  photon  or  of  the  solid  to  within  the 
energy  AE.  The  time  required  for  this  measurement  is  given  by  (34), 

T>1\/AE  =  ^r/u  (35) 

where  2ttX  is  the  wavelength  belonging  to  a  phonon  with  energy  AE 
and  velocity  u.  During  the  time  T,  the  disturbance  caused  by  the  de- 
cay travels  a  distance  L,  given  by 

L  =  Tu  >  X  (36) 

Thus,  if  one  wants  to  determine  whether  or  not  an  amount  of  energy 
AE  has  been  transferred  to  the  lattice,  one  is  forced  to  look  at  re- 
gions of  the  solid  of  linear  dimensions  X  or  larger.  This  argument 
justifies  the  statements  made  in  Sec.  2-42. 


THEORY  25 

It  is  impossible  to  decide  by  a  measurement  whether  the  original 
recoil  has  been  imparted  to  the  decaying  nucleus  only  or  has  been 
shared  among  two,  three,  or  more  atoms  within  a  region  of  linear  di- 
mensions X. 

If  no  particular  time  is  selected  by  an  external  apparatus,  the  mean 
life  t  of  the  decaying  state  will  play  the  role  of  the  measuring  inter- 
val. During  one  mean  life,  the  disturbance  from  the  decay  will  travel 
for  a  distance  tu.  The  question  then  arises  whether  a  measurement 
can  decide  that  a  part  of  the  entire  solid,  of  linear  dimensions  tu, 
will  begin  to  move  first.  It  is  easy  to  see,  however,  that  the  recoil 
energy  of  such  a  crystallite  cannot  be  measured,  because  zero-point 
vibrations  will  completely  mask  any  recoil  effect  (Weisskopf  1961). 

There  remains  one  last  question.  How  do  the  parts  of  the  solid  far 
away  from  the  decaying  nucleus  know  how  and  when  to  move  ?  Is  it 
possible  to  decide  whether  or  not  the  signal  travels  through  the  crys- 
tal as  a  shock  wave  with  the  velocity  of  sound  u  ?  Again  the  uncertainty 
relation  prevents  such  a  detailed  investigation.  The  recoil  energy 
given  to  the  entire  solid  is  approximately 

Rsolid  =  R(Matom/Msoiid)  *  R(d/D)3  (37) 

where  R  is  the  recoil  energy  of  the  free  atom,  d  is  the  lattice  pa- 
rameter, and  D  the  linear  dimension  of  the  solid.  The  recoil  energy 
is  of  the  order  of  the  Debye  energy,  Eq.  (32): 

R«liu/d 

The  time  required  to  measure  the  recoil  energy  of  the  entire  solid  is, 
according  to  (34),  given  by 

Ts  *  VRsolid  «  *D3/Rd3  «  D3/ud2 

The  time  t  for  a  signal  with  the  sound  velocity  u  to  travel  the  linear 
dimension  D  is  t  =  D/u.  The  ratio  of  the  two  times  thus  becomes  ap- 
proximately 

T/t«(D/d)2  (38) 

The  time  required  for  a  measurement  of  the  recoil  energy  of  the  en- 
tire solid  is  very  much  larger  than  the  time  needed  for  a  signal  to 
travel  through  the  crystal.  By  the  time  the  measurement  of  the  recoil 
energy  is  finished,  the  crystal  moves  with  uniform  velocity  (if  not 
glued  to  some  material),  and  it  is  impossible  to  tell  how  it  received 
its  travel  orders ! 


26  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 


2-5    SKETCH  OF  THE  THEORY 

In  nearly  every  theory  there  exist  steps  that  are  omitted  in  the 
theoretical  papers  and  not  treated  in  the  textbooks.  These  steps  are 
obviously  designed  to  keep  the  experimental  physicists  in  their  place. 
The  theory  of  the  Mossbauer  effect  makes  no  exception;  the  equation 
from  which  all  later  results  are  derived  [(40)  below]  is  usually  writ- 
ten down  without  detailed  derivation.  It  is  the  purpose  of  the  present 
section  to  supply  the  steps  missing  in  most  papers. 

The  probability  for  emission  or  absorption  of  a  gamma  ray  from  a 
nucleus  embedded  in  a  solid,  with  the  lattice  simultaneously  undergo- 
ing a  transition  from  one  state  to  another,  is  usually  calculated  by 
dispersion  theory,  as  for  example  described  in  Heitler.6  The  relevant 
formula  will  not  be  needed  in  the  present  section,  but  it  can  be  found 
as  Eq.  (8)  in  Lamb's  paper  (Reprint  Lamb  1939). f  Here  the  essential 
fact  used  is  that  the  transition  probability  for  a  given  transition  is 
proportional  to  the  square  of  the  matrix  element  connecting  the  two 
states  involved  in  the  transition  (golden  rule).  In  particular,  the  prob- 
ability for  a  transition  in  which  the  nucleus  decays  from  the  excited 
state  Ni  to  the  ground  state  Nf ,  while  simultaneously  the  lattice  goes 
from  its  initial  state   L^  to  its  final  state  Lf ,  is 

W(Ni-Nf,  Li— Lf)  =  const.  |<f  |Hint|i>  |2  (39) 

where   |i>  and  <f  |  denote  the  initial  and  final  state  of  the  entire  sys- 
tem, including  the  lattice,  and  H^  is  the  interaction  Hamiltonian  re- 
sponsible for  this  decay.  The  energy  that  can  be  transferred  to  the 
lattice  during  this  transition  is  very  small  compared  to  the  gamma- 
ray  energy.  The  dependence  of  the  density  of  final  states  p(E)  on  the 
energy  transfer  to  the  lattice  is  hence  very  small,  p(E)  is  assumed 
to  be  constant,  and  it  is  absorbed  in  the  constant  in  (39). 

For  calculations,  an  explicit  form  of  the  transition  matrix  element 
is  needed.  Lamb  states  that,  because  of  the  short  range  of  nuclear 
forces  and  the  corresponding  independence  of  the  motion  of  the  crys- 
tal of  the  center  of  momentum  (cm.)  and  the  internal  degrees  of 
freedom  of  the  nucleus,  it  can  be  factored  into  a  nuclear  and  a  lat- 
tice matrix  element: 

<f|Hint|i>  =  <Lf|eik-X|Li><N>  (40) 

Here  the  nuclear  matrix  element  <N>  depends  only  on  nuclear  prop- 
erties, k  =  p/h  is  the  wavevector  of  the  emitted  gamma  ray,  and  X 
is  the  coordinate  vector  of  the  cm.  of  the  decaying  nucleus. 


t  A  derivation  based  on  time- dependent  perturbation  theory  is  given 
in  Appendix  A  of  a  paper  by  Petzold  (Petzold  1961).  Compare,  how- 
ever, the  physical  interpretation  of  Petzold  with  the  remarks  made 
here  in  Sec.  2-4. 


THEORY  27 

<Lf  |exp(ik*X)|Li>  is  the  matrix  element  for  transfer  of  a  momen- 
tum -hk  to  the  lattice  through  the  atom  of  the  decaying  nucleus  with 
the  lattice  going  from  the  state  Li  to  Lf . 

Lipkin  (Reprint  Lipkin  1960)  shows  that  the  form  Eq.  (40)  of  the 
matrix  element  is  determined  completely  by  the  requirements  of 
translational  and  Galilean  invar iance.  A  more  detailed  justification 
of  (40)  may,  however,  be  desired  by  many  readers  since  it  forms  the 
basis  for  all  the  later  calculations  and  arguments.  Such  a  justifica- 
tion, in  a  very  pedestrian  way,  will  be  given  here. 

The  Hamiltonian  of  a  charged  particle,  moving  with  a  momentum  p 
in  an  electromagnetic  field  given  by  a  vector  potential  A,  contains  the 
term  [p  -  (e/c)A]2.  This  term  leads  to  the  nonrelativistic  interaction 
Hamiltonian  Hint  =  const  (p  •  A  -  A-p).  After  expanding  A  in  plane 
waves,  one  finds  the  well-known  expression6'25 

<f|Hint|i>  =  const. <f|exp(ik-x)pA|i>  (41) 

where  the  gradient  operator  pa  must  be  applied  in  the  direction  of 
the  polarization  vector  of  the  electromagnetic  wave  k,  and  where  x 
is  the  coordinate  vector  of  the  decaying  nucleon.  Equation  (41)  corre- 
sponds to  a  single-particle  description  of  the  nucleus;  if  the  decay  oc- 
curs through  many  nucleons  in  the  same  nucleus,  an  appropriate  sum 
over  these  nucleons  must  be  introduced  in  (41).  For  simplicity,  this 
sum  is  omitted. 

The  short  range  and  the  strength  of  the  nuclear  forces  now  permits 
the  use  of  the  approximation  that  the  nuclear  decay  is  not  influenced 
by  the  state  of  the  lattice  and  that  the  lattice  condition  does  not  depend 
on  the  nuclear  state.  The  state  functions   |i>  and  <f  |  can  then  be  writ- 
ten as  products   |N^>|Li>    and  <Lf|<Nf|  of  nuclear- state  functions 
|Nj>  and  <Nf|  and  lattice- state  functions   |L^>    and  <Lf|,  with 
<Lf|Li>  =  6fi  and  <Nf|Ni>  =  5fj.  In  addition,  one  introduces  inter- 
nal nuclear  coordinates  p  by  writing 

x  =  X  +  p  (42) 

where  X  is  the  coordinate  vector  of  the  cm.  of  the  decaying  nucleus 

(Fig.  2-3). 

The  momentum  operator  also  splits  up  into  a  sum 

PA  =  PX  +  Pp  (43> 

where  pp  acts  on  the  internal  nuclear  coordinates  and  px  on  the 
cm.  coordinates  of  the  nucleus.  After  introducing  (42)  and  (43)  into 
(41),  the  matrix  element  can  be  separated  into  two  parts,  each  con- 
sisting of  a  product  of  a  nuclear  and  a  lattice  matrix  element: 


25  L.  I.  Schiff,  "Quantum  Mechanics,''  McGraw-Hill,  New  York, 
1955,  Sees.  23  and  35.  R.P.Feynman,  "Quantum  Electrodynamics,' 
W.  A.  Benjamin,  Inc.,  New  York,  1961,  p.  8. 


28 


THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 


radiating  nucleon 


decaying  nucleus 


cm. 


origin 


Fig.  2-3    Coordinates  used  in  the  evaluation  of  the  transition  matrix 

element.  The  origin  is  fixed  at  the  cm.  of  the  entire  crystal. 


<f|Hmt|i>  =  const. 


<Nf|eik'Ppp|Ni><Lf|eik,X|Li> 


+  <Nf|eik*p|Ni><Lf|elk,Xpx|Li>} 


(44) 


To  reduce  (44)  to  (40)  one  must  show  that  the  first  term  in  (44)  is 
much  larger  than  the  second  one.  The  following  arguments  are  only 
qualitative,  but  they  yield  the  right  order  of  magnitude.  Using  the 
closure25'26 


L  |n'Xn'|  =  1 
n' 


(45) 


where  the  summation  extends  over  all  intermediate  states,  the  ratio 
of  the  lattice  matrix  elements  in  the  two  terms  of  (44)  can  be  written 


<Lf|e     '     pxjLj, 
<Lf[eik'X|Li> 


g<Lt|etk,X|L'XL'|i>x|L1> 
<Lf|eik-X|Li> 


The  momentum  "hk  transferred  to  the  lattice  during  the  nuclear  decay 
is  much  larger  than  typical  momenta  components  in  the  lattice.  It  is 
therefore  to  be  expected,  even  without  detailed  calculation,  that  the 
terms  <Lf  |exp(ik*X)|L'>  for  allowed  intermediate  states   L'  are  of 
the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  the  term  <Lf|exp(ik«X)|Li>  .  They 
can  then  be  taken  out  from  under  the  sum  sign,  leading  to 


rL«   L   <L'|px|Li>  =<pL> 


(46) 


26P.  A.  M.  Dirac,  "The  Principles  of  Quantum  Mechanics, "  Oxford 
University  Press,  New  York,  1958,  4th  ed.,  p.  63. 


THEORY  29 

where  <Pl>  denotes  an  average  over  lattice  momentum  components. 
A  similar  reasoning  is  valid  for  the  nuclear  matrix  elements,  where 
the  momentum  transfer  1ik  is  much  smaller  than  typical  nuclear  mo- 
mentum components.  The  corresponding  ratio  of  the  nuclear  matrix 
elements  appearing  in  (44)  becomes 

rN«   L<N'|Pp|Ni>  =<pN>  (47) 

N' 

The  ratio  of  the  first  to  the  second  term  in  (44)  thus  is 

rN/rL  ^<pn>/<pl>  <48) 

or  of  the  order  of  105  or  larger.  A  second  way  of  estimating  the  ratio 
(48)  can  be  obtained  by  first  calculating  rjg,  using  a  multipole  expan- 
sion, exp(ik-p)  =  1  +  ik-p  +  ••• .  One  finds  for  the  first  nonvanishing 
terms  of  the  relevant  matrix  elements:  <Nf  |exp(ik*p)|Ni> 
«  ik<Nf|p|Ni>,  and  <Nf  |exp(ik-p)pp|Ni>  «  <Nf  |pp|Ni>  .  The  last 
expression  can  be  evaluated  further  by  assuming  aHamiltonian  of  the 
form  H  =  (p2/2M)  +  V(p).  One  then  easily  calculates  a  commutator 
[H,p]  =  (m/M)p,  or  p  =  (-iM/ti)[H,p].  Hence  <Nf  |p|Ni>  =  (-iM/n)x 
<Nf |Hp  -  pH|Ni>  =  (+iM/h)(Ei  -  Ef)<Nf|p|Ni>  =  +iMkc<Nf |p|Ni>. 
The  desired  ratio  r^  becomes  rN  =  -Mc  ^<pjsp>  >  *n  agreement  with 
the  crude  arguments  leading  to  (47).  To  estimate  r^  one  first  re- 
marks that  the  highest  momenta  occurring  in  the  lattice  are  of  the  or- 
der of  H/d  and  that  the  matrix  element  <Lf|exp  (ik*X)px|Li>  thus 
cannot  be  larger  than  ti/d.  The  matrix  element  <  Lf|exp  (ik*X)|Lj>  , 
however,  must  be  larger  than  a  certain  minimum  value,  say  10"2,  for 
the  Mossbauer  effect  to  be  observable  [compare  (49)  below].  Thus 
rL  «  lC^-h/d  and  r^/r^,  =*  Mcd/102ti  ^106.  These  arguments  show 
that  (40)  can  safely  be  used. 

Using  (40),  the  calculation  of  the  fraction  f  of  gamma  rays  emitted 
without  energy  loss  to  the  lattice  (Li  —  Li)  is  now  straightforward: 

f=  _KLi|eik'X|Li>|2 


L  |<Lf|eik,X|Li>; 
Lf 


The  denominator  is  easily  shown  to  be  one  with  the  help  of  (45), 
Il<Lf|elk-X|Li>p=i:<Li|e-ik-X|Lt><L£|eik-X|Li> 


Lf  Lf 


<Li|e  e  |Li>  =  1 


Thus  one  finds 


30  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 


f=|<Li|eik,X|Li>|2  (49) 

Equation  (49)  has  been  the  starting  point  for  most  calculations  of 
the  fraction  f  of  gamma  rays  emitted  or  absorbed  without  energy  loss. 
A  few  examples  best  illustrate  its  use. 

2-51    The  Einstein  Solid 

The  simplest  and  most  pedestrian  application  is  to  the  Einstein 
solid.  The  ground- state  wave  function  for  a  linear  harmonic  oscilla- 
tor of  mass  M  and  angular  frequency  u)  is  given  by 

*0(x)  =    iWS  e~^^2n  (50) 

Inserting  this  wave  function  into  (49)  and  using  the  fact  that  one  is 
dealing  with  a  one-dimensional  problem,  i.e.,  that  k-X  —  kX,  yields 
after  integration 

f  =  exp  (--h2k2/2Mfta>)  =  exp  (-R/nu)E)  (51) 

This  result  agrees  with  (31),  which  was  quoted  earlier  without  proof. 


2-52   The  Debye  Solid 

For  the  Debye  solid,  the  procedure  is  somewhat  more  complicated, 
because  the  individual  atoms  do  not  all  have  the  same  frequency.  One 
introduces  normal  coordinates  and  then  determines  the  probability  f . 
This  straightforward  calculation  is  performed  in  a  number  of  papers 
(Reprints  Mossbauer,  Lipkin,  Visscher).  The  result  can  be  written 

f  =  e'2w  (52) 


where 


w      -     R 


keD 


1      /T_\2  e/T     xdx 
4      W     /        x      . 


e 


(53) 


This  result  agrees  for  T  =  0  with  (33).  It  must  be  pointed  out  that 
it  is  only  valid  if  the  concept  of  Debye  temperature  is  applicable.  In 
many  instances,  even  for  crystals  consisting  of  only  one  kind  of  atom, 
the  Debye  theory  cannot  be  used.18  When  estimating  f  with  the  help  of 
Eqs.  (52)  and  (53),  these  restrictions  should  be  kept  in  mind.  For 
obtaining  crude  estimates  of  expected  effects,  the  Debye  approximation 
is,  however,  very  useful.  In  Sec.  3-6,  data  helpful  for  such  estimates 
are  collected. 


THEORY  31 

2-53    The  Debye- Waller  Factor 

At  this  point  it  is  worth  remembering  that  recoilless  processes 
have  not  been  invented  by  nuclear  physicists.  The  scattering  of  X 
rays  without  loss  of  energy  to  the  lattice  has  been  used  as  a  standard 
tool  for  many  years.  In  studies  of  Bragg  reflection  it  was  found  that 
the  temperature  had  a  strong  influence  on  the  intensity  of  the  lines. 
Many  authors,  particularly  Debye  and  Waller,  investigated  this  effect 
and  found  that  the  intensity  as  a  function  of  temperature  could  be  ex- 
pressed as27"31 


I=I0e 


-2W 

W  =  2<u|>  sin2  <p/%2  (54) 

where  <p  is  the  Bragg  angle,  2-nX  is  the  X-ray  wavelength,  and<u|> 
is  the  mean- square  deviation  of  the  component  of  displacement  of  the 
atoms  along  the  direction  z  which  is  perpendicular  to  the  reflecting 
planes.  This  Debye-Waller  factor  exp(-2W)  has  many  similarities 
with  the  Lamb-Mdssbauer  factor  f ;  it  is  interesting  to  compare  these 
and  also  note  the  differences. 

The  main  difference  lies  in  the  times  involved.  X-ray  scattering 
is  "fast,"  the  characteristic  time  involved  is  much  shorter  than  the 
characteristic  lattice  time.  In  contrast,  the  emission  and  the  scatter- 
ing of  gamma  rays  in  the  Mossbauer  effect  is  "slow,"  the  relevant 
time  is  comparable  to,  or  longer  than,  the  characteristic  lattice  time. 
These  differences  are  discussed  in  papers  by  Tzara  (Reprint  Tzara 
1961)  and  Trammell  (Trammell  1961),  and  these  should  be  consulted 
for  further  details. 

The  essential  similarity  lies  in  the  appearance  of  the  mean-square 
deviation  of  the  radiating  or  scattering  atoms  from  its  equilibrium 
position.  For  crystals  with  harmonic  lattice  forces,  it  can  be  shown 
that  the  expression  (49)  can  be  transformed  to 

f  =  exp(-<Li|(k.X)2|Li»  (55) 

or 


27P.  P.  Ewald,  "Handbuch  der  Physik,"  Springer,  Berlin,  1933, 
Vol.  23:2,  p.  307. 

28 F.  C.  Blake,  Revs.  Modern  Phys.,  5,  169  (1933). 

29  A.  H.  Compton  and  S.  K.  Allison,  "X-Rays  in  Theory  and  Exper 
iment,"  Van  Nostrand,  Princeton,  N.  J.,  1935,  p.  437. 

30  M.  von  Laue,  "Ro'ntgenstrahlinterferenzen,"  Akademische  Ver- 
lagsgesellschaft,  Leipzig,  1948,  pp.  204,  242. 

31 R.  W.  James,  "Optical  Principles  of  the  Diffraction  of  X-Rays,' 
Bell,  London,  1948. 


32  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

f  =  exp(-<Li|Xk|Li>/*2)  (56) 

Here  X^  is  the  component  of  the  coordinate  vector  X  in  the  direction 
of  the  emitted  photon.  Equation  (56)  is  derived  in  Petzold's  paper 
(Petzold  1961)  and  the  steps  leading  from  (49)  to  (55)  can  be  found  in 
a  paper  by  Van  Hove.32'33    Incidentally,  (56)  agrees  with  the  classically 
derived  Eq.  (30)  and  the  remarks  made  there  apply  also  to  (56). 

2-54   Connection  with  the  Probability  Density34 

If  one  denotes  with  p(X)  the  probability  of  finding  the  radiating  nu- 
cleus at  a  distance  X  from  its  equilibrium  position,  one  can  write 

f=  |/eik'Xp(X)d3X|2  (57) 

Equation  (56)  is  obtained  from  (49)  by  integrating  the  latter  matrix 
element  over  all  lattice  variables  except  X.  It  shows  that  f  is  the 
square  of  the  Fourier  transform  of  the  density  p(X). 

2-55   Further  Calculations 

In  the  back  of  this  volume  a  number  of  reprints  are  collected  which 
further  develop  the  theory  of  the  Mossbauer  effect.  Mossbauer's  pa- 
per, in  which  he  adapts  Lamb's  theory,  is  reprinted  in  German  and 
the  section  on  theory  is  translated.  In  Visscher's  paper,  Mossbauer's 
results  are  derived  in  a  more  modern  way  and  applications  to  a  study 
of  lattice  vibrations  are  indicated.  Lipkin's  paper  deals  with  simple 
sum  rules  which  give  a  deeper  physical  understanding  of  recoilless 
processes.  Inglis,  in  a  paper  not  printed  elsewhere,  discusses  the 
theory  of  the  Mossbauer  effect,  first  in  a  very  simple  one-dimensional 
case  and  then  generalizes  to  three  dimensions.  Singwi  and  Sjolander 
use  the  space- time  self- correlation  function  of  Van  Hove33  to  arrive 
at  very  elegant  and  general  results.  This  approach  is  probably  the 
one  that  is  most  useful  and  versatile  for  applications.  Tzara  includes 
the  interference  with  other  processes  in  his  paper  and  also  shows 
the  connection  with  X-ray  scattering.  For  all  further  details  con- 
cerning theory,  these  papers  should  be  consulted. 


32  L.  van  Hove,  Phys.  Rev.,  95,  249  (1954).  Contained  in  Ref.  33. 

33  L.  van  Hove,  N.  M.  Hugenholtz,  and  L.  P.  Howland,  ''Problems 
in  the  Quantum  Theory  of  Many- Particle  Systems,"  W.  A.  Benjamin, 
Inc.,  New  York,  1961. 

34 H.  J.  Lipkin,  unpublished  notes,  1961. 


EXPERIMENTAL  APPARATUS 
AND  PROBLEMS 


3-1  SURVEY 


In  contrast  with  experiments  in  high-energy  physics,  investiga- 
tions involving  the  Mossbauer  effect  are  quite  simple,  easy  to  under- 
stand, and  inexpensive.    Still,  difficulties  exist,  only  a  few  of  which 
have  been  solved  completely.    Consider,  for  instance,  the  vibration 
problem  in  Zn67.    This  isotope  displays  a  very  narrow  resonance 
with  a  width  of  about  10"10  ev.    This  width  corresponds  to  a  Doppler 
velocity  of  about  10"5  cm  sec"1,  or,  as  the  Los  Alamos  group  puts  it, 
a  velocity  slightly  faster  than  the  one  with  which  fingernails  grow. 
If  hum  exists  in  a  velocity  drive  used  with  Zn67,  an  amplitude  of  a 
few  times  10"8  cm  can  be  sufficient  to  destroy  the  resonance! 

A  basic  setup  for  a  Mossbauer  experiment  and  a  typical  result 
are  sketched  in  Fig.  3-1.    The  source  is  moved  with  a  velocity  v 
with  respect  to  the  absorber,    (in  many  experiments,  it  is  more  con- 
venient to  move  the  absorber.)    The  gamma  ray  then  suffers  a  Dop- 
pler shift  AE, 

AE  =  (v/c)E  (58) 


where  E   is  the  gamma-ray  energy.    The  velocity  v  is  defined  as 
positive  if  the  source  moves  toward  the  absorber.    The  intensity 
I        in  the  detector  is  determined  as  a  function  of  the  velocity  v. 

At  large  velocities,  no  resonance  absorption  occurs.    The  velocity 
at  which  resonance  absorption  becomes  vanishingly  small  depends 
on  the  line  width  and  on  the  line  splitting.    In  each  experiment  one 
usually  selects  a  "safe"  velocity  and  denotes  it  with  v^.   (Visitors 
to  our  lab  are  sometimes  startled  at  seeing  signs  such  as  "°°  = 
1.3  cm/sec")  One  plots  l(v)  =  I        -  B,  where  B  is  the  background 

33 


34 


THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 


source  and 
velocity  drive 


absorber 


counter 


X\\\\\\\\\\^\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\ 


A 


k 


Wv) 


"\/~ 


■*- V 


emission  line        absorption  line 


res 

spectrum  observed  as  a 

function  of  the 

relative  velocity  v 

(thin  source  and  thin  absorber) 


Fig.  3-1  Basic  setup,  emission  and  absorption  lines,  and 
velocity  spectrum  in  a  Mossbauer  transmission 
experiment. 

More  convenient  is  the  normalized  velocity  spectrum  l(v)/l(°°),  or 
the  deviation  from  nonresonant  absorption, 


€(v) 


I(°°)  -  I(v) 
~1R 


(59) 


Figure  3-1  displays  only  the  simplest  case,  single  line  source  and 
single  line  absorber,  both  showing  the  natural  line  width.    The  veloc- 
ity spectrum  can  be  much  more  complicated  in  actual  experiments. 
The  emission  and  the  absorption  lines  can  show  different  widths,  Te 
and  Ta,  and  they  can  be  split  into  components.    The  magnitude  of  the 
splitting  and  the  number  of  components  can  be  different  for  source 
and  absorber.    There  can  also  be  a  shift  between  the  centers  of 
emission  and  absorption  lines.    From  the  experimentally  determined 
velocity  spectrum  for  a  given  source- absorber  combination,  one  tries 
to  determine  one  or  more  of  the  following  quantities:  Lamb- Moss- 
bauer factor,  line  shape,  line  splitting,  and  line  shift.    These  quan- 
tities will  be  discussed  in  the  Sees.  3-11  to  3-14. 


3-11    The  Lamb- Mossbauer  Factor 

The  Debye-Waller  factor  exp(-2W)  for  X-ray  scattering  is  ex- 
pressed by  (54).    The  analogous  quantities  in  the  Mossbauer  effect, 
sometimes  called  the  Lamb- Mossbauer  factors,  are  f,  the  fraction 


APPARATUS  AND  PROBLEMS  35 

of  gamma  rays  emitted  without  energy  loss,  and  f ,  the  correspond- 
ing quantity  for  absorption.    The  factors  f  and  f  give  information 
similar  to  that  contained  in  exp(-2W).   Since  exp(-2W)  is  often  dif- 
ficult to  determine  accurately  by  conventional  X-ray  techniques,  it 
is  desirable  to  measure  f  and  f  as  a  function  of  temperature  for  as 
many  substances  as  possible. 

The  usual  methods  for  determining  absorption  coefficients  are 
not  applicable  for  two  reasons:    (l)  The  absorption  by  a  resonant  ab- 
sorber of  a  gamma- ray  beam  containing  a  fraction  f  of  gamma  rays 
emitted  without  energy  loss  is  not  exponential.    The  deviation  is  due 
to  the  fact  that  the  absorption  cross  section  varies  sharply  with  en- 
ergy;  the  energy  spectrum  of  the  gamma  rays  is  thus  a  function  of 
the  distance  in  the  absorber.    (2)  The  absorption  is  not  only  deter- 
mined by  f  but  also  by  f.    Both  f  and  f  must  be  extracted  from 
the  experiments. 

The  determination  of  f  and  f  is  simple  as  long  as  the  self- ab- 
sorption in  the  source  is  small  and  the  emission  and  absorption  lines 
are  unsplit  and  have  Lorentz  shapes  of  identical  widths.    This  case 
was  first  treated  by  the  Los  Alamos  group  (Craig  et  al.  1959)  and 
the  relevant  equations  are  given  in  the  paper  by  Margulies  and 
Ehrman  (Reprint  Margulies  1961).    More  information  can  be  found 
in  the  review  by  Cotton  (Cotton  1960). 

If  the  emission  or  the  absorption  line  or  both  are  split,  but  still 
display  identical  line  widths,  an  analysis  similar  to  the  one  described 
in  the  Los  Alamos  paper  can  be  performed  (see  Margulies  1962).  An 
analysis  along  the  same  lines  can  also  be  done  if  the  lines  show  a 
Gaussian  shape  but  still  have  identical  widths.    In  general,  however, 
the  experimentally  observed  shape  will  be  neither  Lorentzian  nor 
Gaussian  and  the  data  evaluation  will  hence  be  more  difficult.    The 
evaluation  is  also  considerably  more  difficult  if  emission  and  ab- 
sorption lines  do  not  have  the  same  widths. 

In  many  cases,  the  area  method  is  useful.    Here  one  considers 
the  area  under  the  absorption  curve  and  derives  a  value  of  ff'.  Often 
one  may  have  enough  knowledge  to  separate  this  product.    This 
method,  which  was  first  used  by  the  Argonne  group  (Hanna  et  al.  1960), 
is  described  in  detail  in  a  publication  by  Shirley,  Kaplan,  and  Axel 
(Shirley  1961). 

3-12    Line  Shape 

Only  in  the  ideal  case  do  emission  and  absorption  lines  display 
the  natural  line  shape.    In  actual  experiments,  the  lines  are  widened 
by  finite  source  and  absorber  thickness  and  usually  also  by  the  finite 
velocity  resolution  of  the  apparatus  (Sees.  3-4  and  3-5).    Further- 
more, solid-state  effects  such  as  internal  fields,  imperfections,  and 
impurities  broaden  the  line  and  change  its  shape  (see  Chapter  6). 


36  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

Experimentally,  one  wants  to  find  the  true  shape  and  width  of  the 
emission  and  the  absorption  lines,  extrapolated  to  zero  source  and 
absorber  thickness.    If  the  lifetime  of  the  excited  nuclear  state  is 
known  from  independent  experiments  (electronic  delay  measure- 
ments), one  can  compare  the  observed  line  width  with  the  theoret- 
ically expected  one. 

3-13    Line  Splitting 

Extranuclear  fields  can  split  the  emission  and  the  absorption  lines 
into  components.    These  splittings,  caused  by  magnetic  and  electric 
hyper  fine  interactions,  are  extremely  important  for  the  investigation 
of  solid-state  properties.  Many  typical  examples  are  quoted  in  Chap- 
ter 6.    One  tries  experimentally  to  determine  the  number  of  com- 
ponents and  their  separation  from  the  velocity  spectrum.    It  is  clear 
that  this  requires  a  sufficiently  high  velocity  resolution  and  a  knowl- 
edge of  the  absolute  velocity  scale. 

3-14   Shifts 

The  emission  and  the  absorption  lines  are  only  centered  at  the 
same  energy  if  the  corresponding  nuclei  are  in  very  similar  environ- 
ments.   This  is  very  often  not  the  case,  and  the  two  spectra  are  dis- 
placed one  with  respect  to  the  other.    This  shift  is  deduced  from  the 
velocity  spectrum.    Shifts  can  result  from  temperature  differences 
between  emitter  and  absorber  (Sec.  5-4)  and  from  isomeric  effects 
(Sec.  4-4). 

One  more  remark  needs  to  be  added  about  Fig.  3-1.    The  classical 
investigations  on  optical  and  conventional  nuclear  resonance  fluores- 
cence were  all  performed  as  scattering  experiments.    In  contrast, 
nearly  all  the  work  on  the  Mossbauer  effect  is  done  in  transmission. 
The  main  reasons  for  this  difference  are  the  relatively  large  effects 
(between  about  1  and  50  per  cent  in  most  cases)  and  the  large  inten- 
sities and  favorable  geometry  obtainable  in  transmission.    The  inten- 
sity disadvantage  of  scattering  is  increased  by  the  strong  conversion 
of  low- energy  gamma  rays;   only  a  fraction  l/(l  +  a)  of  the  absorbed 
gamma  rays  is  reemitted  [Eqs.  (9),  (10),  and  (13)].    Some  scattering 
experiments  have  nevertheless  been  performed,  either  by  observing 
the  gamma  rays  directly  (Reprint  Barloutaud  1960),  by  measuring 
the  X  rays  that  follow  the  internal  conversion  process  (Frauenfelder 
1961),  or  by  detecting  the  conversion  electrons  (Kankeleit  1961; 
Mitrofanov  1961). 

3-2    ISOTOPES 

Mossbauer  discovered  the  recoilless  gamma-ray  emission  with 
the  129-kev  gamma  ray  in  Ir191.    If  this  isotope  were  the  only  one 
displaying  such  an  effect,  experiments  would  indeed  be  very  difficult, 


APPARATUS  AND  PROBLEMS  37 


the  applications  would  be  limited,  and  interest  would  not  be  very  great. 
Fortunately,  however,  there  exist  at  least  15  nuclides  in  which  Moss- 
bauer  effect  has  been  observed.    There  is  a  good  chance  that  more 
will  be  found,  and  the  number  of  possible  experiments  is  extremely 
large. 

In  Table  3-1,  properties  of  nuclides  that  have  been  used  for  Moss- 
bauer  experiments  or  which  show  promise  for  exhibiting  such  an  ef- 
fect are  collected.35    Very  likely  this  table  is  not  complete  and  it  is 
also  possible  that  it  contains  errors.    Before  embarking  on  any  ex- 
periments based  on  this  table,  it  is  wise  to  reevaluate  all  critical 
data. 

The  table  was  originally  compiled  by  D.  Nagle  (Los  Alamos 
Scientific  Laboratory)  for  the  first  Mossbauer  conference  held  at 
the  University  of  Illinois  in  June  1960.    It  was  modified  and  checked 
by  G.  DePasquali,  R.  Morrison,  and  D.  Pipkorn  (University  of  Illinois) 
Similar  tables  can  be  found  in  the  review  by  Cotton  and  that  by  Belo- 
zerskii  and  Nemilov. 

The  entries  in  the  table  are  mostly  self-explanatory,  but  the  fol- 
lowing notes  may  be  of  some  assistance: 

Powers  of  ten  are  denoted  as  follows:    1.0  x  10"7  —  1.0(-7). 

a   =  abundance  of  stable  element,  % 

Q  =  ratio  of  gamma- ray  energy  Ey  to  line  width  r  =  ft  In  2/Ty 

a  =  total  internal  conversion  coefficient  (K  implies  aj£, 
L  implies  a^J 

R  =  recoil  energy  of  free  nucleus  in  units  of  10"2  ev 

o'0  =  Mossbauer  absorption  cross  section  in  units  of  10" 19  cm2, 
calculated  with  the  listed  values  of  the  conversion  coef- 
ficient and  assuming  natural  line  width.  In  the  case  of  an 
unknown  conversion  coefficient  the  cross  section  has  been 
calculated  by  assuming  a  =  0.    Once  a  is  known,  the  cor- 
rect cross  section  can  be  found  by  multiplying  the  value 
in  the  table  by  l/(l  +  a) 

X  =  an  effect  has  been  observed 


Table  3-1 

Nuclides  of  Interest  in  Mossbauer  Experiments 


Stable 

Ey, 

T%, 

nuclide 

a,  % 

kev 

sec 

Q          a,  e/y 

R,  10  ~2  ev 

ff'0f  10  ~19  cm2     Effect 

Fe" 

2.17 

14.4 

1.0(-7) 

3.2(12)        15 

0.19 

15                   X 

Ni" 

1.25 

71 

5.2(-9) 

8.1(11)      K  0.11 

4.4 

6.6                X 

Zn67 

4.11 

93 

9.4(-6) 

1.9(15)      K  0.63 

6.9 

1.2                X 

Ge" 

7.67 

13.5 

3.1(-6) 

1.4(14)    3600 

0.13 

0.030 

(continued) 

as  been  taken 

35  Most  of  the  information  contained  in  ' 

Table  3-1  h 

38 


THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 


Table  3-1  (continued) 


Stable 
nuclide 


Ey 
kev 


Tl/2 
sec 


ae/y       R,  10-2  ev 


10" 


Effect 


Kr83 

11.55 

9.3 

<  K-7) 

10 

0.055 

Ru99 

12.7 

89 

4.3 

Ru101 

17.0 

127 

1.4(-9) 

3.9(11) 

K  0.4 

8.5 

Ag107 

51.35 

93 

44.3 

9.0(21) 

16 

4.3 

Ag109 

48.65 

88 

39.2 

7.6(21) 

14 

3.8 

Sn117 

7.57 

161 

K0.13 

12.0 

Sn119 

8.58 

24 

1.9(-8) 

1.0(12) 

7.3 

0.26 

Sb123 

42.75 

161 

11.0 

Te123 

0.87 

159 

1.9(-10) 

6.6(10) 

K  0.17 

11.0 

Te125 

6.99 

35 

1.6(-9) 

1.2(11) 

K  12 

0.52 

I127 

100 

59 

1.9 

1.5 

Xe129 

26.44 

40 

0.67 

Xe131 

21.18 

80 

4.8(-10) 

8.4(10) 

K  1.73 

2.6 

Cs133 

100 

81 

6.0(-9) 

1.1(12) 

K  1.5 

2.7 

La139 

99.9 

163 

1.5(-9) 

5.4(11) 

K  0.22 

10.0 

Nd14S 

8.29 

67 

3.3(-8) 

4.8(12) 

K  3.3 

1.7 

72 

<  K-9) 

K3.3 

1.9 

Sm152 

26.63 

122 

1.4(-9) 

3.7(11) 

K0.7 

5.3 

Eulsl 

47.77 

22 

L  12 

0.17 

Eu153 

52.23 

84 

2.5 

97 

<  K-9) 

K0.3 

3.3 

103 

3.4(-9) 

7.7(11) 

K  1.2 

3.7 

Gd154 

2.15 

123 

1.2(-9) 

3.2(11) 

1.5 

5.3 

Gdlss 

14.7 

60 

87 

105 

K0.4 

1.2 
2.6 
3.8 

Gd156 

20.47 

89 

2    (-9) 

3.9(11) 

K  1.0 

2.7 

Gd160 

21.9 

75 

1.9 

Tb159 

100 

58 

3.5(-ll) 

4.5(9) 

K6 

1.1 

137 

5.4(-ll) 

1.6(10) 

6.3 

Dy160 

2.294 

87 

1.8(-9) 

3.4(11) 

K  1.5 

2.6 

Dy161 

18.88 

25.7 

2.8(-8) 

1.6(12) 

0.22 

74.5 

3    (-9) 

4.9(11) 

1.8 

Dy162 

25.53 

81 

3.2(-9) 

5.7(11) 

2.2 

Dy163 

24.97 

75 

1.8 

Dy164 

28.18 

73 

3.5(-9) 

5.6(11) 

K  2.7 

1.7 

Ho165 

100 

95 

3.3(-ll) 

6.9(9) 

K  1.77 

2.9 

Er164 

1.56 

91 

1.4(-9) 

2.8(11) 

K  1.9 

2.7 

Er166 

33.4 

80 

1.8(-9) 

3.2(11) 

K  1.7 

2.1 

Er168 

27.07 

79.8 

1.84(-9) 

3.2(11) 

K  2.1 

2.0 

Tm169 

100 

8.4 

4    (-9) 

7.4(10) 

0.022 

118 

5    (-U) 

1.3(10) 

K  0.7 

4.4 

Yb170 

3.03 

84.2 

1.57(-9) 

2.9(11) 

K  1.6 

2.2 

21.0 
1.0 
0.97 
0.67 
0.85 
1.7 

10.0 
0.71 
1.7 
3.1 
3.2 

30.0 
0.70 
1.1 
0.56 
0.63 
0.82 
4.8 
5.2 
4.6 
2.0 
0.70 
3.2 

10.0 
2.3 
3.3 
7.7 

22.0 
1.5 
2.6 
6.4 

37.0 
2.9 

19 
5.8 
6.2 
1.2 
5.1 
7.1 
6.2 
700 
3.1 
6.6 


(continued) 


from  D.  Strominger,  J.  M.  Hollander,  and  G.  T.  Seaborg,  Revs. 
Modern  Physics,  30,  585  (1958),  and  C.  L.  McGinnis  (ed.),  ''Nuclear 
Data  Sheets,"  National  Academy  of  Sciences-National  Research 
Council,  Washington,  D.C.,  1958-     . 


APPARATUS    AND    PROBLEMS  39 

Table  3-1  (continued) 


Stable 

Ey 

TV2, 

nuclide 

a,  % 

kev 

sec 

Q 

a  e/y 

R,  10~2  ev 

o\,  10~19  cm2 

Effect 

Ybm 

14.31 

66.7 

<  5(-7) 

1.4 

11.0 

Yb172 

21.82 

78.7 

1.9 

20.0 

YbX73 

16.13 

78.7 

1.9 

5.2 

yb174 

31.84 

76.5 

1.8 

21.0 

Lu175 

94.4 

113.8 

8    (-11) 

2.0(10) 

K  1.6 

4.0 

0.90 

Hf176 

5.21 

88.3 

1.35(-9) 

2.6(11) 

K1.32 

2.4 

6.7 

Hf177 

18.5 

113 

4.2(-10) 

1.0(11) 

K  0.75 

3.9 

1.4 

X 

Hf176 

27.1 

93.1 

1    (-9) 

2.0(11) 

2.6 

14.0 

Hf180 

35.22 

93 

1.4(-9) 

2.9(11) 

KL4.0 

2.6 

2.8 

Ta181 

100 

6.25 

6.8(-6) 

9.4(13) 

44 

0.012 

17 

136.1 

5.7(-ll) 

1.7(10) 

K  1.5 

5.5 

0.66 

X 

W"o 

0.135  102 

5 

3.1 

2.0 

W»2 

26.4 

100 

1.3(-9) 

2.9(11) 

4.5 

2.9 

2.2 

X 

W1" 

14.4 

46.5 
99.1 

9 
3.5 

0.63 
2.9 

2.3 
1.7 

W»4 

30.6 

111 

1.3(-9) 

3.2(11) 

3.6 

9.9 

W186 

28.4 

123 

1.0(-9) 

2.7(11) 

K.0.45 

4.4 

5.6 

Re185 

37.07 

125 

K  2.4 

4.5 

0.61 

Re187 

62.93 

134 

2    (-9) 

5.9(11) 

K2.1 

5.2 

0.58 

X 

Os186 

1.59 

137 

5.1(-10) 

1.5(11) 

K0.45 

5.4 

4.5 

Os188 

13.3 

155 

6.2(-10) 

2.1(11) 

K  0.40 

6.8 

3.6 

Os190 

26.4 

187 

3.5(-10) 

1.4(11) 

K0.2 

9.9 

2.9 

Os192 

41.0 

206 

2.8(-10) 

1.3(11) 

K0.16 

12.0 

2.5 

Irm 

38.5 

82.6 

3.9(-9) 

7.1(11) 

1.9 

1.8 

129 

1.4(-10) 

4.0(10) 

K2.9 

4.7 

0.56 

X 

Ir193 

61.5 

73 

5.7(-9) 

9.1(11) 

1.5 

2.3 

X 

139 

2.6(-10) 

7.9(10) 

K2.2 

5.4 

0.59 

Pt19S 

33.8 

99 

9.0 

2.7 

0.50 

129 

5.8(-10) 

1.6(11) 

4.6 

4.4 

Au197 

100 

77 

1.9(-9) 

3.2(11) 

2.5 

1.6 

0.59 

X 

Hg199 

16.84 

158 

2.4(-9) 

8.3(11) 

K0.2 

6.7 

2.4 

Hg201 

13.22 

32.1 
167.6 

0.27 
7.5 

24.0 
0.44 

3-3   SOURCES  AND  ABSORBERS 

No  time-honored  and  well-proved  recipe  exists  according  to  which 
one  can  prepare  sources  and  absorbers  that  yield  Mossbauer  lines  as 
strong  as  possible  and  as  sharp  as  the  natural  line  width.    A  proce- 
dure leading  to  the  best  results  has  to  be  found  for  each  isotope, 
mainly  by  trial  and  error.36   In  some  cases,  particularly  in  nuclides 
with  extremely  narrow  lines,  such  as  Ta181  and  Ge73,  no  resonance 
has  been  found  as  yet.    All  these  difficulties  are  due  to  solid-state 
effects  and  technical  problems,  and  one  must  learn  more  about  these 


36 One  valuable  suggestion  was  put  forward  by  S.S.  Hanna  at  the 
second  Mossbauer  conference:  "Find  yourself  a  good  chemist." 


40  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

before  he  can  predict  with  certainty  the  outcome  of  any  given  experi- 
ment.   Because  of  these  difficulties,  there  is  little  sense  in  writing 
down  general  guidelines;   indeed,  they  would  probably  mislead  ex- 
perimenters.   Indications  on  source  and  absorber  preparations  can 
be  found  in  nearly  all  the  experimental  papers  reprinted  in  the  back 
and  listed  in  the  bibliography.37 

3-4    APPARATUS 

Two  basically  different  ways  of  obtaining  the  velocity  spectrum 
are  in  use.    In  one,  the  source  (or  the  absorber)  moves  with  a  con- 
stant velocity  for  a  pre-set  time  and  the  counts  during  this  period 
are  recorded.    The  velocity  is  then  changed  to  a  new  value  and  the 
procedure  is  repeated  until  the  entire  spectrum  is  measured. 
Mossbauer's  original  work  was  performed  in  that  way  (Reprints 
Mossbauer  1958,  1959). 

In  the  second  method,  the  source  sweeps  periodically  through  a 
range  of  velocities  and  the  counts  in  predetermined  ranges  of  vel- 
ocity are  stored  in  different  channels  of  a  multichannel  analyzer. 
These  two  methods  gather  information  at  the  same  rate,  but  each 
one  has  advantages  for  certain  types  of  investigations.   With  con- 
stant velocity  drives,  small  parts  of  the  spectrum  can  be  investi- 
gated with  high  accuracy.   With  the  velocity  sweep  device,  the 
entire  spectrum  is  obtained  simultaneously  and  a  first  impression 
can  be  obtained  quickly.    In  either  case,  data  from  positive  and  neg- 
ative velocities  of  equal  magnitude  should  not  be  lumped  together 
without  ascertaining  that  the  velocity  spectrum  is  symmetric  with 
respect  to  velocity  zero. 

One  remark  is  in  order  about  vibration.    For  isotopes  like  Au197, 
where  Q  =  E    /r  ~  5x  1011,  vibrations  are  not  very  serious  and  any 
carefully  built  equipment  will  work.    For  nuclides  like  Fe57,  where 
Q  «  5  x  1012,  the  vibration  problem  is  much  more  serious.    As  a 
rule  of  thumb,  the  following  "scientific"  observation  can  be  useful: 
If  one  touches  the  equipment  lightly  with  the  fingertips  and  notices 
traces  of  vibration,  the  experiment  will  fail!    Bubbling  of  liquid  ni- 
trogen in  dewars,  for  instance,  will  widen  the  lines  considerably. 
For  nuclides  like  Zn67,  with  Q  »  1015,  every  trace  of  vibration  must 
be  carefully  eliminated. 


37  The  nuclide   Fe57  is  probably  the  one  that  is  of  most  interest 
to  groups  starting  research  and  to  instructors  designing  experi- 
ments for  students.    A  very  detailed  description  of  the  source 
preparation  is  contained  in  Margulies,  1962.    Complete  Co57  sources 
and   Fe57  absorbers  can  be  purchased  from  Nuclear  Science  and 
Engineering  Co.,   Pittsburgh,   Pa.,  and  the  U.S.  Nuclear  Corp., 
Burbank,  California. 


APPARATUS    AND    PROBLEMS 


41 


3-41    Constant- Velocity  Drives 

During  the  past  three  years,  a  number  of  constant- velocity  drives 
have  been  constructed.    None  of  these  is  so  superior  to  all  the  others 
that  it  has  replaced  them,  and  physicists  are  still  waiting  for  a  sim- 
ple, accurate,  easily  controllable,  and  vibration-free  drive. 

Three  typical  mechanical  drives  are  shown  in  Fig.  3-2.    The  ro- 
tating disk  used,  for  example,  by  DePasquali  et  al.  1960,  Shirley  et  al. 
1961,  and  shown  in  Fig.  3-2a  is  probably  the  simplest  system.    The 


Fig.  3-2     Constant- velocity  drives:  (a)  rotating  disk;   (b)  three- step 
cam;   (c)  inclined  plane.    (From  Margulies  1962.) 


42  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

gamma  ray  passing  through  the  disk  sees  in  its  direction  of  motion  a 
velocity  component  raj  sin  6,  where  r  is  the  distance  from  the  axis 
of  rotation  to  the  point  where  the  gamma  ray  passes  through  the  ab- 
sorber and  6  is  the  angle  between  the  gamma  ray  and  the  axis  of  ro- 
tation.   The  slit  shown  in  the  figure  can  be  designed  in  such  a  way 
that  an  increase  in  velocity  due  to  an  increase  in  r  is  compensated 
for  by  a  decrease  in  sin  6.    The  velocity  is  changed  by  changing  the 
angular  velocity  co.    The  main  disadvantage  of  this  system  is  the 
large  area  of  absorber  needed,    (if  the  source  is  mounted  on  a  wheel, 
the  activity  is  used  very  inefficiently.) 

A  cam,  as  shown  in  Fig.  3-2b,  is  quite  reliable  provided  the  drive 
is  vibration-free.    Usually,  one  uses  photocells  to  switch  the  counting 
system  off  shortly  before  the  follower  on  the  cam  reaches  a  maxi- 
mum or  minimum  and  starts  it  again  after  passing  these  points. 
Counts  "up"  and  "down"  are  stored  in  different  scalers,  and  two 
more  scalers  count  the  corresponding  times. 

The  inclined  plane  (Argonne  group),   shown  in  Fig.  3- 2c,  pro- 
vides a  uniform  motion  with  a  very  fine  speed  control.    In  this 
device  a  reversible  synchronous  motor  is  employed  to  drive  a 
carriage  by  means  of  an  accurately  machined  lead  screw.    Mounted 
rigidly  to  the  moving  carriage  is  a  plane  whose  angle  of  inclina- 
tion can  be  continuously  varied  between  0  and  45°.     A  shoe  piv- 
oted to  the  foot  of  an  extension  rod  slides  smoothly  along  the  in- 
clined plane,  being  held  quite  firmly  to  the  plane  by  a  thin  layer 
of  oil.    As  the  carriage  is  driven  back  and  forth,  the  extension 
rod  moves  to- and- fro,  carrying  the  absorber  with  it.    In  addition 
to  the  fine  speed  control  afforded  by  varying  the  incline  angle, 
the  lead- screw  speed  can  be  changed  by  a  system  of  gears  and 
pulleys  not  shown. 

These  three  systems  are  only  examples;   more  possibilities  for 
moving  an  object  with  constant  velocity  exists.    An  improved  version 
of  Fig.  3- 2b  uses  a  heart-shaped  cam  and  two  followers.    The  car- 
riage is  guided  up  and  down  and  never  coasts  freely.   Hydraulic  de- 
vices can  either  be  actuated  by  a  hydraulic  master  connected  to  a 
rack- and- pinion  drive  (Reprint  Pound  and  Rebka  1960)  or  by  a  sys- 
tem consisting  of  an  oil  pump  and  valves  to  control  pressure  and 
direction  of  the  oil  flow.    Surplus  servo  cylinders  from  automatic 
pilot  servo  units,  such  as  Electric  Autolite  Mark  IV,  make  excellent 
and  inexpensive  hydraulic  systems.38 

Piezoelectric  crystals  and  loudspeakers,  when  driven  so  that  they 
execute  a  saw  tooth  or  a  triangular  motion,  are  also  versatile  veloc- 
ity drives.    Extreme  care  must  be  taken,  however,  to  prevent  res- 
onances in  the  system  from  distorting  the  wave  shape.    The  best 


38 Such  units  are  available,  for  instance,  from  Herbach  and 
Rademan,  Inc.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 


APPARATUS    AND    PROBLEMS 


43 


method  consists  in  using  a  feedback  mechanism  involving  a  velocity- 
measuring  device.39 

3-42    Velocity  Sweep  Devices 

Velocity  sweep  systems,  using  a  multichannel  analyzer,  permit 
one  to  investigate  the  entire  velocity  spectrum  simultaneously  (Re- 
print Ruby  et  al.  1960).    The  basic  aspects  of  such  an  apparatus  are 
shown  in  Fig.  3-3. 


liliih, 

modulated 
spectrum 


velocity  spectrum 


Fig.  3-3     Velocity  sweep  system.    The  counts  from  the  counter  C 
are  modulated  in  the  modulator  M  by  the  velocity  spec- 
trum v(t)  and  are  then  fed  into  the  multichannel  analyzer 
MA.    The  source  S  is  mounted  on  the  driver  D;   V  is  a 
velocity  pick  up  and  A  is  the  resonant  absorber. 


The  source  is  moved  in  such  a  way  that  all  desired  velocities 
from 


max 


to  +v         are  covered  during  one  cycle.  Attached  to 
max 


the  source  is  a  velocity  pickup  which  measures  the  instantaneous 
velocity  v(t).    This  signal  is  used  to  route  the  energy- selected 
pulses  from  the  counter  into  different  channels  of  a  multichannel 
analyzer.    One  way  of  doing  it,  not  shown  in  Fig.  3-3,  is  to  feed  the 
signal  v(t)  directly  into  the  address  logic  of  a  multichannel  ana- 
lyzer.   In  the  solution  sketched  in  Fig.  3-3  the  amplitude  of  the 
pulses  from  the  counter  is  modulated  by  the  signal  v(t).    An  un- 
modified multichannel  analyzer  then  sorts  the  pulses  according  to 
their  velocity  v(t).    A  third  possibility  is  to  use  a  multichannel 


The  linearity  of  moving- coil  loudspeakers  has  been  investigated 
and  reported  on  by  J.  Baumgardner,  Argonne  National  Laboratory 
Report  ANL-6169. 


44  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

analyzer  as  a  set  of  scalers  and  route  the  counts  to  the  different 
channels  by  means  of  pulses. 

The  simplest  way  of  moving  the  source  is  to  feed  a  sine  wave  into 
the  driver.    The  velocity  v(t)  then  varies  sinusoidally  with  time.  This 
choice  of  v(t)  is  easy  to  realize  experimentally  and  one  encounters 
few  or  no  resonances  in  the  driver.    However,  the  source  spends  un- 
equal times  at  different  velocities  and  the  velocity  spectrum  must  be 
correspondingly  corrected.    This  problem  can  be  avoided  by  selecting 
a  linear  velocity  drive,  as  shown  in  Fig.  3-3.    The  motion  x(t)  of  the 
source  then  must  be  a  double  parabola.    Such  motion  must  be  care- 
fully controlled  by  feedback  in  order  to  prevent  distortions. 

Velocity  pickups  can  be  constructed  in  different  ways.    The  sim- 
plest one  is  to  employ  a  loud  speaker  with  two  voice  coils,  use  one 
for  driving  the  speaker  cone  and  the  other  to  measure  v(t).    A  simi- 
lar solution  consists  in  coupling  two  speakers  either  by  a  mechanical 
link  or  through  the  air.    A  pickup  coil  can  also  be  rigidly  attached  to 
the  source  and  placed  in  a  uniform  magnetic  field.    A  condenser  or  a 
commercially  available  velocity-measuring  device40  can  also  be  used. 
All  these  velocity  pickups  can  be  used  to  route  the  pulses  and  to 
serve  as  feedback  devices  in  controlling  the  motion  of  the  driver. 

3-43   Special  Velocity  Drives 

In  addition  to  the  more  conventional  systems  described  in  Sees. 
3-41  and  3-42,  other  possibilities  exist.    One  is  the  "temperature 
drive/'   If  source  and  absorber  have  different  temperatures,  the 
emission  and  absorption  lines  will  be  shifted  with  respect  to  each 
other  (cf.  Sec.  5-4).    This  shift  can  be  used  to  trace  out  a  resonance 
line.    Another  possibility  is  provided  by  phase  modulation,  which  is 
discussed  in  Sec.  5-5  (see  also  Reprint  Grodzins  and  Phillips  1961). 
The  relativistic  drive  offers  a  third  possibility.    The  source  is  at  the 
center  of  a  rotor  and  the  absorber  on  the  rim.    The  transverse  Dop- 
pler  effect  then  provides  a  small  and  very  accurately  controllable 
shift  (cf.  Sec.  5-3).    These  three  methods  allow  the  investigation  of 
very  small  shifts  and  are  hence  extremely  well  suited  for  the  study 
of  very  narrow  lines. 

3-5    CORRECTIONS 

Corrections  and  checks  are  necessary  in  order  to  ensure  that  the 
results  of  a  Mossbauer  experiment  are  correct. 

3-51    Background 

The  background  B  due  to  other  gamma  rays  and  to  X  rays  must 
be  subtracted  from  the  measured  counting  rates  Iexp  in  order  to  get 

40  E.g.,   LVsyn  Transducers,  Sanborn  Co.,  Waltham,  Mass. 


APPARATUS  AND  PROBLEMS  45 


the  true  counting  rates  l(v).    Equation  (59)  then  reads 

I        H  -  I        (v) 

*(v>=eXtP      H!XBP  (60) 

iexpv  '      D 

Mossbauer  experiments  are  usually  performed  with  gamma  rays  of 
energies  below  100  kev,  and  X  rays  hence  are  often  very  disturbing. 
Very  careful  investigation  of  the  pulse-height  spectrum  is  necessary; 
additional  information  about  the  background  can  also  be  gained  from 
absorption  experiments. 

3-52   Source  and  Absorber  Thickness 

The  corrections  for  finite  source  and  absorber  thickness  can  be 
quite  complicated,  particularly  if  the  lines  do  not  possess  a  Lorent- 
zian  shape  and  if  they  are  split.    Only  a  few  remarks  are  given 
here,  in  order  to  outline  some  of  the  difficulties. 

The  broadening  of  an  absorption  line  in  the  Mossbauer  effect  due 
to  finite  absorber  thickness  has  first  been  treated  by  W.  M.  Visscher 
(unpublished  notes).    He  found  that  if  emission  and  absorption  lines 
have  Lorentzian  shapes  of  width  T,  the  overlap  curve  will  also  be  a 
Lorentzian  but  will  show  an  apparent  width  r         given  by  the  relations 


Tapp/r  =  2.00  +  0.27T         0  ^  T  <  5 

rapp/r  =  2.02  +  0.29T  -  0.005T2         4  &  T  &  10 


(61) 


Here  T  is  the  effective  absorber  thickness,  given  by 

T  =  f  naa0t  (62) 

where  f  is  the  fraction  of  gamma  rays  absorbed  without  energy  loss, 
n  is  the  number  of  atoms  per  cubic  centimeter,  a  the  fractional 
abundance  of  the  resonantly  absorbing  atoms,   a0  the  absorption  cross 
section  at  resonance  [i.e.,  Eq.  (10)  at  resonance],  and  t   the  absorber 
thickness.    Visscher' s  relations  are  useful  for  quick  estimates. 
Margulies  and  Ehrman  (Reprint)  have  extended  Visscher' s  calcula- 
tions and  their  paper  gives  graphs  for  various  cases  of  interest. 

If  the  shape  of  the  emission  and  the  absorption  lines  is  given  by 
a  Gaussian  distribution,  the  line  broadening  is  much  less  pronounced 
than  for  Lorentzian  shapes.    A  comparison  of  the  line  broadening  for 
the  two  shapes  is  given  in  Fig.  3^4.    It  is  clear  from  Fig.  3-4  that 
one  must  be  extremely  careful  in  extrapolations  to  zero  absorber 
thickness. 

So  far  the  discussion  has  been  restricted  to  unsplit  emission  and 
absorption  lines.    In  the  case  of  hyper  fine  splitting,  the  analysis  of 


46 


THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 


-  T  =  f'nacrot0 


Fig.  3-4    Ratio  of  apparent  full  width  at  half  height  to  the 
widths  of  the  emission  and  absorption  lines  as  a 
functions  of  the  effective  absorber  thickness  T. 
The  source  is  assumed  to  be  thin  (nonresonant). 
(Margulies  1962.) 

the  transmission  becomes  more  complicated  but  it  can  still  be  ob- 
tained from  a  straightforward  generalization  of  the  results  given  in 
the  Reprint  by  Margulies  and  Ehrman  (M-E)  (see  Margulies  1962). 
Some  of  the  essential  features  can  be  summarized  as  follows:  If  only 
the  emission  line  is  split,  and  if  Wi  is  the  relative  intensity  of  the 
i-th  emission  line,  then  equation  16  of  M-E  is  still  valid,  provided  f 
is  replaced  by  fW^.  If  only  the  absorption  line  is  split,  the  effective 
thickness  of  the  resonance  absorber  corresponding  to  the  j-th  ab- 
sorption line  is  not  T  but  W^T,  where  Wj   is  the  relative  intensity  of 
the  j-th  absorption  line.  The  absorber,  for  any  given  line,  appears 
thinner  than  it  really  is.  This  fact  must  be  kept  in  mind  when  deter- 
mining the  line  broadening  from  (61)  or  from  Fig.  3-4. 


3-53    Velocity  Resolution 

In  any  apparatus,  the  gamma  rays  will  traverse  the  absorber  at 
various  angles,  not  just  normal.  This  spread  in  angle  introduces  a 
spread  in  velocity  which  must  be  taken  into  account  for  accurate  line- 
width  determinations. 


APPARATUS  AND  PROBLEMS  47 

3-54   Reemission 

In  most  transmission  experiments,  one  assumes  that  a  resonant 
gamma  ray  which  has  been  absorbed  will  not  be  registered  in  the 
counter.  In  general,  this  is  not  true  and  the  amount  of  reradiation, 
which  depends  on  the  conversion  coefficient  and  the  solid  angle  of  the 
counter,  must  be  calculated  and  taken  into  account  (Obenshain  and 
Wegener  1961). 

3-6   USEFUL  INFORMATION 

Some  data  useful  in  preparing  and  evaluating  Mossbauer  experi- 
ments are  collected  in  this  section. 

A  nucleus  of  mass  number  A  decays  from  an  excited  state  with 
spin  Ib,  mean  life  r,  or  half- life  Tl/2,  to  a  stable  ground  state  with 
spin  Ia,  and  emits  a  gamma  ray  of  energy  E  with  a  total  conversion 
coefficient  a.  The  recoil  energy  R  of  the  free  nucleus,  the  maximum 
resonance  absorption  cross  section  o'0  and  the  natural  line  width  r 
are  then  given  by 

R(ev)  «  5.37  x  10"4  E(kev)/A  (63) 

2.45  x  109    21b  +  1       1 


(64) 


E2  (kev)      2IA+  1    1  +  a 
r(ev)  =  6.58  x  10"16/T(sec) 

=  4.55x  10-16/T1/2  (sec)  (65) 

Assume  now  that  the  nucleus  is  embedded  in  a  solid  and  that  the 
solid  can  be  described  in  sufficient  approximation  by  the  Debye  model, 
with  a  Debye  temperature  O.  The  fraction  f  of  gamma  rays  emitted 
without  energy  loss  to  the  lattice  is  then  given  by  (52)  and  (53).  These 
equations  have  been  evaluated  by  Mossbauer  and  Wiedemann  (1960) 
and  by  Cotton  (1960).  The  curves  presented  in  Fig.  3-5  were  made  by 
A.  H.  Muir,  Jr.41 

To  determine  f  from  Fig.  3-5  one  calculates  the  ratios  0/T 
and  R/0.  T  is  the  temperature  of  the  solid  and  R  is  given  (in  ev)  by 
Eq.  (63).  The  curves  in  Fig.  3-5  are  labeled  by  R/6  in  units  of 
ev/°K. 

The  selection  of  an  appropriate  Debye  temperature  is  not  easy. 
First,  published  Debye  temperatures  (e.g.,Refs.  42  to  44)for  any  given 
substance  vary  widely,  depending  on  the  method  of  determination. 
Second,  even  if  one  finds  a  unique  value  in  the  literature,  it  is  not  cer- 
tain that  it  will  fit  the  results  from  Mossbauer  experiments.  In  Table 


41  A.  H.  Muir,  Jr.,  Atomics  International  Report  AI-6699  (1961) 


48 

f*  1 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 

0.2 

0.1 
0.08 
0.06 
0.04 

0.02 
0.01 


THE    MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 


P 

p*- 

/    1 

/    * 

/ 

<0 

/          <0 

/    / 

if 

'  -•/ 

«v 

&' 

i 

/ 

V 

i 

7 

i 

/ 

/ 

-* 

/ 

/ 

f 

1 1 

/ 

J 

i  . 

^ 

/ 

/ 

i 

1 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

I 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

1 

/ 

/ 

/ 

1 

/ 

/ 

f 

f 

/ 

/ 

"^      to  00 

O        ©    ©    r-l 


CO    00 

d  © 


CO  oo  o 


Fig.  3-5     Graph  for  determining  the  fraction  f  as  a  func- 
tion of  0/T  for  various  values  of  R/0.  The 
parameter  labeling  each  curve  is  R/0  in  units 
of  ev/°K.  (From  A.  H.  Muir,  Jr.,  Atomics  In- 
ternational Report  AI-6699.) 

3-2  the  Debye  temperature  of  iron,  as  found  in  three  compilations,  is 
compared  with  the  latest  value  obtained  by  the  Mossbauer  effect.  This 
table  shows  that  one  has  to  be  very  careful  in  using  published  data 
when  designing  an  experiment. 


42  "American  Institute  of  Physics  Handbook/'  McGraw-Hill,  New 
York,  1957,  pp.  4-47  to  4-49. 

43  F.  Seitz,  "The  Modern  Theory  of  Solids,"  McGraw-Hill,  New 
York,  1940,  p.  110. 

44 M.  W.  Holm,  "Debye  Characteristic  Temperatures,' '  Phillips 
Petroleum  Co.  Report  IDO-16399,  Office  of  Technical  Services,  U.S. 
Department  of  Commerce,  Washington  25,  D.  C. 

45 S.  S.  Hanna,  in  "Proceedings  of  the  Second  Mossbauer  Conference,' 
A.  Schoen  and  D.  M.  J.  Compton  (eds.),  Wiley,  New  York,  tentative  pub- 
lication Spring  1962. 


APPARATUS  AND  PROBLEMS  49 

Table  3-2 
Comparison  of  Debye  Temperature  of  Iron  Found  by 
Conventional  Methods  with  That  Deduced  from  the  Mossbauer  Effect 

Method  0,°K  Ref. 


Conventional 

355 

42 

420 

43 

420-460 

44 

Mossbauer 

490 

45 

NUCLEAR  PROPERTIES 


4-1    INTRODUCTION 

In  many  ways,  investigations  on  the  Mossbauer  effect  follow  a  path 
along  which  nuclear  resonance  experiments  have  been  going.  The  dis- 
covery of  the  Mossbauer  effect  grew  out  of  the  study  of  a  nuclear  prop- 
erty, namely,  the  lifetime  of  the  first  excited  state  in  Ir191.  This  goal 
was  attained,  but  at  the  same  time  a  powerful  tool  for  solving  other 
problems  was  created.  Indeed,  the  main  applications  in  the  past  two 
years  have  not  been  to  nuclear  physics,  but  to  other  fields,  such  as 
relativity  and  solid-state  physics.  Despite  this  development  in  an  un- 
expected direction,  applications  to  nuclear  physics  remain  challenging. 
A  few  of  these  are  sketched  in  Sees.  4-2  to  4-5. 

Many  of  the  discussions  in  this  and  the  following  chapters  refer  to 
Fe57,  probably  the  most  used  of  the  "Mossbauer  nuclides."   For  this 
reason  the  decay  scheme  of  Fe57  is  shown  in  Fig.  4-1. 

270-day  Co57 

electron  capture 
0.137  Mev 


91% 


0.01437  Mev    T  =  1.4  x  10"7  sec 
0    stable  ground  state  of  Fe57 


Fig.  4-1     Decay  scheme  of  Fe57.   The  14.4-kev  transition 
3/2  —  1/2  is  the  one  used  in  many  Mossbauer 
experiments. 


50 


NUCLEAR    PROPERTIES  51 

4-2    LIFETIME  AND  CONVERSION  COEFFICIENT 

In  conventional  nuclear  resonance  fluorescence  experiments10"12 
one  can  measure  the  scattering  cross  section  and  is  able  to  deduce 
the  gamma-ray  width  Ty  by  using  (9)  modified  to  take  into  account 
the  Doppler  broadening.  This  procedure  is  rather  indirect,  and  the 
Mdssbauer  effect  permits  a  more  straightforward  approach,  yielding 
both  T  and  IV.   The  total  line  width  r  is  found  by  tracing  out  the  ab- 
sorption or  the  scattering  line  by  using  the  Doppler  effect,  as  sketched 
in  Fig.  3-1.  The  ratio  of  the  scattering  and  the  absorption  cross  sec- 
tion, Eqs.  (9)  and  (10),  yields   Ty/T  .  From  the  total  line  width  one  im- 
mediately gets  the  total  lifetime  r  by  (3)  or  (65).  From  the  ratio 
Ty/T ,  one  finds  the  total  conversion  coefficient  a  by  (13). 

The  measurement  of  the  line  width  to  determine  the  lifetime  was 
first  used  by  Mossbauer  (Reprint  1958)  in  the  case  of  Ir191.  In  a  later 
investigation,  Mossbauer  and  Wiedemann  (1960)  were  able  to  find  a 
value  of  t  =  (1.5  ±  0.2)  X  10"11  sec  for  the  lifetime  of  the  134-kev  ex- 
cited state  in  Re187.  This  lifetime  is  at  present  the  shortest  one  that 
has  been  determined  by  the  Mossbauer  effect. 

Despite  the  simplicity  of  this  method,  some  difficulties  exist.  For 
lifetimes  of  the  order  of  10"10  sec  or  longer,  extranuclear  fields  can 
widen  the  line,  and  one  may  find  apparent  lifetimes  that  are  shorter 
than  the  real  ones.  The  14.4-kev  transition  in  Fe57  (Fig.  4-1)  offers 
an  excellent  example  for  these  difficulties.  The  lifetime  of  the  3/2 
state  is  known  from  electronic  measurements  to  be  r  =  1.4  xl0"7sec. 
According  to  (65)  the  corresponding  line  width  is  4.7 xlO-9  ev.   All  the 
early  experiments,  however,  yielded  line  widths  considerably  larger 
than  that.  Only  after  the  source  and  absorber  preparation  was  care- 
fully investigated  did  experiments  yield  values  Texp  within  10  per 
cent  of  the  expected  one.  Hence  very  careful  measurements  of  the 
line  shape  and  a  thorough  understanding  of  the  solid-state  processes 
involved  in  the  line  widening  are  prerequisites  for  valid  estimates  of 
lifetimes  longer  than,  say,  10"10  sec. 

Difficulties  may  also  arise  for  very  short  lifetimes.  If  the  nuclear 
lifetime  becomes  comparable  to,  or  shorter  than,  the  inverse  of  the 
Debye  frequency  (~  10"13  sec),  it  may  be  impossible  to  distinguish  re- 
coilless  transitions  from  those  in  which  the  lattice  takes  up  energy. 
Furthermore,  heat  spikes  due  to  previous  decays  may  well  destroy 
the  effect.  Investigations  in  this  range  are  very  desirable  and  they 
will  probably  yield  information  not  only  about  nuclear  lifetimes,  but 
also  about  solid-state  processes  connected  with  nuclear  decays. 

4-3    NUCLEAR  MOMENTS 

The  Mossbauer  effect  permits  the  determination  of  nuclear  mo- 
ments, i.e.,  spin,  magnetic  dipole  moment,  and  electric  quadrupole 
moment,  in  a  rather  direct  way,  provided  certain  conditions  are  met. 


52  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

Consider  as  the  simplest  example  a  nuclide  with  spin  0  in  the  ground 
state  A  and  spin  IB,  magnetic  moment  /xB,  and  g  factor  gB  in  the 
excited  state  B.  Assume  further  that  emitting  and  absorbing  nuclei 
are  embedded  in  solids  in  such  a  way  that  the  nuclei  see  no  magnetic 
field  or  electric  field  gradient.  The  emission  and  absorption  lines 
will  be  unsplit.  If  one  now  applies  an  external  magnetic  field  H  to 
source  or  absorber,  the  corresponding  line  will  split  into  2IB  +  1 
equally  spaced  components,  with  a  separation  between  components  of 

A=gBM0H  (66) 

Here  /i0  is  the  nuclear  magneton,  /j.0  =  5.05  x  10"24  erg/gauss 

=  3.15  x  10"12  ev/gauss.  If  the  separation  is  larger  than  the  width  2T 

of  the  overlap  line  (Fig.  3-1),  i.e.,  if 

gBM0H  2  2T  =  2ti/r  (67) 

the  number  of  components  can  be  counted  and  one  has  found  the  spin 
IB.  From  the  splitting  A,  one  determines  the  nuclear  g  factor  gB  if 
the  external  field  is  known.  The  nuclear  g  factor  and  the  spin  to- 
gether yield  the  magnetic  moment,  jiB  =  gBMo^B-  As  an  example  for 
condition  (67),  take  gB  =  1,  H  =  105  gauss.  A  separation  is  then  possi- 
ble for  r  £  6  x  10"9  sec. 

If  condition  (67)  is  not  fulfilled,  the  spin  IB  cannot  be  determined 
simply  by  counting  the  number  of  components.  Nevertheless  it  is  often 
possible  to  find  an  approximate  value  of  the  g  factor  by  measuring  the 
increase  in  line  width  as  a  function  of  the  applied  field  H. 

The  situation  encountered  usually  is  more  complicated  than  out- 
lined above,  since  the  ground-state  spin  will  in  general  not  be  zero 
and  very  large  internal  fields  are  often  present.  The  first  problem, 
nonzero  ground- state  spin,  results  in  the  observation  of  more  than 
2IB  +  1  components.  Usually,  however,  the  ground- state  spin  and  mo- 
ments can  be  measured  with  conventional  techniques  and  their  knowl- 
edge permits  one  to  unravel  the  complex  spectrum.  Moreover,  polar- 
ization experiments  can  help  to  reduce  the  number  of  components  and 
to  make  their  identification  easier  (see  Sec.  5-9). 

The  presence  of  very  strong  internal  magnetic  fields  in  ferromag- 
netic and  paramagnetic  substances  introduces  complications  on  the 
one  hand,  but,  on  the  other,  allows  the  determination  of  g  factors  that 
otherwise  would  be  difficult  to  find.  Indeed,  the  first  observation  of 
the  Zeeman  effect  of  a  nuclear  gamma  ray  was  performed  by  using 
the  internal  magnetic  field  in  Fe57  (Pound  and  Rebka  1959a,  DePasquali 
et  al.  1960,  Reprint  Hanna  et  al.  1960).  Two  limiting  cases  must  be 
distinguished  when  considering  internal  fields.  One  extreme  occurs 
when  the  field  can  be  considered  to  be  a  static  external  field;  the  num- 
ber and  splitting  of  components  observed  in  a  given  direction  is  then 


NUCLEAR    PROPERTIES  53 

given  by  the  nuclear  moments  and  the  direction  and  magnitude  of  the 
magnetic  field.  This  case  is  approached,  for  instance,  by  Fe57  in  iron. 
The  other  extreme  corresponds  to  free  atoms  where  the  hyperfine  in- 
teraction is  governed  by  the  usual  spectroscopic  rules:  If  the  atomic 
spin  is  denoted  by  J,  the  multiplicity  of  components  depends  on  J  also. 
For  instance,  if  J  <Ia>  the  ground  state  splits  only  into  2 J  +  1  mag- 
netic sublevels.  Obviously,  a  free  atom  cannot  exhibit  a  Mossbauer 
effect.  However,  in  the  rare  earth  elements  situations  can  arise 
where  transitions  without  energy  loss  occur  and  where  at  the  same 
time  the  unfilled  inner  shells  can  be  treated  like  free  atoms. 

To  investigate  the  quadrupole  coupling  Q- VE,  where  Q  is  the  nu- 
clear quadrupole  moment  and  VE  the  electric  field  gradient  at  the 
nuclear  site,  one  must  place  source  or  absorber  nuclei  in  a  surround- 
ing with  a  high  electric  field  gradient  VE  and  measure  the  resulting 
splitting.  If  one  wants  to  find  the  quadrupole  moment  Q,  one  must 
calculate  the  field  gradient. 

The  first  experimental  investigation  of  quadrupole  effects  was  done 
by  Kistner  and  Sunyar,  using  Fe57.  Fe57  is  well  suited  for  this  purpose, 
since  the  ground- state  spin  1/2  prevents  the  ground  state  from  having 
a  quadrupole  moment,  and  only  the  splitting  due  to  the  excited  state 
with  spin  3/2  must  be  taken  into  account.   Kistner  and  Sunyar  showed 
that  the  splitting  of  Fe57  embedded  in  antiferromagnetic  Fe203  can  be 
explained  by  a  superposition  of  magnetic  hyperfine  structure  and  quad- 
rupole interaction  (Reprint  Kistner  and  Sunyar  1960).  In  the  meantime, 
many  examples  have  been  found  in  which  only  quadrupole  splitting  ex- 
ists (see,  for  instance,  Reprint  DeBenedetti  1961). 

The  number  of  publications  reporting  investigations  of  magnetic  and 
quadrupole  interactions  in  various  systems  with  various  nuclides  is 
growing  steadily,  and  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  bibliography. 

Incidentally,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  measurements  of  mo- 
ments of  excited  states  by  the  Mossbauer  effect  have  already  led  to 
additional  theoretical  investigations.  Attempts  to  derive  the  quadru- 
pole moment  of  the  3/2  state  in  Fe57  have  been  made,46'47  and  the 
magnetic  moment  of  the  3/2  state  has  turned  out  to  be  a  sensitive 
measure  for  the  validity  of  nuclear  model  calculations.48  (See  also 
Abragam  1961,  Gastebois  1961.) 

4-4    ISOMERIC  SHIFTS  (CHEMICAL  SHIFTS)49 

In  atomic  spectroscopy,  lines  from  an  isotopic  mixture  show  a 
splitting  which  is  not  present  in  the  spectrum  of  an  isotopically  pure 


46R.  Bersohn,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  609  (1960). 
47 G.  Burns,  Phys.  Rev.,  124,  524  (1961). 


48R.  D.  Lawson  and  M.  H.  Macfar lane,  Nuclear  Phys.,  24, 18  (1961). 
49 Both  terms,  isomeric  and  chemical  shift,  are  used  in  the  litera- 
ture to  denote  the  same  effect. 


54  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

element.  In  heavy  elements,  this  isotopic  splitting  is  due  to  the  fact 
that  the  addition  of  one  or  more  neutrons  changes  the  nuclear  radius. 
This  change,  in  turn,  shifts  the  atomic  energy  levels.50'55  A  change  in 
the  radius  can  occur  even  without  a  change  in  nucleon  number  when 
the  nucleus  goes  from  one  state  to  another,  for  instance,  when  it  de- 
cays from  an  isomeric  state  to  the  ground  state.  The  corresponding 
shift  in  energy  is  called  an  isomeric  shift  and  such  a  shift  of  atomic 
energy  levels  has  recently  been  observed  in  Hg197.56 

A  change  in  nuclear  radius  which  shifts  the  atomic  energy  levels 
will  obviously  also  affect  the  nuclear  levels  by  the  same  amount.  An 
isomeric  shift  has  indeed  been  observed  in  the  Mossbauer  effect  and 
this  shift  may  well  turn  out  to  yield  more  information  about  nuclear 
and  solid-state  physics  than,  for  instance,  the  lifetime  measurements 
described  in  Sec.  4-2.  The  first  unambiguous  observation  of  an  iso- 
meric shift  was  made  by  Kistner  and  Sunyar  (Reprint  1960),  using 
Fe57.  Subsequently,  isomeric  shifts  were  investigated  with  Fe57  (e.g., 
Solomon  1960;  Reprint  DeBenedetti  1960,  Wertheim  1961);  with  Sn119 
(Boyle  1961);  and  with  Au197  (Shirley  1961).  Systematic  discussions  of 
the  isomeric  shifts  have  been  published  by  Walker  et  al.  (Reprint  1961) 
and  by  Shirley  (1961). 

In  the  present  section  the  physical  idea  underlying  the  isomer  shift 
will  be  outlined  in  simplest  terms.  As  pointed  out  above,  a  change  in 
the  electrostatic  interaction  between  the  nucleus  and  its  electron  shell 
is  responsible  for  the  equal  energy  shifts  of  the  atomic  and  the  nuclear 
levels.  The  observation  of  these  two  effects  is  entirely  different,  how- 
ever. Consider  first  the  atomic  isotope  and  isomer  shift.  Isotopes, 
and  isomers  have  the  same  electron  shell  but  different  nuclear  radii. 
The  same  atomic  transition  hence  can  have  a  different  energy  in  two 
atoms  which  contain  nuclei  in  different  states,  provided  the  two  atomic 
states  involved  in  the  transition  are  affected  differently  by  the  change 
in  nuclear  radius.  Otherwise  both  levels  are  shifted  by  equal  amounts 
and  no  net  change  in  the  transition  energy  results.  In  the  nuclear  iso- 
mer shift,  one  compares  the  same  nuclear  transition  in  two  atomic 
systems  which  have  different  electronic  wave  functions  at  the  nucleus. 


50  H.  Kopfermann,  "Kernmomente,"  Akademische  Verlagsgesell- 
schaft,  Frankfurt,  1956;  "Nuclear  Moments,"  Academic  Press,  New 
York,  1958. 

51  K.  W.  Ford  and  D.  L.  Hill,  Ann.  Rev. Nuclear  Sci.,  5,  25  (1955). 

52  J.  E.  Mack  and  H.  Arroe,  Ann.  Rev.  Nuclear  Sci.,  6,  117  (1956). 

53  D.  L.  Hill,  Matter  and  Charge  Distribution  within  Atomic  Nuclei, 
"Encyclopedia  of  Physics,"  Springer,  Berlin,  1957,  Vol.  39,  p.  178. 

54 G.  Breit,  Revs.  Modern  Phys.,  30,  507  (1958). 

55  L.  R.  B.  Elton,  "Nuclear  Sizes,"  Oxford  University  Press,  New 
York,  1961. 

56  A.  C.  Melissinos  and  S.  P.  Davis,  Phys.  Rev.,  115,  130  (1959). 


NUCLEAR     PROPERTIES 


55 


A  shift  can  only  be  seen  if  the  two  nuclear  states  involved  have  differ- 
ent radii;  otherwise  both  levels  involved  in  the  transition  change  by 
the  same  amount,  and  the  gamma-ray  energy  is  not  affected.  The  re- 
quirements for  the  observation  of  a  nuclear  isomeric  shift  hence  are: 

1.  The  two  nuclear  states  involved  must  have  different  charge  dis- 
tributions. 

2.  There  must  be  electronic  wave  functions  (usually  from  s  elec- 
trons) which  overlap  appreciably  with  the  nuclear  wave  functions. 

3.  These  wave  functions  must  be  sensitive  to  external  (chemical) 
changes. 

All  three  requirements  are  justified  by  the  following  simple  calcu- 
lation. 

In  order  to  calculate  the  shift  of  the  nuclear  energy  levels,  consider 
first  a  point  nucleus,  of  charge   Ze,  with  two  levels  A  and  B,  sepa- 
rated by  an  energy  E0.  The  electrostatic  potential  created  by  this 
point  nucleus  is  shown  as  a  dotted  line  in  Fig.  4-2.  Now  consider  an- 
other nucleus,  of  equal  charge,  but  with  radius  Ra  in  the  ground  state 
A  and  a  radius  Rg  in  the  excited  state  B,  as  shown  in  Fig.  4-2.  Be- 
cause of  the  diminished  interaction  with  the  electrons,  the  two  levels 
A  and  B  will  lie  higher  for  this  nucleus  than  they  did  for  the  point 


RARB 


►  r 


u 


^"constant 
potential 
nucleus 


V(r) 
Fig.  4-2 


Ze/r 


-_IEEB 


Ej 


1AEA 


Electrostatic  potential  for  a  point  nucleus  and 
for  a  constant  potential  nucleus .  The  radius  Ra 
of  the  ground  state  is  assumed  to  be  smaller 
than  the  radius  Rg  for  the  excited  state.  The 
level  shifts  from  point  nucleus  to  finite- size 
nucleus  are  shown  on  the  right. 


nucleus  (Fig.  4-2).  To  find  for  instance  the  shift  AE^  one  determines 
the  contribution  to  the  total  energy  of  the  system  which  comes  from 
the  electrostatic  interaction.  The  potential  from  Ra  to  infinity  is  the 
same  for  the  finite  as  for  the  point  nucleus.  Hence  only  the  volume 
from  0  to  Ra  needs  to  be  taken  into  account  when  determining  the  en- 
ergy shift.  If  one  assumes  that  the  wave  function  ^(r)  of  the  relevant 
electrons  is  essentially  constant  over  the  distances  involved  and  can 
be  replaced  by  ^(0),  the  contribution  to  the  interaction  energy  from 
this  volume  is  given  by 


56  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

E(Ra)  =  -  /    y(r)e  l^(°)|2  47ri*2  dr  (68) 

o 

where  V(r)  is  the  electrostatic  potential  created  by  the  nucleus.  For 
a  point  nucleus,  V(r)  =  Ze/r,  and  one  finds 

EP(RA)  =  -2;rZe2R2A|*(0)|2  (69) 

The  energy  E(R^)  for  a  finite  nucleus  depends  on  the  charge  distri- 
bution. Easiest  to  calculate  is  the  surface  charge  model  (top-slice 
model),  where  the  electrostatic  potential  is  constant  from  the  center 
to  the  nuclear  surface  and  joins  the  outside  potential  at  r  =  R.  This 
potential  is  shown  in  Fig.  4-2,  and  its  contribution  is  given  by 

Eg(RA)  =  -  (4/3)77  Ze2R2A  |*(0)  |2  (70) 

The  difference  between  the  expressions  (70)  and  (69)  yields  the  shift 

AEA  =  Eg(RA)  -  Ep(RA)  =  (2/3)77 Ze2R2A |^(0) |2  (71) 

The  assumption  of  a  surface  charge  is  unrealistic,  but  the  calculation 
can  easily  be  performed  with  a  nuclear  charge  density  p(r).  The  re- 
sult has  exactly  the  same  form  as  Eq.  (71),  but  the  nuclear  radius  R^ 
is  replaced  by  the  root-mean-square  radius 

<RA>  =  /p(r)r2  dv  =  477  /p(r)r4  dr  (72) 

The  transition  energy  between  two  levels  B  and  A  becomes 

EJ  =  E0  +  AEB-  AEA  =  E0  +(2/3)  77Ze2|*(0)|2  [<Ra>-  <rb>] 

(73) 

Ordinarily,  it  is  impossible  to  observe  such  a  small  energy  change. 
However,  if  one  performs  a  Mossbauer  experiment  and  uses  source 
and  absorber  with  different  chemical  environments  such  that  the  wave 
functions  at  the  nuclei  in  the  emitter  e  and  the  absorber  a  are  differ- 
ent, one  finds  for  the  difference  in  gamma-ray  energy  from  (73) 

6=Ea-Ee  =  (2/3)7rZe2[<R2B>-<R2A>]{|^(0)a|2-|^(0)e|2}  (74) 

Equation  (74)  justifies  the  three  requirements  listed  above,  and  it 
gives  the  correct  order  of  magnitude  for  the  isomeric  shift.  However, 
for  many  applications  a  more  accurate  formula  is  desired.  Relevant 
derivations  and  equations  can  be  found  in  refs.  50  to  55  and  57,  and  in 


57 


A.  R.  Bodmer,  Nuclear  Phys.,  21,  347  (1960), 


NUCLEAR    PROPERTIES  57 

the  publication  by  Shirley  (1961).  Applications  of  (74)  are  contained  in 
the  Reprints  by  DeBenedetti  et  al.  and  Walker  et  al. 

Equation  (74)  also  shows  that  information  on  two  different  fields 
can  be  obtained  from  isomeric-shift  experiments.  On  the  one  hand, 
differences  in  the  nuclear  radius  between  ground  state  and  excited 
state  can  be  measured.  On  the  other  hand,  changes  in  the  wave  func- 
tion of  s  electrons  can  be  studied  in  various  substances.  Both  ave- 
nues offer  exciting  possibilities  for  further  investigations. 

4-5    PARITY  EXPERIMENTS 

The  observation  of  the  intensity  and  of  the  polarization  of  individual 
Zeeman  components  of  nuclear  gamma  rays  (Sees.  4-2  and  5-9)  per- 
mits the  investigation  of  parity  conservation  in  strong  and  weak  inter- 
actions. Grodzins  and  Genovese  (1961)  have  tested  the  parity  conser- 
vation in  strong  interactions  in  the  14.4-kev  transition  in  Fe57  by  com- 
paring the  transition  rates  for  the  Am  =  ±  1  components  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  nuclear  polarization  with  those  opposite  to  it.   They  found 
the  relative  strength  of  a  parity  admixed  wave  function  to  be  less 
than  lO-5. 

Morita  (1961)  has  suggested  experiments  testing  parity  conserva- 
tion and  time-reversal  invariance  in  weak  interactions. 


GENERAL  PHYSICS 


5-1    SURVEY 


Those  applications  of  the  Mossbauer  effect  that  are  not  nuclear 
or  solid-state  physics  are  reviewed  in  this  chapter.  When  going 
through  the  various  sections,  one  realizes  that  such  a  division  is  very 
arbitrary  and  that  it  should  only  be  understood  as  a  scheme  for  ar- 
ranging things.  Actually,  one  of  the  beautiful  aspects  of  the  Moss- 
bauer effect  is  that  it  shows  the  unity  of  physics  and  connects  seem- 
ingly unrelated  fields. 

Comparing  the  applications  in  Sees.  5-2  to  5-5  with  those  of  Chaps. 
4  and  6,  one  notices  that  they  belong  to  a  different  class.  Indeed, 
rather  than  divide  the  various  topics  as  is  done  in  this  book,  one  can 
equally  well  distinguish  two  classes:  (1)  experiments  depending  on  the 
line  width  T,  and  (2)  experiments  depending  on  Q  =  E/r,  the  ratio  of 
the  transition  energy  to  the  line  width. 

It  is  really  for  class  2  that  the  Mossbauer  effect  shows  its  superi- 
ority as  a  research  tool;  it  is  surprising  that  more  experiments  have 
not  been  done  which  take  advantage  of  the  extremely  high  Q  values 
available  with  nuclides  such  as  Fe57  and  Zn67. 

5-2    GRAVITATIONAL  RED  SHIFT  (APPARENT  WEIGHT  OF 
PHOTONS) 

Einstein's  theory  of  relativity  has  always  held  a  particular  fasci- 
nation for  the  scientist  and  the  layman  alike,  and  it  has  stirred  imag- 
ination as  no  other  theory  has  done  in  the  present  century.  It  is  there- 
fore not  surprising  that  the  use  of  the  Mossbauer  effect  to  study  prob- 
lems connected  with  relativity  has  received  an  enormous  amount  of 
attention  and  publicity.  Soon  after  the  discovery  of  the  Mossbauer  ef- 
fect, it  was  realized  by  many  physicists  that  this  new  tool  offered  pos- 


58 


GENERAL    PHYSICS  59 


sibilities  for  investigating  problems  in  relativity.  A  few  groups 
started  to  explore  the  feasibility  of  such  experiments.  No  group  has 
done  more  admirable  work,  however,  than  Pound  and  his  co-workers 
at  Harvard.  They  have  succeeded  in  unambiguously  demonstrating  the 
red  shift  of  photons  in  the  laboratory. 

The  red  shift  of  spectral  lines  in  a  gravitational  field  was  pre- 
dicted by  Einstein58'59  and  a  classic  description  of  the  relevant  facts 
can  be  found  in  Pauli's  article60  (see  also  Moller  1960).  Here  a  short 
outline  of  the  essential  arguments  will  be  given.  Consider  a  source  of 
radiation  at  rest  in  a  system  Kq,  which  moves  with  a  velocity  v=  /3c 
with  respect  to  the  laboratory  system  K^.  The  radiation  source  can 
be  used  as  a  clock.  If  this  clock  measures  in  its  system   Kq  a  time  t0 
(proper  time)  between  two  events,  then  an  observer  in  K^^  will  find 
a  longer  time  tja^  between  these  same  events  (time  dilation): 

tlab  =  V(l  -  02)V2  (75) 

If  the  source  in  Kq  emits  a  radiation  of  frequency  oj0,  then  the  fre- 
quency measured  in  K^  is  given  by61 

±  (1  -  /32)1/2        .  1  +  g  cos  a0  (na, 

^ab  "  -o    j  .  -p  cos  fllab  "  -o     (1  .  ^  ™ 

In  these  expressions  for  the  Doppler  shift,  a0  is  the  angle  between 
the  direction  of  emission  of  the  photon  oj0  and  the  velocity  v  measured 
in  Kq,  and  cqab  denotes  the  same  angle  measured  in  K^. 

For  small  velocities,  v«c,  (75)  and  (76)  can  be  approximated  by 

tlab  ■*  U1  +  (!/2)/32]  (77) 

and 

wlab  *  ^ot1  +  0  cos  alab  -  (l/2)/32]  (78) 

Now  consider  a  source  which  is  fixed  at  a  radius  R  to  a  disk 
which  rotates  with  an  angular  frequency  £2.  An  observer  at  the  cen- 
ter of  the  disk  will  receive  only  photons  that  have  been  emitted  radi- 


58 A.  Einstein,  Ann.  Physik,  35,  898  (1911);  reprinted  in  "The 
Principle  of  Relativity,"  Dover,  New  York,  1923. 

59  A.  Einstein,  "Uber  die  spezielle  und  allgemeine  Relativitats- 
theorie,"  Vieweg,  Braunschweig,  1956,  17th  ed.,  p.  82;  "Relativity,  the 
Special  and  the  General  Theory,"  Methuen,  London,  1954. 

60W.  Pauli,  "Theory  of  Relativity,"  Pergamon,  London,  1958, 
pp.  19,  151-154. 

61 E.  L.  Hill,  Optics  and  Relativity  Theory,  in  E.  U.  Condon  and  H.  Odi- 
shaw  (eds.),  "Handbook  of  Physics,"  McGraw-Hill, New  York,  1958. 


60  THE    MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

ally,  i.e.,  for  which  cqab  =  90°.  According  to  Eq.  (78),  the  observer 
then  measures  a  frequency 

^lab  -  co0[l  -  (l/2)(Rft/c)2]  (79) 

This  relation  also  follows  from  the  time  dilation  (77),  since  an  in- 
crease in  the  time  interval  between  two  signals  entails  a  correspond- 
ing decrease  in  energy. 

The  arguments  leading  to  Eq.  (79)  are  based  on  the  Doppler  effect; 
the  observer  determines  the  change  in  frequency  due  to  the  trans- 
verse motion  of  the  source.  Einstein  has  shown  that  the  frequency 
shift  can  be  considered  from  a  different  point  of  view— one  which  leads 
to  an  extremely  important  generalization.  Instead  of  postulating  a 
transverse  Doppler  effect,  the  observer  can  assume  that  his  disk  is 
at  rest  and  that  the  source  instead  is  in  a  different  gravitational  po- 
tential. The  centrifugal  force  acting  on  the  source  then  is  interpreted 
as  a  gravitational  force.  The  potential  at  the  radius  R  is  equal  to  the 
negative  of  the  work  required  to  move  a  unit  mass  from  R  to  the 
center: 

<J>=-(1/2)R2S22  (80) 

Equation  (79)  can  now  be  written  as 

^lab  ~  <o0(l  +  $/c2)  (81) 

Einstein  postulated  Eq.  (81)  to  hold  not  only  for  the  rotating  disk  but 
generally  for  all  situations  where  observer  and  clock  are  situated  in 
different  gravitational  potentials.  Whether  the  potential  is  gravita- 
tional or  due  to  uniform  acceleration  does  not  matter  (principle  of 
equivalence). 

The  derivation  of  Eq.  (81)  shows  that  the  gravitational  red  shift 
does  not  yield  information  about  the  equations  of  general  relativity.  It 
only  tests  the  principle  of  equivalence  and  shows  that  photons  in  a 
gravitational  field  behave  like  particles  with  mass.  Pound  correspond- 
ingly terms  the  terrestrial-red-shift  experiment  "apparent  weight  of 
photons."  A  particle  with  mass  m  gains  an  energy  m<£,  if  moved 
from  a  potential  0  to  a  potential  <£.  According  to  Eq.  (81),  a  photon 
of  energy  E  =  na;0  gains  an  amount  "fico0$/c2.  The  photon  thus  behaves 
like  a  particle  with  a  "mass" 

mphoton=Wc2  =  E/c2  (82) 

As  expected,  the  rest  mass  of  photons  is  zero.  One  could,  of  course, 
start  from  (82)  and  arrive  at  (81). 

If  a  source  of  resonant  gamma  rays  is  situated  in  the  earth's  gravi- 


GENERAL    PHYSICS  61 


tational  field  at  a  height  H  above  a  resonant  absorber,  then  the  poten- 
tial difference  is  given  by  <£>=  gH,  as  long  as  H  is  small  compared  to 
the  radius  of  the  earth.  A  photon,  emitted  by  this  source,  will  "fall" 
in  the  gravitational  field  toward  the  absorber  and  actually  undergo  a 
"violet"  rather  than  a  red  shift.  The  corresponding  relative  gain  in 
energy  is  given  in  first  approximation  by  (81)  as 

AE/E  =  (wiab  "  w0)/o>o  =  gH/c2  (83) 

or 

AE/E  =  H(cm)  x  1.09  x  10" 18  (84) 

For  a  difference  in  height  between  source  and  absorber  of  10  m,  one 
gets  a  relative  shift  of  about  1  part  in  1015. 

One  aspect  of  the  red-shift  experiment  deserves  a  few  more 
words.    The  arguments  given  above  assume  that  the  frequency  of 
photons  depends  on  the  gravitational  potential  but  that  the  nuclear 
levels,  measured  by  an  observer  at  rest  with  respect  to  the  nucleus 
and  situated  in  the  same  gravitational  potential,  remain  unchanged. 
This  assumption  is  based  on  the  weakness  of  the  gravitational  inter- 
action as  compared  to  nuclear  and  electromagnetic  forces.    It  is, 
however,  possible  to  select  a  coordinate  frame  in  which  the  fre- 
quency of  the  photons  moving  in  a  static  gravitational  field  remains 
constant  (Miller  1960,  p.  46).    Measured  in  this  coordinate  frame, 
the  energy  of  the  atomic  or  nuclear  levels  depends  on  the  gravita- 
tional potential,  and  it  is  this  dependence  that  is  responsible  for  the 
red  shift.    These  two  descriptions  are  equivalent. 

The  basic  idea  of  a  terrestrial-red- shift  experiment  is  very  sim- 
ple. A  resonant  source  is  placed  at  a  height  H  above  the  resonant  ab- 
sorber, and  the  relative  energy  shift  is  determined  by  measuring  the 
velocity  spectrum.  However,  the  practical  difficulties  are  enormous, 
particularly  because  even  Fe57,  the  nuclide  used  at  the  present  time, 
has  a  Q  value  of  "only"  3  x  1012.  For  a  height  H  =  10  m,  a  shift  of 
about  one  part  in  103  of  the  line  width  must  be  determined  accurately. 
In  addition,  many  disturbing  effects  exist  and  must  be  eliminated  or 
corrected  for  with  extreme  care. 

The  first  completely  satisfactory  measurement  was  performed  by 
Pound  and  Rebka  (Reprint  1960),  and  the  reader  is  referred  to  their 
excellent  report  and  to  Pound's  review  (1960,  1961)  for  an  understand- 
ing and  appreciation  of  this  difficult  experiment. 

Two  additional  remarks  are  in  order.  During  the  past  few  years, 
physicists  have  often  speculated  whether  antiparticles  will  fall  or  rise 
in  a  gravitational  field.  Winterberg  has  pointed  out  recently62  that  the 


62 


F.  Winterberg,  Nuovo  cimento,  19,  186  (1961), 


62  THE    MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

positive  result  of  the  Pound-Rebka  experiment  makes  it  extremely 
likely  that  antiparticles  and  particles  have  the  same  sign  of  the  gravi- 
tational interaction.  Consider  the  following  gedanken  experiment.  A 
photon  of  energy  2m c2  -  e   falls  in  a  gravitational  field  until  it  has 
gained  an  energy  €  .  In  the  presence  of  a  very  heavy  nucleus,  it  then 
creates  a  particle-antiparticle  pair  of  total  mass  2mc2.  If  the  anti- 
particle  is  subject  to  "anti  gravity/'  the  pair  is  weightless  and  can 
be  brought  to  the  starting  point  of  the  photon  without  energy  loss,  thus 
violating  energy  conservation. 

The  second  remark  concerns  a  suggestion  by  Cocconi  and  Salpeter 
(1960),  who  proposed  to  use  the  Mossbauer  effect  to  set  an  upper  limit 
on  a  possible  anisotropy  of  inertia.  Corresponding  experiments  using 
the  Mossbauer  effect  (Sherwin  1960)  and  conventional  resonance  tech- 
niques63'64 failed  to  observe  an  effect  and  hence  apparently  deter- 
mined a  limit  on  the  anisotropy  of  inertia.  Dicke,  however,  points  out 
that  this  null  result  does  not  cast  doubts  on  the  validity  of  Mach's 
principle,  but  shows  that  inertial  anisotropy  effects  are  universal  and 
the  same  for  all  particles.65 

5-3    ACCELERATED  SYSTEMS 

The  high  Q  value  of  isotopes  like  Fe57  allows  the  observations  of 
effects  due  to  accelerated  systems.  The  simplest  such  experiment  is 
the  measurement  of  the  energy  shift  of  a  photon  emitted  from  a  sys- 
tem rotating  with  a  frequency  ft.  If  a  resonant  emitter  is  mounted  on 
this  system  at  a  radius  Re  and  a  resonant  absorber  is  situated  at  a 
radius  Ra>  one  finds  for  the  relative  energy  shift  from  Eqs.  (79)  or 
(81),  in  first  approximation, 

(Ea  -  Ee)/E0  =  (ft2/2c2)(R|  -  R|)  (85) 

At  first  one  would  expect  that  source  and  absorber  must  lie  on  the 
same  radius  or  that  the  absorber  must  be  exactly  in  the  center  to 
avoid  a  linear  Doppler  effect.  However,  a  short  calculation  shows 
that  the  first-order  terms  will  cancel.  Such  a  cancellation  is  to  be 
expected,  since  the  gravitational  field  equivalent  to  the  acceleration 
on  a  rotating  system  depends  only  on  the  distance  from  the  center 
[Eq.  (80)] . 

The  Harwell  group  (Reprint  Hay  1960)  first  demonstrated  experi- 
mentally that  Eq.  (85)  is  followed  within  the  limits  of  error.  This 
experiment,  together  with  the  Pound-Rebka  experiment  discussed  in 


63  V.  W.  Hughes,  H.  G.  Robinson,  and  V.  Be ltrow- Lopez,  Phys. 
Rev.  Letters,  4,  342  (1960). 

64R.  W.  P.  Drever,  Phil.  Mag.,  6,  683  (1961). 
65 R.  H.  Dicke,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  7,  359  (1961). 


GENERAL    PHYSICS  63 


Sec.  5-2,  shows  that  the  equivalence  principle  is  correct  to  within 
about  5  per  cent. 

Equation  (85)  indicates  that  no  shift  is  to  be  expected  if  source  and 
absorber  move  on  the  same  orbit,  even  if  their  relative  velocity  is  as 
high  as  2RS2.  This  absence  of  a  Doppler  shift  has  been  verified  by 
Champeney  and  Moon  (Reprint  1961). 

Bommel  has  performed  an  experiment  in  which  he  tested  the  fre- 
quency shift  in  a  linearly  accelerated  system66  by  mounting  source 
and  absorber  on  piezoelectric  crystals  and  driving  the  crystals  in 
phase. 

5-4   SECOND-ORDER  DOPPLER  SHIFT 

In  the  framework  of  the  classical  theory  of  the  Mossbauer  effect, 
as  sketched  in  Sec.  2-3,  Eq.  (78)  can  be  interpreted  as  follows.  The 
emitting  nucleus  moves  about  its  equilibrium  position  with  a  velocity 
v(t).  As  discussed  in  remark  4  of  Sec.  2-3,  the  characteristic  time 
for  the  lattice  vibrations  is  much  shorter  than  the  lifetime  of  the  nu- 
clear state.  The  linear  term  (v/c)  cos  cqab  in  Eq.  (78)  will  hence 
average  out,  giving  rise  to  the  unshifted  and  sharp  Mossbauer  line. 
The  quadratic  term,  -(l/2)(v/c)2,  will  remain  and  it  will  cause  a  shift 
in  the  energy  of  the  emitted  or  absorbed  gamma  ray  (second-order 
Doppler  shift).  This  shift  can  be  calculated,  since  (l/2)Mv2  =  Ekin, 
where  M  is  the  mass  and  Ekul  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  decaying 
atom.  Hence  one  finds 

6E/E  =  -Ekin/Mc2  (86) 

In  the  classical  limit,  the  kinetic  energy  Ekm  is  equal  to  (3/2)kT,  and 
the  relative  energy  shift  becomes 

6E/E  =  -  3kT/2Mc2  (87) 

For  harmonic  lattice  forces,  where  the  total  energy  U  is  twice  the 
kinetic  energy  Ekjn,  one  finds  for  the  temperature  dependence  of  the 
relative  energy  shift  from  Eq.  (86), 

-—-  (6E/E)  =  -CL/M'c2  (88) 

Here  Cl  =  8U/3T  is  the  specific  heat  of  the  lattice  and  M'  is  the 
gram  atomic  weight  of  the  lattice  substance. 

The  question  of  whether  the  temperature  motion  that  causes  the 
shift  (86)  will  also  give  rise  to  a  broadening  of  the  lines  has  been 


66  H.  Bommel,  in  "Proceedings  of  the  Second  Mossbauer  Confer- 
ence, "  Paris,  Sept.  13-16,1961,  A.  Schoen  and  D.  M.  J.  Compton  (eds.), 
Wiley,  New  York,  tentative  publication  Spring  1962. 


64  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

studied  by  Snyder  and  Wick  (1960).  They  find  that  for  a  perfect  crys- 
talline solid  such  a  broadening  does  not  occur. 

If  the  environment  of  source  and  absorber  nuclei  are  the  same,  the 
term  (86)  will  be  identical  for  both  and  hence  will  not  be  observable. 
However,  if  the  source  and  the  absorber  are  at  different  temperatures 
or  if  source  and  absorber  nuclei  are  in  different  surroundings,  an  ob- 
servable shift  can  result.  Since  such  a  shift  depends  on  the  ''chemical 
state"  of  source  and  absorber,  it  is  sometimes  difficult  to  separate  it 
from  the  isomeric  shift  discussed  in  Sec.  4-4. 

Actually,  the  second-order  Doppler  shift  was  overlooked  until  early 
1960,  when  Pound  and  Rebka  (Reprint  1960)  realized  that  such  an  effect 
existed.  They  derived  an  expression  for  it  and  verified  this  expression 
[Eq.  (88)]  experimentally.  At  the  same  time  and  from  a  different  point 
of  view,  the  effect  was  predicted  by  Josephson  (Reprint  1960).  In  an  un- 
dergraduate examination  at  Oxford  University,  Josephson  received  the 
problem  to  calculate  the  change  in  frequency  of  an  oscillator  which 
suddenly  changes  its  mass.  He  had  read  about  the  Mossbauer  effect 
and  realized  that  there  was  a  connection.  When  the  excited  state  de- 
cays by  gamma-ray  emission,  the  nucleus  loses  energy,  and  its  mass 
is  reduced  by  an  amount  5M  =  -E/c2.    Its  thermal  momentum  p  is 
unchanged,  since  the  solid  takes  up  all  the  recoil  momentum.  The  re- 
duced mass,  however,  causes  an  increase  in  the  kinetic  energy  of  the 
atom: 

5Ekin  =  (8Ekin/9M)  6M  =  (-p2/2M2)(-E/c2)  =  (l/2)E(v2/c2)      (89) 

which  is  compensated  by  a  corresponding  decrease  in  the  energy  of 
the  emitted  gamma  ray.  The  shift  Eq.  (89)  thus  agrees  in  magnitude 
and  sign  with  the  classical  result  deduced  from  Eq.  (78).  Josephson 
wrote  a  short  note  on  his  derivation  and  sent  it  to  Harwell,  where  it 
arrived  among  many  crank  letters.  Marshall  realized  the  importance 
of  Josephson's  calculation  and  tried  to  reach  him  by  telephone,  only 
to  be  told  that  undergraduates  were  not  supposed  to  receive  calls. 
Despite  these  difficulties,  Josephson's  note  was  published. 

The  experiments  confirming  the  second-order  Doppler  shift  in  Fe57 
(Reprint  Pound  and  Rebka  1960)  and  Sn119  (Boyle  1960)  also  constitute 
a  direct  proof  of  the  famous  "clock  paradox"  or  "twin  paradox,"  as 
was  pointed  out  by  Sherwin  (1960).  In  his  original  paper  on  special 
relativity,  Einstein67  predicted  the  following  effect:  At  a  time  t  =  0, 
two  identical  clocks  are  synchronized  at  a  point  A.  One  clock  remains 
at  A  and  measures  the  time  t.  The  other  clock  travels  away  from  A 
with  a  velocity  v(t).  When  it  eventually  returns  to  A,  it  will  indicate 
an  elapsed  time  s0  which  is  shorter  than  the  time  t0  measured  by  the 
stationary  clock  in  the  ratio 

67A.  Einstein,  Ann.  Physik,  17,  891  (1905).  Reprinted  in  "The 
Principle  of  Relativity,"  Dover,  New  York,  1923,  p.  49. 


GENERAL    PHYSICS  65 

to 
So/to  =  UAo)  /  [l-(v/c)T2dt  (90) 

0 

Equation  (90)  is  a  generalization  of  Eq.  (75);  in  one  form  or  another 
it  is  an  integral  part  of  science  fiction  literature.  The  paradox  lies  in 
the  fact  that  a  straightforward  application  of  ' 'relativity/ '  without  a 
careful  definition  of  its  meaning,  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  one 
should  never  be  able  to  tell  which  clock  is  accelerated  and  that  Eq. 
(90)  should  be  invalid.  This  disagreement  has  been  discussed  exten- 
sively in  the  literature;  Sherwin  summarizes  the  various  arguments 
and  then  shows  that  the  emitting  and  absorbing  nuclei  in  a  Mossbauer 
experiment  play  the  roles  of  the  two  clocks.  Assume  the  absorber  to 
be  at  a  very  low  temperature,  so  that  v  =*  0;  it  then  plays  the  role  of 
the  stationary  clock.  The  source  at  high  temperature  easily  possesses 
rms  velocities  <v2>1/2    comparable  to  that  of  a  jet  plane,  and  it  plays 
the  role  of  the  clock  moving  in  a  space  craft.  According  to  Eq.  (86)  or 
(87),  the  emission  line  indeed  has  a  lower  energy  than  the  absorption 
line.  In  other  words,  the  traveling  clock  goes  slower  than  the  station- 
ary clock,  Eq.  (90)  is  justified,  and  the  science  fiction  writers  can  con- 
tinue using  it. 


5-5  FREQUENCY  AND  PHASE  MODULATION 

Two  methods  for  slightly  shifting  the  energy  of  resonant  gamma 
rays  will  be  discussed  in  this  section.  These  methods  are  not  only 
useful  to  shift  energies  and  hence  can  be  employed  as  velocity  drives 
(Sec.  3-43),  but  they  also  serve  as  tools  for  other  investigations. 

The  first  of  these  methods  can  be  called  "frequency  modulation  of 
gamma  rays."  In  Sec.  2-3,  it  was  shown  that  if  one  moves  the  source 
of  an  electromagnetic  wave  [exp  (iu>0t)]  with  a  simple  harmonic  mo- 
tion, x(0)  sin  £2t,  sidebands  appear  with  frequencies  u>0±ft,  w0±2J2, .... 
Ruby  and  Bolef  (Reprint  I960)  have  observed  these  sidebands  by  fix- 
ing a  source  of  Fe57  on  a  quartz  transducer  and  vibrating  it  with  a 
frequency  of  20  Mc/sec.  The  theory  borrowed  from  Sec.  2-3  is  clas- 
sical; a  quantum  mechanical  treatment  has  been  given  by  Abragam 
(1960). 

A  phase  modulation  of  the  14.4-kev  gamma  ray  of  Fe57  has  been 
observed  by  Grodzins  and  Phillips  (Reprint  1961).  If  a  medium  with 
a  refractive  index  n  and  a  length  L  is  placed  in  the  path  of  a  resonant 
gamma  ray  of  frequency  u)0,  a  phase  shift 

$  =  (1  -  n)o)0(L/c)  (91) 

results.  If  either  the  length  L  or  the  index  of  refraction  n  is  a  func- 
tion of  time,  and  if  the  medium  is  placed  between  source  and  absorber, 
then  the  time -dependent  part  of  the  wave  function  of  the  photon  at  the 
absorber  is  given  by 


66  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 


f(t)  =  exp[-iw0t  +  i$(t)  -  Tt/2n]  (92) 

where  r  is  the  natural  line  width.  The  frequency  spectrum  of  this 
phase- modulated  wave  train  is  given  by  the  absolute  square  of  the 
Fourier  transform  g(ct)), 

OO 

g(w)  =  1/(2tt)V2   f  at  exp  (icot)  f  (t)  (93) 

o 

If  one  modulates  the  phase  sinusoidally,  the  result  is  similar  to 
the  one  found  in  Sec.  2-3  and  in  the  paragraph  above.  Sidebands  ap- 
pear and  the  intensity  in  the  central  line  of  frequency  oo0  is  dimin- 
ished. 

The  saw-tooth  modulation  of  the  phase  shift  is  more  interesting. 
Assuming 

*(t)  =  $0t/to  to>t>0  (95) 

the  integral  (93)  can  be  evaluated  in  closed  form.  All  practically  ob- 
tainable phase  shifts  $0  and  modulation  times  t0  are  such  that  the 
relation 

$o<u0t0  (96) 

is  easily  fulfilled.  In  the  approximation  (96),  the  frequency  spectrum 
is  given  by 

«•>  =  i  ^  i2  s  [co-.0(i-v2:ogp  +  (r/2B)2  (97) 

The  width  of  the  original  line  of  energy  E  is  unchanged,  but  the  line 
is  shifted  by  an  amount  AE  given  by 

AE/E  =  $0/co0t0  (98) 

If  the  phase  modulation  also  modulates  the  intensity  I  of  the  photons, 
for  instance,  if  the  photons  traverse  material  with  a  linear  absorption 
coefficient  ju  and  a  thickness  varying  according  to  L  =  L0t/t0  so  that 
I(t)  =  Iq  exp(-juL0t/t0),  then  the  line  width  T  in  Eq.  (97)  must  be  re- 
placed by 

r'=r  +  ^L0/t0  (99) 

5-6    THE  UNCERTAINTY  RELATION  BETWEEN  ENERGY  AND 
TIME 

A  linear  harmonic  oscillator  serves  as  a  simple  model  for  a  clas- 
sical radiation  source.6  If  undamped,  it  will  emit  an  infinitely  long 


GENERAL    PHYSICS  67 

wave  train  of  sharp  frequency  w0.  If  the  oscillator  is  damped,  the  am- 
plitude f  will  decrease  in  time.  If  the  damping  is  small,  this  decrease 
will  be  exponential, 

f(t)  =  f  (0)  exp  [-iw0t  -  (l/2)yt]  (100) 

The  intensity  averaged  over  one  period  as  a  function  of  time  is  given 
by  the  absolute  square  of  f(t), 

I(t)  =  I(0)exp(-yt)  (101) 

The  mean  life  t  of  this  exponential  decay  is  equal  to  1/y.  The  fre- 
quency of  such  a  wave  train  will  no  longer  be  sharp,  but  will  be  given 
by  the  absolute  square  of  the  Fourier  transform  [Eq.  (93)]  of  f(t), 

i(w)  =  ^  <„  -  S+  m*  (102) 

Equation  (102)  represents  a  Lorentz  line  with  full  width  at  half-height 
y  centered  at  co0.  Decay  time  r  and  line  width  y  satisfy  the  relation 

T-y=l  (103) 

It  is  clear  from  these  arguments  that  the  line  will  invariably  broaden 
if  the  wave  train  is  shortened.  Even  if  the  decay  I(t)  is  not  exponen- 
tial, the  relation  (103)  will  yield  the  right  order  of  magnitude  for  the 
line  width  y. 

In  quantum  theory,  the  expression  (103)  is  replaced  by  the  uncer- 
tainty relation  (34).  The  arguments  which  show  that  a  shortening  of 
the  time  t  results  in  a  broadening  of  the  line  width  y  are  cast  in  a 
different  language.  Rather  than  speaking  about  a  wave  train,  one  dis- 
cusses the  possibility  of  measuring  a  given  separation  in  energy  AE 
within  a  given  time  T  (Sec.  2-43).  The  emission  process  and  its  ob- 
servation can  no  longer  be  separated;  both  must  be  incorporated  in 
the  quantum  mechanical  treatment.  The  relevancy  of  Eq.  (34)  to  these 
problems  and  its  detailed  interpretation  have  led  to  many  arguments 
and  discussions.  One  of  the  exciting  applications  of  the  Mossbauer 
effect  is  the  demonstration  of  the  correctness  of  the  ideas  leading  to, 
and  expressed  by,  Eq.  (34). 

The  corresponding  experiments  can  be  performed  best  with  the 
nuclide  Fe57  (Fig.  4-1).  The  123-kev  gamma  ray  leading  from  the 
second  to  the  first  excited  state  is  used  to  signal  the  time  t  =  0, 
i.e.,  the  time  when  the  first  excited  state  of  Fe57  is  populated.   The 
14.4-kev  gamma  ray  then  can  be  observed  in  delayed  coincidence  with 
this  "signal"  gamma  ray.  By  utilizing  a  variable  delay  and  a  resolv- 
ing time  which  is  short  compared  to  the  mean  life  of  the  14.4-kev  pho- 
tons, one  can  study  the  shape  of  the  Mossbauer  line  as  a  function  of 


68 


THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 


absorption 


Fig.   5-1 


cm/sec 


Doppler  velocity 


The  oscillatory  behavior  of  the  Fe57  absorption 
line  when  observed  with  delayed  coincidences. 
[Adapted  from  Wu  and  co-workers  (I960).] 
Lifetime  of  the  14.4-kev  state  in  Fe57  r  ^  1.4 
x  10"7  sec;  delay  time  =*  (l/2)r,  resolving  time 
=*0.1r. 


the  time  elapsed  between  the  population  of  the  level  and  the  observa- 
tion of  the  photon. 

Such  experiments  were  first  performed  by  the  Argonne  group  (Hol- 
land 1960,  Reprint  Lynch  1960),  and  later  repeated  by  Wu  and  collab- 
orators (I960).  Hamermesh  formulated  a  classical  theory  of  the  time- 
dependent  effects  (Reprint  Lynch  1960).  Harris  (1961)  performed  a 
quantum  mechanical  calculation  and  found  complete  agreement  with 
the  classical  theory. 

Theory  and  experiment  both  yield  the  following  results:  For  delay 
times  short  compared  to  the  mean  life,  the  Mdssbauer  line  is  broad- 
ened in  agreement  with  the  expressions  (34)  and  (103).  This  broaden- 
ing can  be  seen  clearly  in  Fig.  10  of  the  Reprint  (Lynch  1960).  With 
increasing  delay  time,  the  line  narrows  and  develops  a  damped  oscil- 
latory behavior  as  shown  in  Fig.  5-1.  For  times  long  compared  to  the 
mean  life,  the  oscillations  are  rapid  and  the  central  line  becomes  nar- 
rower than  the  natural  line  width.  For  most  delay  times,  there  exist 


GENERAL    PHYSICS  69 

energies  close  to  the  resonance  energy  where  the  number  of  gamma 
rays  seen  by  the  detector  is  greater  than  if  the  absorber  were  not 
present;  the  absorber  produces  a  time  bunching  of  photons.  This 
''photon  excess"  is  shaded  in  Fig.  5-1. 

None  of  these  results  is  new  in  the  sense  that  it  could  not  have  been 
calculated  years  ago.  However,  the  experimental  observation  of  these 
effects  has  stimulated  thinking  about  elementary  radiation  theory,  and 
it  allows  a  convincing  demonstration  of  the  uncertainty  relation  be- 
tween time  and  energy. 

Hack  and  Hamermesh  (Reprint  1961)  have  treated  another  applica- 
tion of  the  Mossbauer  effect  to  line- shape  problems.  Assume  that  a 
constant  magnetic  field  splits  the  initial  state  of  a  gamma  transition 
into  components,  separated  by  an  energy  A  [Eq.  (66)] .  If  one  now  ap- 
plies an  external  radiofrequency  field  of  frequency  corf ,  one  expects 
changes  in  the  radiation  pattern  of  the  gamma  ray  at  resonance,  Hu>rf 
=  A.  It  may  be  possible  to  detect  these  changes  using  the  Mossbauer 
effect. 


5-7   RECOILLESS  RAYLEIGH  SCATTERING 

Consider  a  beam  of  monochromatic  X  rays  of  energy  E  and  mo- 
mentum k  which  is  scattered  by  a  crystal.  The  scattered  beam  of  mo- 
mentum k'  contains  a  modified  and  an  unmodified  line.68   The  modi- 
fied line,  shifted  to  lower  energies  and  considerably  wider  than  the 
incident  beam,  is  due  to  Compton  effect  and  will  not  be  considered 
further.  The  unmodified  line  is  due  to  Rayleigh  scattering:  The  inci- 
dent photon  of  energy  E  is  absorbed  by  a  bound  electron  that  is  vir- 
tually excited  to  a  higher  discrete  level  or  to  the  continuum.  A  photon 
of  the  same  energy  E  is  then  reemitted  while  the  electron  returns  to 
its  original  state.29'69'70  The  small  fraction  of  the  unmodified  line  due 
to  nuclear  Thomson  scattering  will  be  neglected. 

With  the  energy  resolution  available  in  ordinary  X-ray  experiments, 
the  unmodified  line  appears  to  be  essentially  identical  to  the  incident 
line.  Actually,  however,  it  consists  of  a  coherent  (elastic)  and  an  inco- 
herent (inelastic)  part.  Both  parts  transfer  the  entire  recoil  momen- 
tum fi(k  -  k')  to  the  lattice  as  a  whole.  The  incoherent  beam  also  ex- 
changes energy  with  the  lattice  by  emitting  or  absorbing  phonons.  The 
energies  involved  in  this  exchange  are  of  the  order  of  0.1  ev,  or  less. 


68R.  B.  Leighton,  "Principles  of  Modern  Physics,"  McGraw-Hill, 
New  York,  1959,  p.  434. 

69  J.  M.  Jauch  and  F.  Rohrlich,  "The  Theory  of  Photons  and  Elec- 
trons," Addison-Wesley,  Reading,  Mass.,  1955,  p.  387. 

70G.  W.  Grodstein,  "X-Ray  Attenuation  Coefficients  from  10  kev 
to  100  Mev,"  Natl.  Bur.  Standards  Circ.  583,  1957. 


70  THE    MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

Since  the  widths  of  X  rays  are  of  the  order  of  1  ev,  these  phonon  proc- 
esses simply  lead  to  a  line  widening  and  a  small  line  shift,  but  the  in- 
coherent part  cannot  be  separated  from  the  coherent  part  by  conven- 
tional X-ray  spectrometers.  The  coherent  or  elastic  part,  which  is 
now  often  called  the  recoilless  part,  leaves  the  lattice  in  its  initial 
state  and  has  exactly  the  same  energy  E  as  the  primary  beam.  It  is 
this  coherent  part  of  the  unmodified  line  which  is  the  tool  of  X-ray 
diffraction. 

The  entire  unmodified  line,  coherent  and  incoherent,  is  due  to  Ray- 
leigh  scattering;  the  electronic  state  of  the  scatterer  is  not  changed. 
To  calculate  the  coherent  part,  one  must  first  find  the  total  Rayleigh 
scattering.  Contributions  arise  from  two  sources— from  the  different 
electrons  in  the  same  atom  and  from  electrons  in  different  atoms. 
These  contributions  are  partially  coherent,  and  one  must  combine  the 
amplitudes  rather  than  the  intensities  due  to  the  various  electrons.71 
The  scattering  from  the  different  electrons  of  the  same  atom  is  de- 
scribed by  a  form  factor;  the  scattering  from  different  atoms  is  strong 
only  at  certain  angles,  the  Bragg  angles,  and  leads  to  the  Bragg  re- 
flection, used  for  the  determination  of  the  structure  of  crystals. 

Once  one  has  calculated  the  total  Rayleigh  scattering,  the  coherent 
part  of  the  unmodified  line  is  found  by  taking  into  account  the  thermal 
motion  of  the  atoms.  This  thermal  motion  gives  rise  to  the  emission 
and  absorption  of  phonons  and  thus  introduces  energy  shifts  and  inco- 
herence. The  fraction  of  scattering  events  that  occurs  without  energy 
loss  is  calculated  similarly  to  the  procedure  outlined  in  Sec.  2-5,  and 
it  is  given  by  the  Debye-Waller  factor  [Eq.  (54)].  (See  also  Sec.  6-22.) 

Before  the  discovery  of  the  Mossbauer  effect,  the  coherent  beam 
was  distinguished  from  the  incoherent  one  by  studying  the  intensity  of 
Bragg  reflections  as  a  function  of  temperature.  Tzara  and  Barloutaud 
(Reprint  1960)  have  shown  that  the  Mossbauer  effect  permits  a  direct 
observation  of  the  recoilless  Rayleigh  scattering.  Resonant  gamma 
rays,  for  instance,  from  a  Sn119  0r  an  Fe57  source,  are  scattered 
from  a  crystal  that  does  not  contain  resonantly  absorbing  nuclei.  The 
secondary  beam  k'  contains  a  fraction  of  gamma  rays  that  still  pos- 
sess the  initial  energy  E.  They  can  be  distinguished  from  the  inco- 
herent background  with  a  resonant  absorber  in  front  of  the  detector. 
By  measuring  the  velocity  spectrum,  i.e.,  by  moving  the  resonant  ab- 
sorber with  a  velocity  v  with  respect  to  the  stationary  source  and 
scatterer,  one  can  trace  out  the  form  of  the  coherent  line  in  a  manner 
similar  to  the  investigation  of  the  transmission  line  shown  in  Fig.  3-1. 


71 A  small  problem  in  semantics  arises  here.  Both  the  coherent 
and  incoherent  part  of  the  unmodified  line  must  be  calculated,  taking 
into  account  the  coherence  among  the  various  atoms  and  electrons. 
The  coherence  among  the  atoms  is  then  partly  destroyed  by  tempera- 
ture motion,  and  this  gives  rise  to  the  incoherent  part. 


GENERAL    PHYSICS  71 

The  possibility  of  cleanly  separating  the  coherent  from  the  incoherent 
line  is  of  course  due  to  the  fact  that  the  gamma  rays  used  in  these  ex- 
periments possess  a  line  width  of  about  10" 7  ev  or  less.  This  width  is 
not  changed  by  the  coherent  scattering,  whereas  the  incoherent  line  is 
shifted  and  is  smeared  out  over  an  energy  of  about  0.1  ev. 

5-8  COHERENCE  AND  INTERFERENCE 

The  theory  of  coherence  and  interference  involving  Mossbauer  scat- 
tering has  been  treated  in  a  number  of  publications  (Reprint  Kastler 
1960,  Reprint  Tzara  1961,  Podgoretskii  1960,  Lipkin  1961,  Moon  1961, 
Raghavan  1961,  Trammel  1961,  Tassie72).  Relevant  experiments  have 
been  performed  by  Black  and  Moon  (Reprint  1960)  and  by  Major  (1961). 
More  recent  results  have  been  reported  by  Black.73 

The  concept  of  coherence  originated  in  classical  optics.  Even  though 
it  is  basically  not  a  difficult  concept,  its  application  is  often  confusing, 
and  errors  can  arise  because  the  physical  situation  and  the  meaning  of 
coherence  have  not  been  clearly  defined.74'75  Here,  a  simple  example 
should  suffice.  Consider  two  radiation  sources,  each  emitting  waves 
of  frequency  w0  with  amplitudes  a=  |a|  exp[io?(t)]  and  b=  |b|  exp[i/3(t)], 
where  a  and  0  are  real.  The  intensity  I(t)  observed  at  a  given  point 
r  in  space  and  averaged  over  one  period  will  be  the  absolute  square 
of  the  sum  of  the  amplitudes 

I(r,t)  =  |a  +  b|2  =  |a|2  +  |b|2  +  Iint  (104) 

where  the  interference  term  I^nt  is  given  by 

Iint  =  2  |a|  |b|  cos  (a  -  j3)  =  2  Re(a*  b)  (105) 

The  two  waves  a  and  b  are  said  to  be  incoherent  at  the  point  r  if 
the  intensity  I(r,t)  is  the  sum  of   |a|2  and   |b|2,  i.e.,  if  the  interfer- 
ence term  vanishes.  The  waves  will  be  perfectly  coherent  if  the 
phases  of  the  two  bear  a  definite  relationship  to  each  other  and 
slightly  coherent  if  there  exists  a  small  correlation  between  their 
phases. 

In  quantum  theory  the  discussion  of  coherence  can  be  made  along 
the  same  lines:  If  the  probability  of  finding  photons  from  two  sources 
at  a  given  point  is  not  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  probabilities,  one  says 
that  the  two  waves  possess  a  certain  amount  of  coherence.  This  def- 
inition applies  particularly  to  the  scattering  of  one  photon  from  two 


72  L.  J.  Tassie,  unpublished  report. 

73 P.  J.  Black,  in  "Proceedings  of  the  Second  Mossbauer  Confer- 
ence, "  Paris,  Sept.  13-16,  1961,  A.  Schoen  and  D.  M.  J.  Compton 
(eds.),  Wiley,  New  York,  tentative  publication  Spring  1962. 

74A.  T.  Forrester,  Am.  J.  Phys.,  24,  192  (1956). 

75  E.L.  O'Neill  and  L.C.Bradley,  Phys.  Today,  14  (6),  28  (1961). 


72  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

scattering  centers  (see  Ref.  6,  pp.  192-194,  202;  and  Ref.  23,  pp.  133- 
137).  The  scattered  waves  can  be  coherent;  i.e.,  they  can  interfere 
with  each  other  provided  there  is  a  fixed  phase  relation  between  them. 
The  coherence  is  destroyed,  however,  if  one  determines  by  a  meas- 
urement, for  instance  of  the  recoil  of  one  center,  from  which  center 
the  photon  has  been  scattered.  Such  an  investigation  with  fixed  phase 
relation  is  analogous  to  the  famous  optical  double- slit  experiment. 

In  order  to  discuss  specifically  the  processes  that  can  interfere 
with  Mossbauer  scattering,  consider  a  photon  of  momentum  lik  which 
strikes  a  resonant  scatterer  and  excites  a  nucleus  to  its  first  excited 
state  by  recoilless  absorption.  The  reemission  can  result  in  a  photon 
of  momentum  ftk'  or  in  a  conversion  electron.  If  one  detects  photons, 
Rayleigh  scattering  by  the  atomic  electrons  of  one  atom  or  by  the 
electrons  of  many  atoms  can  be  coherent  with  the  Mossbauer  scatter- 
ing. If  one  detects  electrons,  the  photo  effect  and  the  internal  conver- 
sion can  interfere.72  If  the  resonant  nuclei  in  the  absorber  are  abun- 
dant enough,  scattering  from  the  different  nuclei  can  be  coherent.  In 
all  these  examples,  coherence  exists  only  if  one  does  not  determine 
where  the  scattering  occurs.  If,  for  instance,  a  hyperfine  interaction 
is  present  at  the  resonant  nuclei,  then  its  observation  shows  that  res- 
onance scattering  has  occurred  and  all  coherence  with  Rayleigh  scat- 
tering is  destroyed. 

The  equations  describing  the  cross  sections  in  the  presence  of  co- 
herent processes  are  given  by  Tzara  (Reprint  1961).  Here  some  of 
the  essential  facts  are  summarized.  If  one  observes  all  processes 
leading  to  scattering  in  the  direction  k',  without  discriminating  against 
those  which  leave  the  lattice  in  an  excited  state,  the  cross  section  is 
given  by  (Lipkin  1961) 

a  oc  [|R|2  +  |M|2  f(k)  +  2C  Re  (R*M)  f(k)]  (106) 

where  R  is  the  probability  amplitude  for  Rayleigh  scattering  plus  nu- 
clear Thomson  scattering,  M  is  the  probability  amplitude  for  the 
Mossbauer  scattering,  and  f(k)  is  the  Lamb- Mossbauer  factor,  Eq. 
(49)  or  (56).  C  is  a  factor  describing  the  degree  of  coherence  be- 
tween the  processes;  it  is  independent  of  the  lattice  (Moon  1961). 

If  one  uses  a  resonant  detector  to  observe  only  those  scattering 
events  which  leave  the  lattice  in  its  initial  state,  one  finds 

a  cc[|R|*F'(k  -  k')  +  |M|2  f2(k)  +  2C  Re(R*M)F1/2  (k-k')  f(k)] 

(107) 

where  k-k'  is  the  momentum  transferred  to  the  lattice  and 
F(k  -  k')  is  the  corresponding  Debye-Waller  factor,  Eq.  (54). 

A  few  remarks  about  the  interpretation  and  the  application  of  these 
equations  are  in  order. 


GENERAL    PHYSICS  73 

1.  Equation  (106)  and  Eq.  (107)  show  that  one  must  choose  R  and 
M  of  about  equal  magnitude  in  order  to  make  the  interference  term 
as  large  as  possible  compared  with  the  other  terms. 

2.  The  dependence  of  the  interference  term  on  the  Debye-Waller 
factor  F  (k  -  k')  and  on  the  Lamb- Mossbauer  factor  is  clearly  exhib- 
ited by  the  two  equations,  (106)  and  (107),  and  needs  no  further  dis- 
cussion. 

3.  The  interference  between  Mossbauer  scattering  and  Rayleigh 
scattering  has  been  observed  experimentally  by  Black  and  Moon73 
(Reprint  1960).  In  order  to  get  a  large  effect,  they  selected  scattering 
angles  such  that  strong  Bragg  reflections  occurred  (compare  Sec. 
5-7).  The  interference  term  changes  sign  when  one  changes  the  en- 
ergy from  slightly  above  the  Mossbauer  resonance  to  slightly  below, 
and  vanishes  at  exact  resonance.  This  effect  also  is  expected  (Tzara 
1961,  Moon  1961). 

4.  Campbell  and  Bernstein76  have  observed  interference  between 
the  Mossbauer  scattering  and  totally  reflected  gamma  rays.  This 
technique  permits  the  study  of  the  chemical  and  magnetic  environment 
of  those  nuclei  which  lie  in  a  very  thin  layer  close  to  the  surface. 

5.  One  possible  application  of  interference  effects  may  well  be  the 
observation  of  a  weak  Mossbauer  line  in  a  strong  background,  since 
the  interference  term  depends  on  M  rather  than  on  |M|2  (Moon  1961). 

6.  Another  possible  application  is  to  the  determination  of  phases  in 
crystallography  (Raghavan). 

5-9   POLARIZATION77 

The  optical  Zeeman  effect  has  been  extremely  important  for  the 
understanding  of  atomic  structure.  In  nuclear  physics,  prior  to  the 
discovery  of  the  Mossbauer  effect,  analogous  experiments  were  im- 
possible. It  is  true  that  many  polarization  experiments  have  been  per- 
formed with  nuclear  gamma  rays,  but  these  experiments  have  been 
difficult  and  cumbersome.  Moreover,  they  always  had  to  be  performed 
on  components  unresolved  in  energy,  and  the  information  gathered 
about  the  polarization  of  individual  components  was  rather  indirect. 

The  discovery  of  the  Mossbauer  effect  has  changed  this  situation. 
Particularly  with  the  14.4-kev  gamma  ray  emitted  by  Fe57,  the  nuclear 
Zeeman  effect  can  be  observed  easily  and  in  detail  (see  Sec.  4-3).  The 
individual  components  of  the  emitted  gamma-ray  lines  are  widely  sep- 
arated compared  to  the  natural  line  width.  The  93-kev  gamma  ray  in 
Zn67  displays  a  Zeeman  splitting  of  many  line  widths  in  fields  as  small 
as  100  gauss  (Reprint  Craig  1960). 


76E.  C.  Campbell  and  S.  Bernstein,  Bull.  Am.  Phys.  Soc,  6, 443  (1961), 
77  This  section  follows  closely  some  parts  of  a  Los  Alamos  publica- 
tion (Frauenfelder  1962). 


74  THE    MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

Once  the  Zeeman  components  are  separated  clearly,  the  determina- 
tion of  their  state  of  polarization  becomes  the  next  step.  Experiments 
with  the  plane  polarization  of  the  Fe57  gamma  rays  were  first  per- 
formed by  the  Argonne  group  in  order  to  complete  the  understanding 
of  the  Mossbauer  spectrum  of  Fe57  embedded  in  iron  (Reprint  Hanna 
1960).  The  gamma-ray  polarization  has  also  been  taken  into  account 
by  Wegener  and  Obenshain  in  order  to  explain  the  shape  of  the  lines 
observed  in  Ni61  (Wegener  1961).  The  elliptical  polarization  was  first 
used  to  simplify  the  investigation  of  the  complicated  spectra  that  ap- 
pear when  Fe57  is  embedded  in  CoPd  (Reprint  Nagle  1960). 

Polarization  measurements  on  resolved  gamma-ray  components 
can  be  a  very  effective  tool  for  unraveling  complex  spectra,  for  re- 
ducing the  number  of  lines  in  complicated  spectra,  and  for  finding  the 
direction  of  the  internal  magnetic  field  inside  magnetic  domains  in 
ferromagnets,  ferrimagnets,  antiferromagnets,  and  possibly  super- 
conducting ferromagnets. 

A  complete  theory  of  the  polarization  of  gamma  rays  emitted  and 
absorbed  in  the  Mossbauer  effect  has  been  worked  out  by  Visscher 
(Frauenf elder  1962),  and  this  paper  should  be  consulted  for  details. 
In  the  present  section,  a  few  remarks  and  the  description  of  a  simple 
experiment  show  the  ease  with  which  the  elliptical  polarization  can  be 
demonstrated  in  the  Mossbauer  effect.  A  similar  very  simple  exper- 
iment showing  the  linear  polarization  of  the  Fe57  gamma  rays  has 
been  performed  by  the  Argonne  group  (Perlow  1960). 

The  levels  of  Fe57,  embedded  in  ferromagnetic  iron  metal  and 
placed  in  an  external  magnetic  field,  are  shown  in  Fig.  2  of  the  Re- 
print (Hanna  I960).78    The  radiation  pattern  emitted  by  Fe57  will  gen- 
erally consist  of  six  lines,  as  shown  in  the  same  figure.  However,  if 
one  observes  the  pattern  along  the  axis  of  the  external  magnetic  field, 
the  transition  Am  =  0  is  completely  forbidden,  and  only  four  compo- 
nents appear.  To  discuss  the  polarization  of  the  four  components,  one 
notes  that  a  gamma  ray  is  called  right  circularly  polarized  if  its  spin 
lies  in  the  direction  of  motion.  (This  convention  is  opposite  to  the  one 
used  in  optical  spectroscopy.)  Consider  first  the  highest  energy  com- 
ponent, namely,  the  transition  -3/2  to  -1/2.  The  z  component  of  an- 
gular momentum  must  be  conserved,  and  any  gamma  ray  correspond- 
ing to  this  component  hence  must  have  a  z  component  of  angular 
momentum  of  -1.  If  this  gamma  ray  is  emitted  along  the  +z  direc- 
tion, its  spin  is  antiparallel  to  its  momentum,  and  it  is  left  circularly 


78  The  labeling  of  the  magnetic  sublevels  of  Fe57  has  led  to  some 
confusion.  The  magnetic  moment  of  the  excited  state  is  negative;  the 
internal  field  in  iron  metal  is  opposite  to  the  externally  applied  mag- 
netic field.  If  one  uses  the  convention  that  the  external  field  is  di- 
rected along  the  +z  axis,  then  the  m  =  -3/2  state  possesses  the  high- 
est energy,  as  shown  in  Fig.  2  of  the  Reprint  (Hanna,  1960). 


GENERAL    PHYSICS 


75 


Fe57  source 


Fe57  absorber 


counter 


Fig.   5-2    A  simple  experiment  to  demonstrate  the  circu- 
lar polarization  of  the  14.4-kev  gamma  rays 
from  Fe57.  The  counting  rate  with  parallel  fields 
is  much  larger  than  with  antiparallel  fields  at 
source  and  absorber. 


polarized.  If  it  is  emitted  in  the  -z  direction,  spin  and  momentum  are 
parallel  and  the  photon  is  right  circularly  polarized.  Similarly,  one 
can  see  that  the  other  components  are  also  circularly  polarized. 

The  primitive  experimental  setup  that  serves  to  demonstrate  the 
elliptical  polarization  of  the  Fe57  gamma  rays  emitted  closely  paral- 
lel to  the  field  axis  is  shown  in  Fig.  5-2.  (Emission  completely  par- 
allel is  hard  to  achieve  experimentally.)  Source  and  absorber  consist 
of  iron  metal  and  both  are  placed  in  solenoids.  If  the  fields  in  the  two 
solenoids  are  parallel,  the  absorption  at  the  central  peak,  i.e.,  at 
zero  relative  velocity  between  source  and  absorber,  is  very  much 
larger  than  that  for  antiparallel  fields.  The  explanation  is  obvious. 
At  small  angles  with  the  field  axis,  the  emitted  and  the  absorbed  pho- 
tons are  nearly  circularly  polarized.  In  parallel  fields,  the  right  cir- 
cular components  of  the  source  have  the  same  energy  as  the  right 
circular  absorption  levels,  and  the  left  circular  emission  components 
have  the  same  energy  as  the  corresponding  left  circular  absorption 
levels  and  the  absorption  is  large.  Reversing  the  field,  for  instance, 
at  the  source,  changes  right  into  left  circular  and  vice  versa.  The 
energies  for  equal  polarization  in  source  and  absorber  no  longer  are 
the  same,  and  the  absorption  at  zero  relative  velocity  is  small. 


SOLID-STATE  PHYSICS 


6-1    SURVEY 


In  Chapter  4  it  was  pointed  out  that  a  striking  similarity  exists  be- 
tween the  histories  of  nuclear  magnetic  resonance  and  the  Mossbauer 
effect.  Originally  both  effects  belonged  to  nuclear  physics,  but  the 
solid-state  applications  soon  dominated  both  fields.  The  reason  is 
clear:  The  number  of  nuclear  properties  that  can  be  investigated  is 
limited,  but  the  number  of  solid-state  parameters  that  can  be  varied 
and  studied  is  very  large.  It  seems  at  the  present  time  as  if  most  of 
the  future  investigations  involving  the  Mossbauer  effect  will  be  in 
solid-state  physics.  In  the  present  chapter  a  brief  sketch  of  some  of 
the  major  applications  will  be  given.  A  more  detailed  discussion  of 
recent  work  can  be  found  in  the  "Proceedings  of  the  Second  Moss- 
bauer Conference"  (see  Sec.  7-3). 

The  quantities  that  can  be  measured  in  a  Mossbauer  experiment, 
namely,  the  Lamb- Mossbauer  factors,  the  line  shape,  the  line  splitting, 
and  the  line  shift,  have  been  discussed  in  Chapter  3.  The  fact  that  these 
quantities  can  be  determined  under  a  wide  variety  of  conditions  and 
with  a  wide  range  of  parameters  makes  the  recoilless  gamma-ray 
emission  and  absorption  such  a  powerful  tool  in  solid-state  physics. 

The  choice  of  parameters  to  be  varied  determines  which  solid-state 
properties  will  be  investigated.  One  can,  first  of  all,  embed  the  reso- 
nant nuclei  in  the  source  or  in  the  absorber.  The  host  can  be  of  the 
same  chemical  composition  as  the  radioactive  material,  or  it  can  be 
different.  The  resonant  nuclei  can  be  interstitial  or  substitutional  im- 
purities; their  concentration  can  be  varied  over  wide  ranges.  The  host 
lattice  can  be  well  annealed  or  it  can  be  strained.  Its  temperature  can 
be  varied  or  the  external  pressure  can  be  changed.  External  magnetic 
or  electric  fields  can  be  applied.  The  emitted  or  absorbed  radiation 
and  its  characteristics  can  be  studied  at  various  angles  with  respect 

76 


SOLID-STATE     PHYSICS  77 

to  internal  or  external  fields  or  nonisotropic  lattice  properties.  The 
Mossbauer  effect  can  be  measured  in  transmission  or  in  scattering; 
one  can  observe  gamma  rays,  conversion  electrons,  or  X  rays  follow- 
ing internal  conversion.  Interference  effects  can  be  used.  The  time 
dependence  of  various  properties  can  be  studied  either  by  means  of  a 
delay  technique  or  by  embedding  isotopes  with  different  excited-state 
lifetimes  into  the  same  host  lattice. 

Four  typical  applications  of  the  Mossbauer  effect  to  solid-state 
problems  will  be  discussed  in  the  next  sections.  These  four,  lattice 
properties  (Sec.  6-2),  internal  fields  (Sec.  6-3),  impurities  and  im- 
perfections (Sec.  6-4),  and  low -temperature  topics  (Sec.  6-5),  do  not 
exhaust  all  the  possibilities.  The  Mossbauer  effect,  for  instance,  has 
also  been  used  to  get  information  about  atomic  wave  functions  at  the 
nucleus  (Reprint  Walker  1961)  and  to  determine  the  index  of  refrac- 
tion of  lucite  (Reprint  Grodzins  1961).  These  are  but  two  examples  of 
investigations  that  are  not  contained  in  Sees.  6-2  to  6-5.  Very  likely 
the  Mossbauer  effect  will  also  be  utilized  to  study  surfaces,  liquids, 
and  some  problems  in  chemistry  and  biophysics. 

The  Mossbauer  effect  is  the  youngest  of  the  nuclear  guests  in  solid- 
state  physics.  It  fits  in  well  indeed  with  the  older  ones,  complementing 
them  in  some  areas  and  allowing  checks  in  others.  Table  6-1  lists  the 
major  nuclear  tools  in  solid-state  physics  and  indicates  the  areas  of 
information  which  they  have  in  common  with  the  Mossbauer  effect. 

Table  6-1  Nuclear  Tools  in  Solid- State  Physics 

Topics  in  common  with  the 

Tool Mossbauer  effect Refs. 

X-ray  diffraction  Lattice  dynamics  18,  27-31,  79 

Neutron  diffraction  Lattice  dynamics  Reprint  Lamb  1939 

Magnetic  properties  80-83 

Nuclear  magnetic  Internal  fields  84-89 

resonance  Atomic  wave  functions 

at  the  nucleus 

Angular  correlation]       Internal  fields  90-93 

Oriented  nuclei  Aftereffects  of  radio-  94,  95 

active  decays 


79 J.  Bouman  in  ' 'Encyclopedia  of  Physics,"  Springer,  Berlin,  1957, 
Vol.  32. 

80 C.  G.  Shull  and  E.  O.  Wollan  in  F.  Seitz  and  D.  Turnbull  (eds.), 
"Solid  State  Physics,"  Academic,  New  York,  1956,  Vol.  2,  p.  138. 

81 G.  R.  Ringo  in  "Encyclopedia  of  Physics,"  Springer,  Berlin,  1957, 
Vol.  32. 

82 E.  Amaldi  in  "Encyclopedia  of  Physics,"  Springer,  Berlin,  1959, 
Vol.  38/2. 


78  THE     M5SSBAUER    EFFECT 


6-2    LATTICE  PROPERTIES 

Boyle  recently  divided  the  Mossbauer  experiments  to  determine 
lattice  properties  into  three  classes:  difficult  and  uninteresting,  very 
difficult,  impossible.96  Since  even  impossible  experiments  sometimes 
succeed,  a  few  of  the  applications  of  the  Mossbauer  effect  to  lattice 
problems  are  sketched  in  the  present  section. 

6-21    The  Lamb- Mossbauer  Factor  f 

This  factor,  Eq.  (49),  can  be  determined  by  measuring  the  fraction 
of  gamma  rays  emitted  or  absorbed  without  energy  loss  as  a  function 
of  the  temperature  T.   From  f(T)  one  finds  the  mean- square  devia- 
tion <X2>  by  using  Eq.  (56).  Further  evaluation  depends  on  the  model 
one  selects  to  describe  the  solid.  Usually  one  determines  a  Debye 
temperature  0  with  the  help  of  Eqs.  (52)  and  (54)  (see  also  Ref .  97). 


83  L.  S.  Kothari  and  K.  S.  Singwi  in  F.Seitz  and  D.  Turnbull  (eds.), 
"Solid  State  Physics,"  Academic,  New  York,  1959,  Vol.  8,  p.  109. 

84  E.  R.Andrew,  "Nuclear  Magnetic  Resonance,"  Cambridge  Univer- 
sity Press,  New  York,  1955. 

85G.E.Pake  in  F.Seitz  and  D.  Turnbull  (eds.),  "Solid  State  Physics," 
Academic,  New  York,  1956,  Vol.  2,  p.  1. 

86W.  D.  Knight  in  F.  Seitz  and  D.  Turnbull  (eds.),  "Solid  State 
Physics,"  Academic,  New  York,  1956,  Vol.  2,  p.  93. 

87  M.H.Cohen  and  F.Reif  in  F.Seitz  and  D.  Turnbull  (eds.),  "Solid 
State  Physics,"  Academic,  New  York,  1957,  Vol.  5,  p.  322. 

88 T.  P.  Das  and  E.  L.  Hahn,  "Nuclear  Quadrupole  Resonance  Spec- 
troscopy," Supplement  1  to  "Solid  State  Physics,"  Academic,  New 
York,  1958. 

89  A.  Abragam,  "The  Principles  of  Nuclear  Magnetism,"  Oxford 
University  Press,  New  York,  1961. 

90 H.  Frauenfelder  in  K.  Siegbahn  (ed.),  "Beta-  and  Gamma-Ray 
Spectroscopy,"  North- Holland,  Amsterdam,  1955. 

91 R.  M.  Steffen,  Advances  in  Phys.,  4,  293  (1955). 

92 S.  Devons  and  L.  J.  B.  Goldfarb  in  "Encyclopedia  of  Physics," 
Springer,  Berlin,  1957,  Vol.  42. 

93E.Heer  and  T.B.Novey  in  F.Seitz  and  D.  Turnbull  (eds.),  "Solid 
State  Physics,"  Academic,  New  York,  1959,  Vol.  9,  p.  199. 

94R.  J.  Blin-Stoyle,  M.  A.  Grace,  and  H.  Halban  in  K.  Siegbahn  (ed.), 
"Beta-  and  Gamma-Ray  Spectroscopy,"  North- Holland,  Amsterdam, 
1955. 

95 R.  J.  Blin-Stoyle  and  M.  A.  Grace  in  "Encyclopedia  of  Physics," 
Springer,  Berlin,  1957,  Vol.  42. 

96  A.  J.  F.  Boyle  in  "Proceedings  of  the  Second  Mossbauer  Confer- 
ence," Paris,  Sept.  13-16,  1961,  A.  Schoen  and  D.  M.  J.  Compton(eds.), 
Wiley,  New  York,  tentative  publication    Spring    1962. 


SOLID-STATE     PHYSICS  79 

Boyle  et  al.  (Reprint  1961)  have  shown  that  one  can  also  get  infor- 
mation about  anharmonic  terms  from  f(T).  The  reader  is  referred  to 
their  paper  for  a  discussion  of  the  procedure  and  of  the  approxima- 
tions involved  in  the  evaluation. 

Singwi  and  Sjolander  (Reprint  1960)  pointed  out  that  in  an  anisotro- 
pic solid,  such  as  graphite,  one  should  expect  a  dependence  of  f  and 
of  the  line  width  on  the  direction  of  emission.  Corresponding  calcula- 
tions by  Kagan  (1961)  corroborate  this  statement,  and  an  anisotropic 
behavior  has  actually  been  found  for  Fe57  embedded  in  graphite.98'99 

Two  more  possible  experiments  should  be  mentioned  here.  It  is  of 
interest  to  determine  whether  f(T)  will  follow  the  Debye  behavior  at 
very  low  temperatures  or  whether  deviations  will  occur.  Investiga- 
tions in  molecular  crystals  should  reveal  how  additional  degrees  of 
freedom  affect  f(T). 

6-22   The  Debye- Waller  Factor 

This  factor,  F  (k  -  k') ,  can  be  found  with  the  help  of  the  recoilless 
Rayleigh  scattering  (Sec.  5-7).  A  few  words  about  the  difference  be- 
tween the  Lamb- Mossbauer  factor  f(k)  and  the  Debye- Waller  factor 
F(k  -  k')    are  in  order  here  (Reprint  Tzara  1961,  Lipkin  1961,  Tram- 
mell  1962).  Consider  a  process  in  which  an  incoming  beam,  neutrons 
or  photons,  of  momentum  tlk,  is  scattered  by  a  solid  into  a  momentum 
state  nk' .  If  the  scattering  process  is  nonresonant ,  then  the  time  de- 
lay (collision  time,  phase  shift)  between  incoming  and  outgoing  wave 
is  of  the  order  of,  or  less  than,  v/d,  where  v  is  the  beam  velocity 
and  d  the  linear  dimension  of  the  scatterer.100  This  delay  time  is 
much  shorter  than  the  characteristic  lattice  time  -R/k0:  An  X-ray 
wave  front  moves  across  an  atom  in  a  time  of  the  order  of  10"18  sec, 
whereas  typical  lattice  vibration  times  are  longer  than  10"14  sec.  In 
scattering  of  atomic  X  rays,  the  duration  of  the  entire  wave  train  is 
of  the  order  of  10"15  sec  or  less  and  hence  also  short  compared  to  the 
lattice  vibration  time.  In  a  crude  way  of  speaking,  the  entire  scatter- 


97 W.  Marshall  in  "Proceedings  of  the  Second  Mossbauer  Confer- 
ence," Paris,  Sept.  13-16,  1961,  A.  Schoen  and  D.M.J.  Compton(eds.), 
Wiley,  New  York,  tentative  publication    Spring    1962. 

98  D.  E.  Nagle  in  "Proceedings  of  the  Second  Mossbauer  Confer- 
ence," Paris,  Sept.  13-16,  1961,  A.  Schoen  and  D.  M.  J.  Compton(eds.), 
Wiley,  New  York,  tentative  publication   Spring    1962. 

99H.  Pollak,  M.  DeCoster,and  S.  Amelincks  in  "Proceedings  of  the 
Second  Mossbauer  Conference,"  Paris,  Sept.  13-16, 1961,  A.  Schoen  and 
D.  M.  J.  Compton  (eds .),  Wiley,  New  York,  tentative  publication  Spring 
1962. 

100  D.  Bohm,  "Quantum  Theory,"  Prentice- Hall,  Englewood  Cliffs, 
N.J.,  1951,  p.  261. 


80  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

ing  process  occurs  on  atoms  that  move  very  little  during  the  scatter- 
ing process.  The  entire  momentum  h(k  -  k')  is  transferred  to  the 
lattice  during  such  a  nonresonant  collision.  The  fraction  of  X  rays 
scattered  without  energy  loss  is  found  by  averaging  over  the  various 
positions  of  the  scattering  atom.  This  calculation  leads  to  the  Debye- 
Waller  factor, 

F(k-  k')  =  exp  -<[(k-  k')-X]2>  (108) 

where  X  is  the  coordinate  vector  of  the  cm.  of  the  decaying  nucleus 
(Fig.  2-3).  The  fraction  F  of  recoilless  nonresonant  scattering  de- 
pends on  the  scattering  angle  2cp;  it  increases  with  decreasing  angle 
<p,  i.e.,  with  decreasing  momentum  transfer  ft(k  -  k').  Since  the 
scattering  is  elastic,  |k  -  k'|  =  2k  sin  </?,  and  Eq.  (108)  is  thus  identi- 
cal with  Eq.  (54). 

The  nonresonant  scattering  (Rayleigh  scattering)  with  nuclear 
gamma  rays  from  a  resonant  source  is  also  described  by  Eq.  (108). 
Even  though  the  duration  of  the  wave  train  is  long  compared  to  the  lat- 
tice vibration  time,  the  time  delay  is  short.  At  each  instant  of  time 
the  conditions  implied  in  Eq.  (108)  are  fulfilled,  and  the  averaging  over 
the  motion  of  the  scattering  atoms  again  leads  to  Eq.  (108).  The  inten- 
sity of  the  recoilless  Rayleigh  scattering  thus  measures  the  Debye- 
Waller  factor  F(k-  k'). 

The  resonant  scattering  leads  to  a  different  expression.  Here,  the 
time  delay  between  incident  and  outgoing  wave  front  is  of  the  order  of 
r  =  "fi/r,  i.e.,  of  the  order  of  the  lifetime  of  the  resonant  state.100  In 
Mdssbauer  scattering  this  lifetime  is  much  longer  than  the  lattice  vi- 
bration times,  and  there  is  negligible  correlation  between  the  posi- 
tions of  absorption  and  subsequent  reemission.  The  fraction  fs  of 
gamma  rays  scattered  without  energy  loss  is  then  given  by  the  prod- 
uct of  two  Lamb- Mdssbauer  factors, 

fs  =  f(k)f(k')  (109) 


6-23   Phonon  Spectra 

It  has  repeatedly  been  suggested  that  a  detailed  measurement  of 
the  energy  spectrum  of  the  gamma  rays  in  the  Mdssbauer  effect,  par- 
ticularly the  observation  of  the  one  phonon  exchange,  will  yield  valu- 
able information  about  phonon  spectra  (Reprint  Visscher  1960,  Petz- 
old  1961).  Unfortunately  such  experiments  are  extremely  difficult 
since  the  energy  range  to  be  covered  is  of  the  order  of  10"2  ev  and 
hence  much  wider  than  even  very  wide  lines.  Neutrons  are  much  bet- 
ter suited  for  such  investigations  (Reprint  Singwi  1960),  except  for 
elements  with  very  large  capture  cross  sections,  such  as  He3. 


SOLID-STATE     PHYSICS  81 


6-24    Diffusion 

Diffusion  should  lead  to  a  broadening  of  the  emission  and  absorp- 
tion lines  close  to  the  melting  point  (Reprint  Singwi  1960).  It  is  very 
likely  that  such  a  broadening  can  be  observed  experimentally. 

6-25   Lattice  Specific  Heats 

These  can  be  determined  by  the  observation  of  the  second-order 
Doppler  effect,  as  pointed  out  in  Sec.  5-4,  Eq.  (88).  The  main  prob- 
lem is  the  unambiguous  separation  of  the  various  temperature- 
dependent  shifts. 

6-26   Pressure  Effects 

Increasing  the  ambient  pressure  p  on  a  sample  will  increase  the 
Lamb-Mossbauer  factor  f  (Hanks  1961)  and  will  shift  the  resonance 
line101  (Pound  1961). 

To  calculate  the  pressure  dependence  f(p)  of  the  Lamb-Mossbauer 
factor,  it  is  easiest  to  assume  that  the  Debye  model  (Sees.  2-2  and 
2-52)  applies  so  that  f  -  f(e).  Then  one  has 

af/ap  =  (af/ae)  (ae/av)(av/ap)  (no) 

The  dependence  of  the  Debye  temperature  0  on  the  volume  V  is 
given  by  the  Griineisen  relation21: 

3  In  0/a  In  V=  -y  (111) 

Neglecting  the  volume  dependence  of  the  Griineisen  constant  y,  Eq. 
(Ill)  can  be  written 

de/dv=  -ye/v  .  (112) 

The  volume  V  depends  on  the  pressure  p  through  the  compressibility 

3V/ap  =  -KV  (113) 

For  simplicity  assume  temperatures  low  enough  so  that  Eq.  (33) 
holds:  f  =  exp(-3R/2k0).  Then  one  finds  with  Eqs.  (33)  and  (110)  to 
(113),  after  integration, 

f(p)  =  f(p  =  0)  exp  [(3R/2k0)  /cyp]  =  exp[-(3R/2k0)(l-/cyp)]  (114) 


101  R.V.  Pound  in  "Proceedings  of  the  Second  Mossbauer  Confer- 
ence," Paris,  Sept.  13-16, 1961,  A.  Schoen  and  D.  M.  J.  Compton  (eds.), 
Wiley,  New  York,  tentative  publication   Spring    1962. 


82  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

The  Griineisen  constant  y  is  of  the  order  of  2  (Table  10.3  in  Ref.  21), 
the  volume  compressibility   k  varies  from  about  3  x  10~7  atm"1  for  W 
to  about  5  x  10"5  atm"1  for  Cs.  As  pointed  out  by  Hanks  (1961),  it 
should  thus  be  possible  to  observe  the  pressure  dependence  of  f.  It 
should  even  be  feasible  to  detect  a  pressure- induced  recoilless  emis- 
sion or  absorption  in  substances  where  f  is  too  small  to  be  seen  at 
normal  pressures. 

The  second  manifestation  of  a  change  of  the  ambient  pressure, 
namely,  a  shift  of  the  Mossbauer  line,  is  mainly  due  to  two  contribu- 
tions. One  is  caused  by  a  change  with  pressure  of  the  electronic  wave 
functions  at  the  nucleus;  this  term  can  be  called  the  volume  depend- 
ence of  the  isomeric  shift  (Sec.  4-4).  The  other  contribution  comes 
from  the  volume  dependence  of  the  internal  energy  of  the  solid;  this 
term  is  analogous  to  the  second-order  Doppler  shift  (Sec.  5-4).  One 
interesting  difference  between  the  second-order  Doppler  shift  and  the 
pressure  shift  appears:  The  former  does  not  depend  on  the  zero-point 
energy  and  thus  goes  to  zero  at  low  temperatures.  The  pressure  shift, 
however,  does  depend  on  the  zero-point  energy  and  thus  remains  finite 
even  at  very  low  temperatures. 

The  dependence  of  the  Lamb- Mossbauer  factor  f  on  pressure  has 
not  yet  been  observed  experimentally.  The  pressure  shift,  however, 
has  been  investigated  by  Pound101  who  found  a  relative  shift 
(l/E)(dE/3p)  =  -2.6  x  10"18  atm-1  for  Fe57,  in  good  agreement  with  his 
theoretical  estimates  (Pound  1961). 

6-3    INTERNAL  FIELDS 

An  inspection  of  the  bibliography  (Chapter  7)  shows  that  the  largest 
number  of  publications  is  devoted  to  the  application  of  the  Mossbauer 
effect  to  the  study  of  internal  fields.  These  investigations  have  al- 
ready greatly  enhanced  the  knowledge  of  internal  fields  and  it  is  very 
likely  that  the  fast  flow  of  information  will  continue.  Despite  the  im- 
portance of  internal  field  studies,  the  present  section  is  short.  Excel- 
lent surveys  already  exist,  for  instance  in  the  notes  by  Abragam  (see 
Sec.  7-1)  and  in  the  paper  by  Wertheim  (Reprint  1961).  Moreover, 
the  basic  ideas  underlying  the  study  of  internal  fields  have  already 
been  outlined  in  the  discussion  of  the  nuclear  moments  in  Sec.  4-3. 

The  solid-state  physicist's  view  of  Sec.  4-3  is  obvious:  Instead  of 
measuring  nuclear  g  factors  and  nuclear  quadrupole  moments,  his 
interest  is  directed  to  the  extranuclear  fields  responsible  for  the  in- 
teractions. To  determine  these  extranuclear  fields,  one  requires  a 
knowledge  of  the  magnitude  and  sign  of  the  nuclear  moments.  The 
ground-state  moments  can  usually  be  determined  by  conventional  tech- 
niques. When  the  ground-state  moments  are  known,  the  excited-state 
properties  can  usually  be  inferred  from  the  Mossbauer  pattern.  Once 
the  nuclear  moments  are  known,  the  dependence  of  the  internal  fields 


SOLID-STATE     PHYSICS  83 

on  various  parameters,  such  as  crystal  structure,  temperature,  pres- 
sure, and  external  fields,  can  be  studied. 

In  Sec.  6  of  the  reprints  a  number  of  representative  papers  are 
collected.  These  give  a  fair  survey  of  the  problems  that  have  already 
been  examined  and  the  tools  used  in  measuring  and  interpreting  spec- 
tra. All  these  papers  use  either  Fe57  or  Sn119  as  the  probe.  These 
two  nuclides  permit  a  tremendous  amount  of  research,  and  their  use 
has  already  led  to  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  magnetic  properties 
of  solids.  The  field  at  the  iron  nucleus  in  iron  metal  constitutes  a 
good  example.  The  first  experiments  (Reprint  Hanna  1960,  Sec.  4  of 
the  reprints)  yielded  a  magnitude  of  the  magnetic  field   |H|  =  3.3xl05 
oersteds,  which  was  in  good  agreement  with  the  theoretical  predic- 
tions. Then  the  Argonne  group  went  one  step  farther  and  determined 
also  the  sign  of  H  (Reprint  Hanna  1960,  Sec.  6  of  the  reprints).  They 
found  the  internal  field  to  be  opposite  to  the  externally  applied  field, 
in  direct  contradiction  to  theoretical  prediction.  Since  then  theoretical 
physicists  have  obtained  agreement  with  experimental  facts.102 

In  addition  to  studies  with  Fe57  and  Sn119,  a  considerable  amount  of 
work  has  been  performed  with  rare  earth  nuclides,  and  with  nuclides 
like  Au197 embedded  in  ferromagnetic  materials  (see  the  bibliography). 
These  areas  promise  to  be  as  interesting  and  rewarding  as  the  work 
discussed  above. 

Investigations  of  quadrupole  effects  have  been  performed  also  (Re- 
print Kistner  1960,  Reprint  DeBenedetti  1961,  see  also  the  bibliogra- 
phy). Quadrupole  splittings  have  been  found  in  many  substances  and  a 
beginning  has  been  made  to  correlate  these  splittings  with  the  chemi- 
cal and  physical  state  of  the  solid.  The  interpretation  is  difficult  when 
magnetic  and  quadrupole  interactions  are  simultaneously  present.  The 
splitting  then  depends  on  the  orientation  of  the  magnetic  field  with  re- 
spect to  the  electric  field  gradient  (e.g.,  Wertheim  1961a),  and  it  is 
advantageous  to  work  with  single  crystals. 

6-4  IMPURITIES  AND  IMPERFECTIONS 

Every  Mossbauer  experiment  involves  nonideal  lattices.  Sadly, 
little  work  has  been  done  so  far  to  systematically  investigate  the  in- 
fluence of  deviations  from  an  ideal  lattice  on  recoilless  emission  or 
absorption.  A  number  of  publications  deal  with  internal  fields  at  im- 
purity atoms  but  this  aspect  will  not  be  discussed. 

6-41    Impurities 

Impurities  actually  form  a  special  class  of  imperfections,  but  they 
are  singled  out  here  because  each  radioactive  atom  that  emits  a 


102 


R.  E.  Watson  and  A.  J.  Freeman,  Phys.  Rev.,  123,  2027  (1961). 


84  THE     MdSSBAUER    EFFECT 


gamma  ray  can  be  considered  an  impurity  atom.  These  radioactive 
atoms  can  be  different  from  the  normal  lattice  in  a  number  of  proper- 
ties, such  as  mass,  binding,  or  radius;  they  can  also  be  in  interstitial 
positions. 

The  crude  models  that  have  been  considered  so  far  (Shapiro  1961, 
Reprint  Maleev  1961,  Visscher  1962)  predict  some  features  which  can 
be  checked  by  experiment.  Two  of  these  predictions  are  particularly 
simple  to  describe,  namely,  the  influence  of  the  mass   M  of  the  im- 
purity atom  and  the  existence  of  localized  oscillations.  Assume  that 
the  ideal  lattice  consists  of  atoms  with  a  mass  m  and  that  the  radio- 
active impurity  atom  possesses  a  mass  M.  The  predominant  part  of 
the  mean-square  deviatibn  <X2>  comes  from  frequencies  far  below 
the  Debye  frequency  o>d  because  the  contribution  of  each  individual 
mode,  <Xi>,  is  proportional  to  1/wi.  The  low-frequency  modes 
have  wavelengths  long  compared  to  the  lattice  spacing,  and  the  neigh- 
boring atoms  move  predominantly  in  the  same  direction.  The  displace- 
ment of  the  impurity  atom  with  respect  to  its  neighbors  is  then  small 
compared  to  its  displacement  X  from  the  equilibrium  position.  The 
mean- square  deviation  <X2>  of  the  impurity  atom  is  in  a  first  ap- 
proximation the  same  as  that  of  the  normal  lattice  atoms.  In  the 
Debye  approximation,  the  Lamb-Mossbauer  factor  f  is  thus  given  by 
Eq.  (53),  with  R  =  E2/2mc2.  If  this  description  is  correct,  then  the 
fraction  f  should  be  determined  by  the  mass  m  of  the  atoms  in  the 
host  lattice,  and  not  by  the  mass  M  of  the  impurity  atom.  This  con- 
clusion has,  however,  not  yet  been  substantiated  by  experiments. 

An  impurity  atom  in  an  ideal  lattice  produces  localized  oscillations, 
i.e.,  oscillations  that  are  large  in  its  immediate  vicinity  and  damp  out 
quickly  with  increasing  distance  from  it.103  These  localized  oscilla- 
tions should  give  rise  to  individual  discrete  peaks  in  the  recoil  spec- 
trum, separated  from  the  unshifted  line  by  energies  of  the  order  of 
0.01  ev  (Reprint  Maleev  1961,  Visscher  1962). 

6-42   Imperfections 

A  second  type  of  problem  occurs  when  the  host  lattice  is  not  ideal, 
which  is  the  situation  normally  encountered  in  experiments.  Various 
types  of  imperfections  can  then  influence  the  Mossbauer  effect.  Even 
though  little  work  has  been  done  on  this  aspect,  there  is  no  doubt  that 
experiments  involving  imperfections  will  play  an  increasingly  larger 
role  in  future  research. 


6-5    LOW  TEMPERATURES 

There  exist  some  problems  which  are  inherently  dependent  on  tern- 


103  A.  A.  Maradudin,  P.  Mazur,  E.  W.  Montroll,  and  G.  H.  Weiss, 
Revs.  Modern  Physics,  30,  175  (1958). 


SOLID-STATE     PHYSICS  85 

peratures  close  to,  or  below,  the  helium  boiling  point  and  which  can 
be  investigated  with  the  Mossbauer  effect.  Two  of  these  will  be 
sketched  here. 

6-51   Nuclear  Orientation 

In  conventional  nuclear  orientation  experiments,94'95  the  degree  of 
orientation  must  be  deduced  from  angular  distributions  of  nuclear  radi- 
ations. With  the  Mossbauer  effect,  this  property  can  be  determined 
more  directly,  at  least  in  favorable  cases.  The  ease  and  accuracy  with 
which  such  measurements  can  be  performed  make  it  likely  that  the 
Mossbauer  effect  can  be  used  as  a  thermometer  at  very  low  tempera- 
tures (Taylor  1962). 

As  a  simple  example,  consider  a  single  line  Co57—*  Fe57  source  and 
an  Fe57  absorber  that  possesses  a  strong  internal  field  H.  The  ground 
state  of  the  Fe57  nuclei  in  the  absorber  is  split  into  two  magnetic  sub- 
levels,  separated  in  energy  by  A  =  gfi0H  [Eq.  (66)].  At  a  temperature  T, 
the  ratio  of  the  equilibrium  populations  of  these  two  sublevels  is 

N(+l/2)/N(-l/2)  =  exp  (-A/kT)  =  exp  (-g/i0H/kT)  (115) 

The  ratio  of  symmetric  absorption  components,  for  instance, 
(l/2-~3/2)/(-l/2^  -3/2),  is  also  given  by  (115).  At  very  low  temper- 
atures, where  A^>kT,  the  component  originating  from  the  higher  sub- 
level  is  absent.  In  general,  both  components  will  be  present;  their  in- 
tensity ratio  is  a  direct  measure  for  the  Boltzmann  factor  (115)  and 
hence  yields  the  temperature  T  if  g  and  H  are  known. 

An  Fe57  absorber  works  as  a  thermometer  only  at  very  low  tem- 
peratures because  the  magnetic  moment  of  the  Fe57  ground  state  is 
very  small.  The  splitting  in  iron  metal  corresponds  to  a  temperature 
T*  =  A/k  =  2.2  x  10~3  °K;  appreciable  effects  hence  occur  only  in  the 
millidegree  range.  The  Los  Alamos  group  performed  an  experiment 
at  higher  temperatures  by  using  the  much  larger  magnetic  moment  of 
the  parent  nucleus  Co57  (Reprint  Dash  1961). 

6-52   Superconductivity 

The  application  of  the  Mossbauer  effect  to  superconductivity  is 
tempting  at  first  glance  because  the  energy  changes  detectable  in  the 
Mossbauer  effect  and  the  energy  change  per  atom  in  superconducting 
transitions  are  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude.  A  more  detailed  dis- 
cussion shows,  however,  that  one  should  not  expect  sizeable  effects, 
because  very  few  electrons  participate  in  a  superconducting  transition. 
Careful  experiments  by  the  Los  Alamos  group  (Craig  1960,  1961)  have 
indeed  failed  to  find  an  influence  of  a  superconducting  transition  on 
the  Mossbauer  effect.  Recent  experiments  (Wiedemann  1961)  which  in- 
dicate a  very  small  change  in  f,  are  not  conclusive. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  ON  THE 
MOSSBAUER  EFFECT 

Compiled  by  E.  Liischer,  D.  Pipkorn,  and  M.  Runkel 
Physics  Department,  University  of  Illinois 

7-1    REVIEW  ARTICLES 

A.  Abragam,  L'effet  Mossbauer  et  ses  applications  a  Petude  des 
champs  internes  (unpublished  lecture  notes). 

G.  N.  Belozerskii  and  Yu.  A.  Nemilov,  The  resonance  dispersion  of 
y-rays  in  crystals,  Uspekhi  Fiz.  Nauk,  72,  433  (1960)  (in  Russian); 
Soviet  Physics  Uspekhi,  3,  813  (1961)  (in  English). 

A.  J.  F.  Boyle  and  H.  E.  Hall,  Mossbauer  effect,  Repts.  Progr.  in 
Phys.  (to  be  published  in  1962). 

W.  E.  Burcham,  Nuclear  resonant  scattering  without  recoil  (Moss- 
bauer effect),  Sci.  Progr.,  48,  630  (1960). 

E.  Cotton,  Emission  et  absorption  de  rayonnement  gamma  sans  recul 
du  noyau  emetteur  emprisonne  dans  un  reseau  cristallin  (Effet 
Mossbauer),  J.  phys.  radium,  21,  285  (1960). 

P.P.  Craig,  Experimental  aspects  and  applications  of  the  Mossbauer 
effect,  in  G.  M.  Graham  and  A.  C.  Hollis -Halle tt  (eds.),    "Pro- 
ceedings of  the  Vllth  International  Conference  on  Low  Tempera- 
ture Physics,"  University  of  Toronto  Press,  Toronto,  1961, 
pp.  22-35. 

S.  DeBenedetti,  The  Mossbauer  effect,  Sci.  American,  202,  72  (1960). 


*  Entries  in  this  bibliography  are  arranged  (a)  alphabetically  by 
author,   (b)  by  added  joint  authors,   (c)   alphabetically  by  title.     In 
cases  where  two  or  more  papers  by  the  same  authors  appeared  in 
the  same  year,  the  second  paper  (alphabetically  by  title)  is  desig- 
nated a,  the  third  b,  etc. 

86 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  87 

W.  E.  Kock,  The  Mossbauer  radiation,  Science,  131,  1588  (1960). 
I.  Y.  Krause  and  G.  Liiders,  Kernresonanzabsorption  mit  eingefro- 

renem  Ruckstoss,  Naturwissenschaften,  47,  532  (1960). 
H.  Lustig,  The  Mossbauer  effect,  Am.  J.  Phys.,  29,  1  (1961). 
C.  Moller,  The  Mossbauer  effect,  pp.  73-79  of  Selected  Problems 

in  General  Relativity,  "Brandeis  University  1960  Summer  Insti- 
tute in  Theoretical  Physics  Lecture  Notes,"  distributed  by 

W.  A.  Benjamin,  Inc.,  New  York. 
P.  B.  Moon,  Developments  in  gamma-ray  optics,  Nature,  185,  427 

(1960). 
R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Recoilless  resonance  absorption  of  gamma  quanta 

in  solids,  Uspekhi  Fiz.  Nauk,  72,  658  (1960)  (in  Russian);   Soviet 

Physics  Uspekhi,  3,  866  (1961)  (in  English). 
R.  V.  Pound,  On  the  weight  of  photons,  Uspekhi  Fiz.  Nauk,  72,  673 

(1960)  (in  Russian);   Soviet  Physics  Uspekhi,  3,  875  (1961)  (in 

English). 
F.  L.  Shapiro,  "Elementary  Theory  of  the  Mossbauer  Effect,"  Press 

of  Phys.  Inst.,  Academy  of  Sciences,  Moscow,  1960  (in  Russian). 

F.  L.  Shapiro,  The  Mossbauer  effect,  Uspekhi  Fiz.  Nauk,  72,  685 
(1960)  (in  Russian);   Soviet  Physics  Uspekhi,  3,  881  (1961)  (in 
English);    Fortschr.  Physik,  9,  329  (1961)  (in  German). 

G.  K.  Wertheim,  The  Mossbauer  effect:  a  tool  for  science, 
Nucleonics,  19,  No.  1,  52  (1961). 

V.  Weisskopf,  The  Mossbauer  effect,  in  W.  E.  Brittin  and  B.  W. 
Downs  (eds.),  "Lectures  in  Theoretical  Physics,"  vol.  3,  Inter- 
science,  New  York,  1961,  pp.  70-80. 


7-2    RESEARCH  PAPERS 

A.  Abragam,  Effect  of  ultrasonics  on  the  emission  and  absorption 
of  y  radiation  without  recoil,  Compt.  rend.,  250,  4334  (1960). 

A.  Abragam  and  F.  Boutron,  Moment  quadrupolaire  du  premier  etat 
nucleaire  excite  du  fer  57,  Compt.  rend.,  252,  2404  (1961). 

C.  Alff  and  G.  K.  Wertheim,  Hyperfine  structure  of  Fe57  in  yttrium - 
iron  garnet  from  the  Mossbauer  effect,  Phys.  Rev.,  122,  1414 
(1961). 

S.  I.  Aksenov,  V.  P.  Alfimenkov,  V.  I.  Lushchikov,  Yu.  M.  Ostanevich, 
F.  L.  Shapiro,  and  Yen  Wu-Kuang,  Observation  of  resonance  ab- 
sorption of  gamma  rays  in  Zn67,  Zhur.  Eksp.  i  Teoret.  Fiz.,  40, 
88  (1961)  (in  Russian);   Soviet  Physics  JETP,  13,  62  (1961)  (in 
English). 

I.  Ya.  Bar  it,  M.  I.  Podgoretzkii,  and  F.  L.  Shapiro,  Several  possible 
applications  for  the  resonant  scattering  of  y-rays,  Zhur.  Eksp.  i 
Teoret.  Fiz.,  38,  301  (1960)  (in  Russian);  Soviet  Physics  JETP,  11, 
218  (1960)  (in  English). 

R.  Barloutaud,  E.  Cotton,  J.  L.  Picou,  and  J.  Quidort,  Absorption 


88  THE    MftSSBAUER    EFFECT 

resonnante  sans  recul  dy  rayonnement  y  de  23.8  de  Sn119,  Compt. 
rend.,  250,  319  (1960). 

R.  Barloutaud,  J.  L.  Picou,  and  C.  Tzara,  Diffusion  resonnante  du 
rayonnement  y  de  23.8  kev  de  Sn119  emis  sans  recul,  Compt.  rend., 
250,  2705  (1960a). 

R.  Bauminger,  S.  G.  Cohen,  A.  Marinov,  and  S.  Ofer,  Hyperfine  inter- 
actions in  the  ground  state  and  first  excited  state  of  Dy161  in  dys- 
prosium iron  garnet,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  6,  467  (1961). 

R.  Bauminger,  S.  G.  Cohen,  A.  Marinov,  and  S.  Ofer,  Study  of  the  in- 
ternal fields  acting  on  iron-nuclei  in  iron  garnet  using  the  recoil 
free  absorption  in  Fe57  of  the  14.4  kev  gamma  radiation  from 
Fe57m,  Phys.  Rev.,  122,  743  (1961a). 

R.  Bauminger,  S.  G.  Cohen,  A.  Marinov,  S.  Ofer,  and  E.  Segal,  Study 
of  the  low  temperature  transitions  in  magnetite  and  the  internal 
fields  acting  on  iron  nuclei  in  some  spinel  ferrites,  using  Moss- 
bauer  absorption,  Phys.  Rev.,  122,  1447  (1961b). 

P.  J.  Black  and  P.  B.  Moon,  Resonant  scattering  of  the  14  kev  Fe57 
y-ray  and  its  interference  with  Rayleigh  scattering,  Nature,  188, 
481  (1960). 

A.  J.  F.  Boyle,  D.  St.  P.  Bunbury,  and  C.  Edwards,  The  isomer  shift 
in  Sn119  and  the  quadrupole  moment  of  the  first  excited  state, 
Proc.  Phys.  Soc.  (London)  (to  be  published). 

A.  J.  F.  Boyle,  D.  St.  P.  Bunbury,  and  C.  Edwards,  The  nuclear 
Zeeman  effect  and  quadrupole  splitting  in  Sn119,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc. 
(London),  77,  1062  (1961b). 

A.  J.  F.  Boyle,  D.  St.  P.  Bunbury,  and  C.  Edwards,  Polarization  of 
the  conduction  electrons  in  the  ferromagnetic  metals,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters,  5,  553  (1960). 

A.  J.  F.  Boyle,  D.  St.  P.  Bunbury,  C.  Edwards,  and  H.  E.  Hall, 
A  chemical  red  shift  of  the  recoilless  y-emission  of  Sn119m,  Proc. 
Phys.  Soc.  (London),  76,  165  (1960a). 

A.  J.  F.  Boyle,  D.  St.  P.  Bunbury,  C.  Edwards,  and  H.  E.  Hall,  The 
Mossbauer  effect  in  tin  from  120 °K  to  the  melting  point,  Proc. 
Phys.  Soc.  (London),  77,  129  (1961a). 

V.  A.  Bryukhanov,  N.  N.  Delyagin,  B.  Zhvenglinskii,  and  V.  S. 

Shpinel,  The  energy  shifts  of  y -transitions  observed  in  resonance 
absorption  of  gamma  quanta  in  crystals,  Zhur.  Eksp.  i  Teoret. 
Fiz.,  40,  713  (1961)  (in  Russian);   Soviet  Physics  JETP,  13,  499 
(1961)  (in  English). 

A.  Bussiere  de  Nercy,  M.  Langevin,  and  M.  Spighel,  Absorption 
resonnante  du  rayonnement  y  de  Pholmium  166  et  de  Posmium 
193  sans  recul  de  noyau,  Compt.  rend.,  250,  1031  (1960). 

A.  Bussiere  de  Nercy,  M.  Langevin,  and  M.  Spighel,  Absorption 

resonnante  du  rayonnement  y  sans  recul  du  noyau  de  Ho166  et  Os193, 
J.  phys.  radium,  21,  288  (1960a). 

D.  C.  Champeney  and  P.  B.  Moon,  Absence  of  Doppler  shift  for  y-ray 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  89 

source  and  detector  on  same  circular  orbit,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc. 
(London),  77,  350  (1961). 

G.  Cocconi  and  E.  E.  Salpeter,  Upper  limit  for  the  anisotropy  of  in- 
ertia from  the  Mossbauer  effect,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  176  (1960). 

M.  Cordey-Hayes,  N.  A.  Dyson,  and  P.  B.  Moon,  Width  and  intensity 
of  the  Mossbauer  line  in  Fe57,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc.    (London),  75, 
810  (1960). 

P.  P.  Craig,  J.  G.  Dash,  A.  D.  McGuire,  D.  E.  Nagle,  and  R.  R. 
Reiswig,  Nuclear  resonance  absorption  of  gamma  rays  in  Ir191, 
Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  3,  221  (1959). 

P.  P.  Craig,  D.  E.  Nagle,  and  D.  R.  F.  Cochran,  Zeeman  effect  in 
the  recoilless  y-ray  resonance  of  Zn67,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4, 
561  (1960). 

P.  P.  Craig,  D.  E.  Nagle,  and  R.  D.  Reiswig,  Resonant  absorption  of 
gamma  radiation  in  superconductors,  Phys.  and  Chem.  Solids,  17, 
168  (1960a). 

P.P.  Craig,  D.  Nagle,  and  R.  D.  Taylor,  Mossbauer  effect  in  super- 
conducting indium,  Nuovo  cimento,  22,  402  (1961). 

T.  E.  Cranshaw,  J.  P.  Schiffer,  and  A.  B.  Whitehead,  Measurement 
of  the  gravitational  red  shift  using  the  Mossbauer  effect  in  Fe57, 
Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  163  (1960). 

J.  G.  Dash,  R.  D.  Taylor,  P.  P.  Craig,  D.  E.  Nagle,  D.  R.  F.  Cochran, 
and  W.  E.  Keller,  Mossbauer  effect  in  Fe57  at  very  low  tempera- 
ture, Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  5,  152  (1960). 

J.  G.  Dash,  R.  D.  Taylor,  D.E.  Nagle,  P.P.Craig,  and  W.  M.  Visscher, 
Polarization  of  Co57  in  Fe  metal,  Phys.  Rev.,  122,  1116  (1961). 

S.  DeBenedetti,  G.  Lang,  and  R.  Ingalls,  Electric  quadrupole  split- 
ting and  the  nuclear  volume  effect  in  the  ions  of  Fe57,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters,  6,  60  (1961). 

N.  N.  Delyagin,  V.  S.  Shpinel,  V.  A.  Bryukhanov,  and  B.  Zhvenglinskii, 
Hyperfine  structure  of  y-rays  caused  by  quadrupole  interaction  in 
a  crystal  lattice,  Zhru.  Eksp.  i  Teoret.  Fiz.,  39,  220  (1960)  (in 
Russian);   Soviet  Physics  JETP,  12,  159  (1961)  (in  English). 

N.  N.  Delyagin,  V.  S.  Shpinel,  V.  A.  Bryukhanov,  and  B.  Zhvenglinskii, 
Nuclear  Zeeman-effect  in  Sn119,  Zhur.  Eksp.  i  Teoret.  Fiz.,  39, 
894  (1960a)  (in  Russian);   Soviet  Physics  JETP,  12,  619  (1961)  (in 
English). 

G.  DePasquali,  H.  Frauenfelder,  S.  Margulies,  and  R.  N.  Peacock, 
Nuclear  resonance  absorption  and  nuclear  Zeeman  effect  in  Fe57, 
Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  71  (1960). 

I.  P.  Dziub  and  A.  F.  Lubchenko,  On  the  theory  of  the  Mossbauer  ef- 
fect, Doklady  Akad.  Nauk  SSSR,  136,  66  (1961)  (in  Russian);  Phys. 
Express,  3,  No.  9,  34  (1961)  (in  English);  Soviet  Physics  Doklady, 
6,  33  (1961)  (in  English). 

P.  A.  Flinn  and  S.  L.  Ruby,  Local  magnetic  fields  in  Fe-Al  alloys, 
Phys.  Rev.,  124,  34  (1961). 


90  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

H.  Frauenfelder,  D.  R.  F.  Cochran,  D.  E.  Nagle,  and  R.  D.  Taylor, 

Internal  conversion  from  resonance  absorption,  Nuovo  cimento, 

19,  183  (1961). 
H.  Frauenfelder,  D.  E.  Nagle,  R.  D.  Taylor,  D.  R.  F.  Cochran,  and 

W.  M.  Visscher,  Elliptical  polarization  of  Fe57  gamma  rays  (to 

be  published). 
J.  Gastebois  and  J.  Quidort,  Mise  en  evidence  du  moment  quadru- 

polaire  du  noyau  de  fer  57,  Compt.  rend,  253,  1257  (1961). 

A.  Gelberg,  Winkelverteilung  und  zirkulare  Polarisation  der 
y-Strahlung  im  Mossbauereffekt,  Inst,  de  Fiz.  Atomica  Maguerle- 
Bucuresti  Rept.  16. 

L.  Grodzins  and  F.  Genovese,  Experimental  investigation  of  parity 
conservation  in  the  14.4  kev  gamma  transition  of  Fe57,  Phys.  Rev., 
121,  228  (1961). 

L.  Grodzins  and  A.  Phillips,  Measurement  of  the  refractive  index  of 
lucite  by  recoilless  resonance  absorption,  Phys.  Rev.,  124,  774 
(1961a). 

M.  N.  Hack  and  M.  Hamermesh,  Effect  of  radiofrequency  resonance 
on  the  natural  line  form,  Nuovo  cimento,  19,  546  (1961). 

R.  V.  Hanks,  Pressure  dependence  of  the  Mossbauer  effect,  Phys. 
Rev.,  124,  1319  (1961). 

S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J.  Perlow,  R.  S.  Preston, 
and  D.  H.  Vincent,  Observation  on  the  Mossbauer  effect  in  Fe57, 
Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  28  (1960). 

S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J.  Perlow,  R.  S.  Preston, 
and  D.  H.  Vincent,  Polarized  spectra  and  hyperfine  structure  in 
Fe57,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  177  (1960a). 

S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  G.  J.  Perlow,  R.  S.  Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vin- 
cent, Direction  of  the  effective  magnetic  field  at  the  nucleus  in 
ferromagnetic  iron,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  513  (1960b). 

S.  S.  Hanna,  L.  Meyer-Schutzmeister,  R.  S.  Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vin- 
cent, Nuclear  Zeeman  effect  in  Sn119,  Phys.  Rev.,  120,  2211 
(1960c). 

S.  M.  Harris,  Quantum  mechanical  calculation  of  Mossbauer  trans- 
mission, Phys.  Rev.,  124,  1178  (1961). 

H.  J.  Hay,  J.  P.  Schiffer,  T.  E.  Cranshaw,  and  P.  A.  Egelstaff, 
Measurement  of  the  red  shift  in  an  accelerated  system  using  the 
Mossbauer  effect  in  Fe57,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  165  (1960). 

B.  Hoffman,  Noon-midnight  red  shift,  Phys.  Rev.,  121,  337  (1960). 
R.  E.  Holland,  F.  J.  Lynch,  G.  J.  Perlow,  and  S.  S.  Hanna,  Time 

spectra  of  filtered  resonance  radiation  of  Fe57,  Phys.  Rev.  Let- 
ters, 4,  181  (1960). 
S.  Jha,  R.  K.  Gupta,  H.  G.  Devare,  G.  C.  Pramila,  and  R.  Srinivasa 
Raghavan,  Recoilless  emission  and  absorption  of  26  kev  gamma- 
ray  of  Dy161,  Nuovo  cimento,  19,  682  (1961). 

C.  E.  Johnson,  M.  S.  Ridout,  T.  E.  Cranshaw,  and  P.  E.  Madsen, 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  91 

Hyperfine  field  and  atomic  moment  of  Fe  in  ferromagnetic  alloys, 

Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  6,  450  (1961). 
B.  D.  Josephson,  Temperature  dependent  shift  of  y-rays  emitted  by 

a  solid,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  341  (1960). 
Yu.  Kagan,  Anisotropy  of  the  Mossbauer  effect,  Doklady  Akad.  Nauk 

SSSR,  140,  794  (1961). 
Yu.  Kagan,  Determination  of  the  frequency  spectrum  of  phonons  in 

crystals,  Zhur.  Eksp.  i  Teoret.  Fiz.,  40,  312  (1961)  (in  Russian); 

Soviet  Physics  JETP,  13,  211  (1961a)  (in  English). 
M.  Kalvius,  P.  Kienle,  K.  Bockmann,  and  H.  Eicher,  Hyperfein- 

strukturaufspal$ung  von  riickstossfreien  y-Linien:  II.    Das  8,42 

kev  Niveau  in  Tm169,  Z.  Physik,  163,  87  (1961). 
E.  Kankeleit,  Untersuchung  von  Konversions-Elektronen  beim 

Mossbauereffekt  am  Wolfram  182  mit  einem  magnetischen 

Spektrometer,  Z.  Physik,  164,  442  (1961). 
A.  Kastler,  Sur  la  possibilite  de  mettre  en  evidence  la  coherence 

de  phase  dans  la  diffusion  de  resonance  des  rayons  y  par  des 

noyaux  atomiques,  Compt.  rend.,  250,  509  (1960). 
M.  V.  Kazarnovskii,  Theory  of  resonant  interaction  of  y-ray  with 

crystals,  Zhur.  Eksp.  i  Teoret.  Fiz.,  38,  1652  (I960)  (in  Russian); 

Soviet  Physics  JETP,  11,  1191  (1960)  (in  English). 
W.  H.  Kelly,  V.  J.  Folen,  M.  Hass,  W.  N.  Schreiner,  and  G.  G. 

Beard,  Magnetic  field  at  the  nucleus  in  spinel-type  crystals, 

Phys.  Rev.,  124,  80  (1961). 
O.  C.  Kistner  and  A.  W.  Sunyar,  Evidence  for  quadrupole  interaction 

of  Fe57m  and  influence  of  chemical  binding  on  nuclear  gamma-ray 

energy,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  412  (1960). 

0.  C.  Kistner,  A.  W.  Sunyar,  and  J.  B.  Swan,  Hyperfine  structure  of 
the  24  kev  transitions  in  Sn119,  Phys.  Rev.  123,  179  (1961). 

1.  Y.  Krause  and  G.  Liiders,  Experimentelle  Priifung  der  Relativitats- 

theorie  mit  Kernresonanzabsorption,  Naturwissenschaften,  48,  34 
(1961). 

M.  A.  Krivoglaz,  Effect  of  diffusion  on  the  scattering  of  neutrons  and 
photons  by  crystal  imperfections,  and  on  the  Mossbauer  effect, 
Zhur.  Eksp.  i  Teoret.  Fiz.,  40,  1812  (1961)  (in  Russian);  Soviet 
Physics  JETP,  13,  1273  (1961)  (in  English). 

W.  E.  Lamb,  Jr.,  Possible  use  of  highly  monochromatic  gamma  rays 
for  microwave  spectroscopy,  in  C.  H.  Townes  (ed.),  "Quantum 
Electronics,  a  Symposium,"  Columbia  University  Press,  New 
York,  1960,  p.  588. 

L.  L.  Lee,  L.  Meyer-Schiitzmeister,  J.  P.  Schiffer,  and  D.  Vincent, 
Nuclear  resonance  absorption  of  gamma  rays  at  low  temperatures, 
Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  3,  223  (1959). 

H.  J.  Lipkin,  The  Debye -Waller  factor  in  Mossbauer  interference  ex- 
periments, Phys.  Rev.,  123,  62  (1961). 


92  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

H.J.  Lipkin,  Some  simple  features  of  the  Mossbauer  effect,  Ann. 
Phys.,  9,  332  (1960). 

H.  J.  Lipkin,  Some  simple  features  of  the  Mossbauer  effect,  II,  Ann. 
Phys.  (in  press). 

W.  Low,  The  effect  of  relaxation  phenomena  on  Mossbauer  experi- 
ments, in  G..  M.  Graham  and  A.  C.  Hollis-Hallett  (eds.),  "Proceed- 
ings of  the  Vllth  International  Conference  on  Low  Temperature 
Physics, "  University  of  Toronto  Press,  Toronto,  1961,  pp.  20-22. 

F.  J.  Lynch,  R.  E.  Holland,  and  M.  Hamermesh,  Time  dependence  of 
resonantly  filtered  gamma  rays  from  Fe57,  Phys.  Rev.,  120,  513 
(1960). 

V.  A.  Lyubimov  and  A.  I.  Alikhanov,  Influence  of  magnetic  fields  on 
resonance  absorption  of  gamma  rays,  Zhur.  Eksp.  i  Teoret.  Fiz., 

38,  1912  (1960)  (in  Russian);  Soviet  Physics  JETP,  11,  1375  (1960) 
(in  English);  Izvest.  Akad.  Nauk  SSSR,  24,  1076  (1960)  (in  Russian); 
Bull.  acad.  sci.  URSS,  24,  1084  (in  English). 

K.  J.  Major,  Recoil-free  resonant  and  nonresonant  scattering  from 
Fe57  (to  be  published). 

S.  V.  Maleev,  On  the  use  of  the  Mossbauer  effect  for  studying  lo- 
calized oscillations  of  atoms  in  solids,  Zhur.  Eksp.  i  Teoret.  Fiz., 

39,  891  (1960)  (in  Russian);   Soviet  Physics  JETP,  12,  617  (1961) 
(in  English). 

S.  Margulies,  The  Mossbauer  effect  in  iron-57  (unpublished  thesis, 

Univ.  Illinois,  1962)  [Tech.  Rept.  28,  on  Nonr  1834(05),  Physics 

Dept.,  Univ.  Illinois  (October  1961)]. 
S.  Margulies  and  J.  R.  Ehrman,  Transmission  and  line  broadening  of 

resonance  radiation  incident  on  a  resonance  absorber,  Nuclear 

Instr.,  12,  131  (1961a). 
Luise  Meyer -Schiitzmeister,  R.  S.  Preston,  and  S.  S.  Hanna,  Internal 

magnetic  fields  in  manganese-tin  alloys,  Phys.  Rev.,  122,  1717 

(1961). 
K.  P.  Mitrofanov  and  V.  S.  Shpinel,  Resonance  absorption  of  the 

23.8  kev  y-ray  of  Sn119  observed  by  means  of  internally  converted 

electrons,  Zhur.  Eksp.  i  Teoret.  Fiz.,  40,  983  (1961)  (in  Russian); 

Soviet  Physics  JETP,  13,  686  (1961)  (in  English). 
P.  B.  Moon,  Interference  between  Rayleigh  and  nuclear  resonant 

scattering  of  gamma  rays,  Proc.  Royal  Soc.  (London),  A263,  309 

(1961). 
M.  Morita,  Possible  parity  and  time -reversal  experiments  using 

the  Mossbauer  effect,  Phys.  Rev.,  122,  1525  (1961). 
R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  von  Gammastrahlung  in 

Ir191,  Z.  Physik,  151,  124  (1958). 
R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Kernresonanzabsorption  von  Gammastrahlung  in 

Ir191,  Naturwissenschaften,  45,  538  (1958a). 
R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Kernresonanzabsorption  von  Gammastrahlung  in 

Ir191,  Z.  Naturforsch.,  14a,  211  (1959). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  93 

R.  L.  Mossbauer,  F.  W.  Stanek,  and  W.  H.  Wiedemann,  Hyperfein- 
strukturaufspaltung  von  ruckstossfreien  y-Linien:    I.     Das 
80,6  kev-Niveau  in  Er166,  Z.  Physik,  161,  388  (1961). 

R.  L.  Mossbauer  and  W.  H.  Wiedemann,  Kernresonanz absorption 
nicht  Dopplerverbreiterter  Gammastrahlung  in  Re187,  Z.  Physik, 
159,  33  (1960). 

D.  E.  Nagle,  P.  P.  Craig,  P.  Barrett,  R.  D.  Taylor,  and  D.  R.  F. 
Cochran,  Internal  fields  at  low  temperatures  in  CoPd  alloys, 
Phys.  Rev.  (to  be  published). 

D.  Nagle,  P.P.  Craig,  J.  G.  Dash,  and  R.  R.  Reiswig,  Nuclear  reso- 
nance fluorescence  in  Au197,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  237  (1960). 

D.  E.  Nagle,  P.P.  Craig,  and  W.  E.  Keller,  Ultra  high  resolution 
y-ray  resonance  in  Zn67,  Nature,  186,  707  (1960a). 

D.  E.  Nagle,  H.  Frauenf elder,  R.  D.  Taylor,  D.  R.  F.  Cochran,  and 
B.  T.  Matthias,  Temperature  dependence  of  the  internal  field  in 
ferromagnets,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  5,  364  (1960b). 

F.  E.  Obenshain  and  H.  H.  F.  Wegener,  Mossbauer  effect  with  Ni61, 
Phys.  Rev.,  121,  1344  (1961). 

S.  Ofer,  P.  Avivi,  R.  Bauminger,  J.  Marinov,  and  S.  G.  Cohen,  Nu- 
clear resonance  absorption  in  Dy161  situated  in  Dy203  and  dyspro- 
sium iron  garnet,  Phys.  Rev.,  120,  406  (1960). 

G.  J.  Perlow,  S.  S.  Hanna,  M.  Hamermesh,  C.  Littlejohn,  D.  H. 
Vincent,  R.  S.  Preston,  and  J.  Heberle,  Polarization  of  nuclear 
resonance  radiation  in  ferromagnetic  Fe57,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters, 
4,  74  (1960). 

J.  Petzold,  Einige  Bermerkungen  zur  Theorie  des  Mossbauer- 

Effektes,  Z.  Physik,  163,  71  (1961). 
J.  Petzold,  "Theorie  des  M6ssbauer-Effektes,,,  Sitzber.  Heidelberg 

Akad.  der  Wissen.  (Springer  Verlag,  Heidelberg,  1961a). 
J.  L  Picou,  J.  Quidort,  R.  Barloutaud,  and  E.  Cotton,  Absorption 

resonnante  des  y  sans  recul  dans  la  des  integration  du  premier  etat 

excite  de  Sn119  (to  be  published). 
M.  I.  Podgoretskii  and  I.  I.  Roizen,  Radiation  of  a  nucleus  in  the 

presence  of  unexcited  nuclei  of  the  same  type,   Zhur.  Eksp.  i 

Teoret.  Fiz.,  39,  1473  (1960)  (in  Russian);    Soviet  Physics  JETP 

12,  1023  (1960)  (in  English);   Physics  Express,  3,  No.  7,  22  (1961) 

(in  English). 
M.  I.  Podgoretskii  and  A.  V.  Stepanov,  The  Doppler  width  of  emission 

and  absorption  lines,  Zhur.  Eksp.  i  Teoret.  Fiz.,  40,  561  (1961) 

(in  Russian);   Soviet  Physics  JETP,  13,  393  (1961)  (in  English). 
R.  V.  Pound,  G.  B.  Benedek,  and  R.  Drever,  Effect  of  hydrostatic 

compression  on  the  energy  of  the  14.4  kev  gamma  ray  from  Fe57 

in  iron,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  7,  405  (1961). 
R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Apparent  weight  of  photons,  Phys. 

Rev.  Letters,  4,  337  (1960). 
R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Attempts  to  detect  resonance  scat- 


94  THE     MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

tering  in  Zn67;   the  effect  of  zero  point  vibrations,  Phys.  Rev.  Let- 
ters, 4,  397  (1960a). 
R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Gravitational  red- shift  in  nuclear 

resonance,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  3,  439  (1959). 
R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Resonant  absorption  of  the  14.4  kev 

y-ray  from  0.10  jiisec  Fe57,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  3,  554  (1959a). 
R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Variation  with  temperature  of  the 

energy  of  recoil-free  y-rays  from  solids,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4, 

274  (1960). 
R.  S.  Raghavan,  On  the  possibility  of  a  new  phase  determining  method 

applying  the  Mossbauer  effect  (to  be  published). 
S.  L.  Ruby  and  D.  I.  Bolef,  Acoustically  modulated  y-rays  from  Fe57, 

Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  5,  5  (1960). 
S.  L.  Ruby,  L.  M.  Epstein,  and  K.  H.  Sun,  Mossbauer  effect  in  ferro- 

cyanide,  Rev.  Sci.  Instr.,  31,  580  (1960). 
S.  L.  Ruby  and  G.  Shirane,  Magnetic  anomaly  in  FeTi03-a!  Fe2Os  sys- 
tem by  Mossbauer  effect,  Phys.  Rev.,  123,  1239  (1961). 
M.  Ruderfer,  First  order  terrestrial  ether  drift  experiment  using 

the  Mossbauer  radiation,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  5,  191  (1960); 

correction:  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  7,  361  (1961). 
J.  P.  Schiffer  and  W.  Marshall,  Recoilless  resonance  absorption  of 

gamma  rays  in  Fe57,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  3,  556  (1959). 
C.  W.  Sherwin,  H.  Frauenfelder,  E.  L.  Garwin,  E.  Luscher,  S. 

Margulies,  and  R.  N.  Peacock,  A  search  for  the  anisotropy  of 

inertia  using  the  Mossbauer  effect  in  Fe57,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters, 

4,  399  (1960). 

C.  W.  Sherwin,  Some  recent  experimental  tests  of  the  "clock  para- 
dox," Phys.  Rev.,  120,  17  (1960a). 

G.  Shirane,  D.  E.  Cox,  and  S.  L.  Ruby,  Mossbauer  study  of  isomer 
shift,  quadrupole  interaction,  and  hyperfine  field  in  several  oxides 
containing  Fe57,  Phys.  Rev.  (to  be  published). 

D.  A.  Shirley,  Interpretation  of  the  isomeric  chemical  shifts  in  Au197, 
Phys.  Rev.,  124,  354  (1961). 

D.  A.  Shirley,  M.  Kaplan,  and  P.  Axel,  Recoil-free  resonant  absorp- 
tion in  Au197,  Phys.  Rev.,  123,  816  (1961a). 

V.  H.  Shpinel,  V.  A.  Bryukhanov,  and  N.  N.  Delyagin,  Effect  of  tem- 
perature on  the  hyperfine  structure  of  gamma  radiation,  Zhur. 
Eksp.  i  Teoret.  Fiz.,  40,  1525  (1961)  (in  Russian). 

K.  S.  Singwi  and  A.  Sjolander,  Resonance  absorption  of  nuclear  y-rays 
and  the  dynamics  of  atomic  motions,  Phys.  Rev.,  120,  2211  (1960). 

V.  V.  Sklyarevskii,  B.  N.  Samoilov,  and  E.  P.  Stepanov,  Temperature 
dependence  of  the  hyperfine  splitting  of  dysprosium  levels  in  para- 
magnetic dysprosium  oxide,  Zhur.  Eksp.  i  Teoret.  Fiz.,  40,  1875 
(1961)  (in  Russian). 

H.  S.  Snyder  and  G.  C.  Wick,  Broadening  of  the  Mossbauer  line,  Phys. 
Rev.,  120,  128  (1960). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  95 

I.  Solomon,  Effet  Mossbauer  dans  la  pyrite  et  la  marcassite,  Compt. 

rend.,  250,  3828  (1960). 
I.  Solomon,  Mesure  par  effet  Mossbauer  de  champs  locaux  dans 

divers  composes  du  fer,  Compt.  rend.,  251,  2675  (1960). 
R.  D.  Taylor,  A  low  temperature  thermometer  utilizing  the  Mossbauer 

effect,  in  C.  M.  Herzfeld  (ed.),  ''Temperature,  Its  Measurement 

and  Control  in  Science  and  Industry,"  Reinhold,  New  York,  1962. 
G.  T.  Trammel,  Elastic  scattering  at  resonance  from  bound  nuclei 

(to  be  published). 
P.-K.  Tseng,  N.  Shikazono,  H.  Takehoshi,  and  T.  Shoji,  Temperature 

dependence  of  nuclear  resonance  absorption  line  width  in  Dy161, 

J.  Phys.  Soc.  Japan,  16,  1790  (1961). 
C.  Tzara,  Diffusion  des  photons  sur  les  atomes  et  les  noyaux  dans 

les  cristaux,  J.  phys.  radium,  22,  303  (1961). 
C.  Tzara,  Sur  l'excitation  resonnante  deniveaux  nucleaires  metastables 

de  vie  tres  longue,  Compt.  rend.,  250,  1466  (1960). 
C.  Tzara  and  R.  Barloutaud,  Recoilless  Rayleigh  scattering  in  solids, 

Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  405  (1960a). 
W.  M.  Visscher,  Neutrino  detection  by  resonance  absorption  in 

crystals  at  low  temperature,  Phys.  Rev.,  116,  1581  (1959). 
W.  M.  Visscher,  Recoilless  emission  by  an  impurity  atom  (to  be 

published). 
W.  M.  Visscher,  Study  of  lattice  vibrations  by  resonance  absorption 

of  nuclear  gamma  rays,  Ann.  Phys.,  9,  194  (1960). 
J.  van  Kranendonk,  Theoretical  aspects  of  the  Mossbauer  effect,  in 

G.  M.  Graham  and  A.  C.  Hollis-Hallett  (eds.),  "Proceedings  of 

the  Vnth  International  Conference  on  Low  Temperature  Physics," 

University  of  Toronto  Press,  Toronto,  1961,  pp.  9-20. 

F.  E.  Wagner,  F.  W.  Stanek,  P.  Kienle,  and  H.  Eicher,  Hyperfein- 
strukturauf spaltung  von  riickstossfreien  y  -Linien:  in.     Das 
84  kev-Niveau  in  Yb170,  Z.  Physik  (to  be  published). 

L.  R.  Walker,  G.  K.  Wertheim,  and  V.  Jaccarino,  Interpretation  of 
the  Fe57  isomer  shift,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  6,  98  (1961). 

H.  H.  F.  Wegener  and  F.  E.  Obenshain,  Mossbauer  effect  for  Ni61 
with  applied  magnetic  fields,  Z.  Physik,  163,  17  (1961). 

G.  K.  Wertheim,  Hyperfine  structure  of  divalent  and  trivalent  Fe57  in 
cobalt  oxide,  Phys.  Rev.,  124,  764  (1961). 

G.  K.  Wertheim,  Hyperfine  structure  of  Fe57  in  paramagnetic  and 

antiferromagnetic  FeF2  from  the  Mossbauer  effect,  Phys.  Rev., 

121,  63  (1961a). 
G.  K.  Wertheim,  Measurement  of  local  fields  at  impurity  Fe57  atoms 

using  the  Mossbauer  effect,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  403  (1960). 
G.  K.  Wertheim,  Mossbauer  effect:  applications  to  magnetism, 

J.  Appl.  Phys.  (Suppl),  32,  110S  (1961b). 
G.  K.  Wertheim  and  J.  H.  Wernick,  Fe57  Mossbauer  effect  on  Cu-Ni 

alloys,  Phys.  Rev.,  123,  755  (1961c). 


96  THE    MOSSBAUER    EFFECT 

W.  H.  Wiedemann,  P.  Kienle,  and  F.  Pobell,  Mossbauereffekt  im 
normalleitenden  und  supraleitenden  Zustand  von  Sn119,  Z.  Physik, 
165  (1961). 

C.  S.  Wu,  Y.  K.  Lee,  N.  Benczer-Koller,  and  P.  Simms,  Frequency 
distribution  of  resonance  line  versus  delay  time,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters,  5,  432  (1960). 

U.  Zahn,  P.  Kienle,  and  H.  Eicher,  Quadrupolaufspaltung  und  Iso- 
merieverschiebung  der  14.4  kev  y-Linie  von  Fe57  in  metall- 
organischen  Eisenverbindungen,  Z.  Physik  (in  press). 

L.  G.  Zastavenko  and  M.  I.  Podgoretskii,  The  effect  of  external  fields 
on  the  angular  correlations  and  resonance  processes  during  quan- 
tum transitions,  Zhur.  Eksp.  i  Teoret.  Fiz.,  39,  1023  (1960)  (in 
Russian);   Soviet  Physics  JETP,  12,  711  (1961)  (in  English).    Ex- 
cerpts also  translated  in  Phys.  Express,  3,  No.  5,  21  (1961). 

7-3    CONFERENCE  REPORTS 

"Mossbauer  Effect;   Recoilless  Emission  and  Absorption  of  Gamma 
Rays,"  Hans  Frauenf elder  and  Harry  Lustig  (eds.)  (Discussions 
of  On-Site  Conference  of  the  Advisory  Committee  to  the  Directo- 
rate of  Solid  State  Sciences,  Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific  Re- 
search, Univ.  Illinois,  Allerton  House,  June  6-7,  1960).    Available 
only  as  AF-TN  60-698.    This  unpublished  report  is  known  in  the 
field  as  "The  First  Mossbauer  Conference  Report." 

Proceedings  of  the  Second  Mossbauer  Conference,  Paris,  Sept.  13-16, 
1961,  A.  Schoen  and  D.  M.  J.  Compton  (eds.),  Wiley,  New  York, 
tentative  publication   Spring    1962. 


REPRINTS  AND 
TRANSLATIONS 


99 


The  Effect  of  Collisions  upon  the  Doppler  Width  of  Spectral  Lines 

R.  H.  DtcKE 

Palmer  Physical  Laboratory,  Princeton  University,  Princeton,  New  Jersey 
(Received  September  17,  1952) 


Quantum  mechanically  the  Doppler  effect  results  from  the  recoil  momentum  changing  the  translational 
energy  of  the  radiating  atom.  The  assumption  that  the  recoil  momentum  is  given  to  the  radiating  atom  is 
shown  to  be  incorrect  if  collisions  are  taking  place.  If  the  collisions  do  not  cause  broadening  by  affecting  the 
internal  state  of  the  radiator,  they  result  in  a  substantial  narrowing  of  the  Doppler  broadened  line. 


QUANTUM  mechanically,  the  Doppler  effect  re- 
sults from  the  recoil  momentum  given  to  the 
radiating  system  by  the  emitted  photon.1  This  recoil 
momentum  implies  a  change  in  the  kinetic  energy  of  the 
radiating  atom  which  is  in  turn  mirrored  by  a  corre- 
sponding change  in  the  photon's  energy.  This  change 
in  the  photon's  energy  is  proportional  to  the  component 
of  the  atom's  velocity  in  the  direction  of  emission  of  the 
photon  and  leads  to  the  normal  expression  for  the 
Doppler  effect.  Since  for  gas  pressures  commonly  en- 
countered the  fraction  of  the  time  that  an  atom  is  in 
collision  is  negligibly  small,  it  might  seem  reasonable  to 
assume  that  the  recoil  momentum  is  absorbed  by  the 
single  radiating  atom  or  molecule  rather  than  by  an 
atomic  aggregate.  In  this  case  the  Doppler  breadth 


a=-£  x 


a-* 


a=f 


V   (|-£) 


EMITTED  , 
v  ('|-£)     FREQUENCY 


Fig.  1.  Spectral  distribution  of  radiation  emitted  by  an  atom 
confined  to  a  one-dimensional  box  of  width  a. 


E.  Fermi,  Revs.  Modern  Phys.  4,  105  (1932). 


would,  within  limits,  be  pressure-independent.  Actu- 
ally, under  certain  circumstances,  this  assumption  is 
far  from  correct.  Collisions  which  do  not  affect  the  in- 
ternal state  of  the  radiating  system  have  a  large  effect 
upon  the  Doppler  breadth. 

The  effect  of  collisions  upon  the  Doppler  effect  is 
best  illustrated  with  a  simple  example  treated  first 
classically  and  then  quantum  mechanically.  Assume 
that  the  radiating  atom,  but  not  the  radiation,  is  con- 
fined to  a  one-dimensional  well  of  width  a,  and  that  it 
moves  back  and  forth  between  the  two  walls  with  a 
speed  v.  The  wave  emitted  by  the  atom  is  frequency 
modulated  with  the  various  harmonics  of  the  oscillation 
frequency  of  the  atom  in  the  square  well.  For  negligible 
collision  and  radiation  damping,  the  spectral  distribu- 
tion of  the  emitted  radiation  is  obtained  from  a  Fourier 
series.  A  set  of  equally  spaced  sharp  lines  is  obtained. 
They  occur  at  the  non-Doppler  shifted  frequency  plus- 
or  minus-integral  multiples  of  the  oscillation  frequency 
of  the  atom  in  the  square  well.  The  intensity  distribu- 
tion of  these  lines  is  shown  for  several  values  of  a/X  in 
Fig.  1. 

In  the  quantum-mechanical  description  of  this  ex- 
ample, the  radiating  system  possesses  two  types  of 
energy,  internal  and  external.  The  external  energy  is 
the  quantized  energy  of  the  atomic  center-of-mass 
moving  in  the  one-dimensional  square  well.  In  a  transi- 
tion in  which  a  photon  is  absorbed  or  emitted,  both  the 
internal  and  external  quantum  numbers  may  change. 
The  frequency  of  the  emitted  photon  is 

^m=H-(V8Ma2)(n2-m2). 

Here  v  is  the  frequency  of  the  non-Doppler  shifted 
line,  M  is  the  mass  of  the  radiator,  and  n,  m  are  in- 
tegers. A  calculation  of  the  transition  probabilities 
gives  results  for  the  intensities  which  are  for  large  n 
and  m  essentially  the  same  as  the  classical  results 
(Fig.  1). 

The  introduction  of  a  Maxwellian  distribution  in  v 
in  the  case  of  the  classical  calculation  leads  to  a  con- 
tinuous distribution  very  similar  to  a  normal  Doppler 
distribution  plus  a  sharp  non-Doppler  broadened  line 
(see  Fig.  2).  The  fraction  of  the  energy  radiated  in  the 
sharp  line  is 

sin2(7ra/X) 


(wa/XY 


472 


100 


473 


DOPPLER     WIDTH     OF    SPECTRAL    LINES 


The  sharp  line  has  its  origin  in  the  fact  that,  for  a  non- 
integral  value  of  7ra/X,  the  normal  unshifted  frequency 
is  emitted  by  all  atoms  independent  of  their  speed. 
Since  for  a>^\  the  dominant  noncentral  lines  in 
Fig.  1  are  always  close  to  the  normal  Doppler  shifted 
frequencies,  the  broad  distribution  has  a  line  contour 
nearly  identical  with  the  normal  Doppler  line.  For 
a<|X,  the  distribution  increases  in  breadth  but  be- 
comes much  weaker. 

For  the  quantum-mechanical  treatment,  a  Maxwell- 
Boltzmann  distribution  among  the  various  energy 
levels  leads  to  a  fine  complex  of  lines  having  fre- 
quencies vnm.  If  the  zero-point  energy  of  oscillation  of 
the  atom  in  the  well  is  very  small  compared  with  kT, 
the  degenerate  frequency  v=  vnn  is  usually  the  most 
intense  single  frequency  emitted.  For  a  small  amount 
of  collision  or  natural  broadening,  the  complex  of  lines 
becomes  a  continuous  distribution  (Fig.  2)  essentially 
identical  with  that  given  by  the  classical  calculation. 
Note  that  although  the  atom  is  in  contact  with  the 
walls  of  the  cavity  only  an  infinitesimal  part  of  the 
time,  the  probability  of  the  photon's  momentum  being 
given  to  trTe~walls  rather  than  to  the  atom  is  finite,  being 

sin2(7ra/X) 


(Tra/X)2 


For  a  gas  confined  to  a  large  volume  but  with  a 
mean  free  path  small  compared  with  a  wavelength,  the 
shape  of  a  Doppler  broadened  line  has  been  calculated 
treating  the  radiation  classically  and  using  a  statistical 
procedure.  In  this  treatment  the  phase  of  the  radiation 
emitted  as  a  function  of  the  time  is  given  by  the  posi- 
tion of  the  radiator  as  a  function  of  the  time.  The 
probability  distribution  of  position  given  by  diffusion 
theory  is  used  to  calculate  the  mean  intensity  as  a 
function  of  frequency.  Substantially  the  same  result  is 
obtained  also  quantum  mechanically,  using  a  method 
similar  to  Foley's.2  This  quantum-mechanical  calcula- 
tion is  valid  only  if  the  recoil  energy  of  the  radiator  is 
small  compared  with  kT.  Assuming  that  the  Doppler 

1 H.  M.  Foley,  Phys.  Rev.  69,  616  (1946). 


"V  FREQUENCY 

Fig.  2.  Doppler  broadened  line  of  a  gas  in  a  one-dimensional  box. 

effect  is  the  only  appreciable  source  of  the  line  breadth, 
it  is  found  that  the  line  has  a  Lorentz  rather  than 
Gaussian  shape.  The  line  contour  is  given  by 


/(«)  =  /«r 


2irD/\2 


(a-Vy+(2irD/\*y 


The  width  of  the  line  at  half-intensity  is,  in  cycles  per 
second,  4xZ)/X2.  Here  D  is  the  self-diffusion  constant  of 
the  gas.  This  line  width  is  roughly  2.8Z./X  times  that 
of  a  normal  Doppler  broadened  line  (L  is  the  mean  free 
path).  Therefore,  under  those  conditions  for  which  the 
calculation  is  valid,  the  line  breadth  which  is  wholly 
Doppler  is  greatly  reduced. 

Because  of  the  requirement  that  the  gas  collisions 
should  not  influence  the  internal  state  of  the  radiator, 
the  above  results  are  ordinarily  valid  only  for  certain 
magnetic  dipole  transitions.  Nuclear  magnetic  resonance 
absorption,  paramagnetic  resonance  absorption,  and 
5-state  hyperfine  transitions  are  examples  of  transitions 
which  are  but  weakly  affected  by  collisions. 


101 

^^^4*******4-*********«9-**-9-******4'********-9-  -5-  4-4-  -5-  *  4-  -3-  -5-  *  *  *  *  -5-  *  * 


Aus  dem  Institut  fiir  Physik  im  Max-Planck-Institut  fiir  medizinische  Forschung, 

Heidelberg 

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  von  Gammastrahlung  in  Ir191 

Von 

Rudolf  L.  Mossbauer* 

Mit  8  Figuren  im  Text 
(Eingegangen  am  9.  Januar  1958) 

Die  Kernresonanzabsorption  der  dem  Zerfall  von  Os191  folgenden  129  keV- Gamma- 
strahlung in  Ir191  wird  untersucht.  Der  Wirkungsquerschnitt  fiir  die  Resonanz- 
absorption  wird  als  Funktion  der  Temperaturen  von  Quelle  und  Absorber  im 
Temperaturbereich  90°  K<  T<  370°  K  gemessen.  Die  Lebenszeit  r  des  129  keV- 
Niveaus  in  Ir191  ergibt  sich  zu  (3,6+ J|g)  1CT10  sec.  Der  Absorptionsquerschnitt 
zeigt  bei  tiefen  Temperaturen  einen  starken  Anstieg  als  Folge  der  Kristallbindung 
der  Absorber-  und  Praparatsubstanzen.  Die  Theorie  von  Lamb  uber  die  Resonanz- 
absorption  langsamer  Neutronen  in  Kristallen  wird  auf  die  Kernresonanzabsorption 
von  Gammastrahlung  ubertragen.  Bei  tiefen  Temperaturen  ergibt  sich  eine 
starke  Abhangigkeit  des  Wirkungsquerschnittes  fiir  die  Kernabsorption  von  der 
Frequenzverteilung  im  Schwingungsspektrum  des  Festkorpers. 

1.  Einleitung 

Die  Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  von  Gammastrahlung  ist  das  kern- 
physikalische  Analogon  zu  der  bekannten  Fluoreszenzerscheinung  der 
Atomhulle :  Anregung  eines  Kernniveaus  durch  Einstrahlung  der  eigenen 
Linie,  wobei  die  Emission  und  Absorption  in  Kernen  gleicher  Art  statt- 
findet.  Die  Quanten  erfahren  bei  ihrer  Emission  bzw.  Absorption 
Energieverluste  infolge  Abgabe  von  RuckstoBenergie  an  die  emittieren- 
den  bzw.  absorbierenden  Kerne,  was  zu  einer  Verschiebung  der  Emis- 
sionslinie  gegeniiber  der  Absorptionslinie  fuhrt.  Bei  Kernubergangen 
ist,  umgekehrt  wie  bei  optischen  Obergangen,  die  durch  den  RiickstoB- 
energieverlust  der  Quanten  bedingte  Linienverschiebung  immer  groB 
gegen  die  naturliche  Linienbreite,  d.h.  die  Resonanzbedingung  ist  ver- 
letzt.  Da  jedoch  die  tatsachliche  Breite  der  Linien  durch  die  Tempera- 
turbewegung  der  Kerne  in  Quelle  und  Absorber  bestimmt  wird**,  die 
zu  Doppler-Verschiebungen  der  Quantenenergien  fuhrt,  wird  fiir  einen 
Teil  der  Quanten  der  RuckstoBenergieverlust  kompensiert  und  die  durch 
den  RiickstoBeffekt  verletzte  Resonanzbedingung  wiederhergestellt. 

*  Neue  Anschrift:  Labor  fiir  technische  Physik,  Technische  Hochschule 
Munchen. 

**  Die  naturliche  Linienbreite  kann  in  alien  hier  interessierenden  Fallen  gegen- 
iiber der  Doppler-Breite  vernachlassigt  werden. 


102 

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  von  Gammastrahlung  in  Ir191  125 

Die  hohen  RiickstoBenergieverluste  der  Quanten  bei  Kerniiber- 
gangen  ergeben  bei  Zimmertemperatur  haufig  nur  eine  geringe  tJber- 
deckung  der  Emissions-  und  Absorptionslinien,  d.h.  die  Resonanz- 
bedingung  ist  nur  fur  wenige  Quanten  erfiillt  und  der  Wirkungsquer- 
schnitt  fur  den  Resonanzeffekt  wird  unmeBbar  klein.  Wie  zuerst  Malm- 
fors  [2]  zeigte,  laBt  sich  in  giinstigen  Fallen  durch  Temperaturerhohung 
ein  meBbarer  Resonanzfluoreszenzeffekt  erzielen*.  Diese  Methode  der 
Temperaturerhohung,  durch  thermische  Verbreiterung  der  Linien  eine 
starkere  Uberlagerung  der  Emissions-  und  Absorptionslinien  zu  er- 
reichen,  wurde  seitdem  in  einer  Reihe  von  Arbeiten  erfolgreich  ange- 
wandt  [3].  Diese  Experimente  erfolgten  in  Form  von  Streuversuchen, 
wobei  jeweils  die  an  den  Kernen  resonanzgestreuten  Quanten  von  dem 
Untergrund  der  elastisch  gestreuten  und  der  durch  den  Compton-Effekt 
gestreuten  Strahlung  abgetrennt  werden  muBten.  Die  Messungen 
muBten  im  allgemeinen  auf  Quellen  beschrankt  werden,  die  keine 
hartere  Gammastrahlung  emittierten  als  die  untersuchte  Resonanz- 
strahlung,  um  im  Nachweiskristall  eine  Uberdeckung  des  Photomaxi- 
mums  der  resonanzgestreuten  Quanten  durch  das  Compton-Kontinuum 
harterer  Linien  zu  verhindern.  Die  Bestimmung  des  Kernfluoreszenz- 
effektes  durch  Messung  der  resonanzgestreuten  Strahlung  bietet  bei 
weicher  Gammastrahlung  zwei  zusatzliche  Schwierigkeiten : 

1 .  Mit  abnehmender  Energie  wird  es  immer  schwieriger,  die  Compton- 
Streustrahlung  von  der  elastischen  Streustrahlung  zu  unterscheiden, 
wegen  des  abnehmenden  Energieunterschiedes  zwischen  primaren  und 
Compton-gestreuten  Quanten.  Erschwerend  wirkt  sich  aus,  daB  das 
Auflosungsvermogen  der  Szintillationsspektrometer  mit  abnehmender 
Energie  abnimmt.  AuBerdem  steigt  der  Wirkungsquerschnitt  fiir  die 
Rayleigh-Streuung  bei  niedrigen  Energien  stark  an  [4]. 

2.  Der  Wirkungsquerschnitt  fiir  die  Resonanzfluoreszenz  ist  umge- 
kehrt  proportional  zur  Lebenszeit  xy  desResonanzniveaus**.  Fur  Lebens- 
zeitmessungen  eignen  sich  daher  gerade  die  kurzlebigen  magnetischen 
Dipol  (Ml)-  und  elektrischen  Quadrupol  (£2)-t)bergange  (ry<10_10sec), 
die  mit  der  Methode  der  verzogerten  Koinzidenzen  nicht  mehr  erfaBt 
werden  konnen.  Die  Strahlungsiibergange  niedriger  Multipolordnung 
zeigen  bei  niedrigen  Energien  eine  betrachtliche  Kon version.  Bei 
der  Resonanzfluoreszenz  wird  von  den  resonanzabsorbierten  Quanten 
nur  der  Bruchteil  (1+a)-1  (a  =  Konversionskoeffizient)  wieder  als 
Quant  reemittiert  und  nur  dieser  Bruchteil  der  resonanzabsorbierten 
Quanten  steht  fiir  die  Messung  zur  Verfiigung. 

*  Einen  t)berblick  iiber  die  verschiedenen  Verfahren  zur  Kompensation  der 
RiickstoBenergieverluste  gibt  Malmfors  [2]. 

**  Diese  Beziehung  gilt  nicht  mehr  fiir  Festkorper  bei  tiefen  Temperaturen ; 
vgl.  Abschnitt  3. 


103 

126  Rudolf  L.  Mossbauer: 

Die  genannten  Schwierigkeiten  lassen  sich  umgehen,  wenn  der  Kern- 
resonanzeffekt  in  Absorption  gemessen  wird.  Da  jedoch  der  Effekt, 
besonders  bei  weicher  Gammastrahlung,  sehr  klein  ist  gegenliber  den 
Absorptionseffekten  der  Atomhulle,  werden  bei  einem  Absorptions- 
experiment  zur  Messung  der  Lebenszeit  eines  Kernniveaus  extreme  An- 
forderungen  an  die  Genauigkeit  und  Stabilitat  der  MeBapparaturen 
gestellt.  Dafiir  bietet  ein  Absorptionsexperiment  gegeniiber  einem 
Streustrahlungsversuch  den  Vorteil  eines  urn  einen  Faktor  1  +  a  hoheren 
Wirkungsquerschnittes  und  ermoglicht  eine  einfachere  Interpretation 
der  MeBergebnisse. 

Die  Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  besitzt  besonderes  Interesse  im  Energie- 
gebiet  weicher  Gammastrahlung,  da  bei  tiefen  Temperaturen  in  diesem 
Energiegebiet  bei  Festkorpern  Einflusse  der  chemischen  Bindung  zu 
erwarten  sind. 

In  der  vorliegenden  Arbeit  wurde  durch  ein  Gamma-Absorptions- 
experiment  die  Lebenszeit  ry  des  129  keV-Niveaus  in  Ir191  bestimmt. 
Untersuchungen  bei  der  Temperatur  des  fliissigen  02  ergaben  einen 
starken  EinfluB  der  chemischen  Bindung  auf  den  Wirkungsquerschnitt 
fur  die  Kernabsorption.  Der  aufgefundene  Bindungseffekt  wurde  mit 
Hilfe  der  Theorie  von  Lamb,  die  zu  diesem  Zweck  fur  den  Fall  der 
Emissionslinie  erweitert  wurde,  theoretisch  gedeutet.  Der  Bindungs- 
effekt ist  sehr  empfindlich  vom  Schwingungsspektrum  des  Festkorpers 
abhangig. 

2.  Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  und  chemische  Bindung 
Die  Absorptions-  und  Emissionslinien  sind  ihrer  Lage  und  ihrer  Form 
nach  vom  Bindungszustand  abhangig.  Insbesondere  ist  der  RuckstoB- 
energieverlust  der  emittierten  und  auch  der  resonanzabsorbierten  Quan- 
ten  abhangig  von  den  Energieaufnahme-  und  Energieabgabemoglich- 
keiten  der  Systeme,  denen  die  betrachteten  Kerne  angehoren  (z.B. 
Molekule  oder  Kristalle). 

Ein  freier  Kern  der  Masse  m  ubernimmt  bei  Emission  eines  Quants 
der  Energie  E0  eine  RiickstoBenergie  R,  die  gegeben  ist  durch 

R  =  E2j2mcK  (1) 

Im  Falle  einer  chemischen  Bindung  des  Kernes  in  einem  Kristall  muB 
der  Kristall  die  RiickstoBenergie  als  innere  Energie  aufnehmen.  Wegen 
der  Quantelung  der  inneren  Energie  konnen  jedoch  beim  RiickstoB  nur 
diskrete  Energien  aufgenommen  werden  und  die  RiickstoBenergie 
hangt  ab  von  den  Wahrscheinlichkeiten  flir  die  Anregung  der  Gitter- 
schwingungen  des  Kristalles.  Bei  Temperaturen  T,  die  groB  sind  gegen 
die  Debyesche  Temperatur  0  des  Kristalles,  ist  die  statistische  Ge- 
schwindigkeitsverteilung  der  Kerne  unabhangig  von  der  Bindung  und 


104 

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  von  Gammastrahlung  in  Ir191  127 

es  erfolgt  eine  ungehinderte  Ubertragung  der  vollen  RiickstoBenergie 
nach  (1).  Mit  abnehmender  Temper atur  gelangt  eine  zunehmende  An- 
zahl  vorzugsweise  der  hochfrequenten  Schwingungsoszillatoren  des  Kri- 
stalles  in  den  Grundzustand.  Diese  Oszillatoren  konnen  keine  Energie 
mehr  abgeben  und  die  Linienform  wird  unsymmetrisch,  wenn  die  Riick- 
stoBenergie nicht  groB  ist  gegen  die  obere  Grenzenergie  %  cog  des  Schwin- 
gungsspektrums  des  Kristalles.  Lamb  [5]  berechnet  die  Lage  und  Form 
der  Absorptionslinie  beim  Resonanzeinfang  langsamer  Neutronen  in 
Kristallen  und  gibt  Naherungen  fur  spezielle  Bindungsfalle  an.  Hier- 
nach  besitzt  die  Absorptionslinie  im  Fall  schwacher  Bindung  und  unter 
der  Annahme,  daB  der  Kristall  als  Debye-Kontinuum  aufgefaBt  werden 
kann,  dieselbe  Form  wie  in  einem  idealen  Gas,  wobei  jedoch  an  die  Stelle 
der  tatsachlichen  Temperatur  T  eine  Temperatur  T*>T  tritt,  die 
der  mittleren  Energie  pro  Schwingungsfreiheitsgrad  des  Kristalles  ent- 
spricht.  Im  Falle  starkerer  Bindung  zeigt  die  Absorptionslinie  bei 
tiefen  Temperaturen  eine  komplizierte  Struktur  und  eine  Verschiebung 
zu  kleineren  Energien,  verbunden  mit  dem  Auftreten  eines  Maximums 
an  der  Stelle  der  Resonanzenergie.  Die  Linienform  wird  um  so  unsym- 
metrischer,  je  kleiner  das  Verhaltnis  R/kO  ist. 

Die  Arbeit  von  Lamb  laBt  sich  leicht  fur  die  Emissionslinie  erweitern 
und  kann  dann  direkt  auf  die  Gammaresonanzprozesse  angewandt 
werden.  Bei  der  Resonanzfluoreszenz  des  129keV  Niveaus  in  Ir191  ist 
R  =  0,046  eV  und  £(9  =  0,025  eV.  Der  Fall  schwacher  Bindung  in  der 
Definition  nach  Lamb  [5]  ist  hier  bei  Temperaturen  T<200°K  nicht 
mehr  realisiert. 

3.  Theorie 

Nach  Lamb  [5]  gilt  fur  den  Wirkungsquerschnitt  fur  die  Resonanz- 
absorption:  a[E)  =  [r^)a0Wa{E)  (2) 

{T  —  totale  Energiebreite  des  Resonanzniveaus ;  E  =  Energie  der  ein- 
fallenden  Quanten;  a0  =  Wirkungsquerschnitt  fur  exakte  Resonanz). 
Wa  (E)  bestimmt  Lage  und  Form  der  Absorptionslinie  : 

oo 

Wa  (E)  (2/r)  Real  /  dp  exp  [*>  (£-£„+  i  7)2)  +  g.  (fi)] .      (3  a) 

0 

Dabei  ist 


M  =  Z 


(p  «s)2 


X 


(4a) 


2m  hco.N 

X  [(as-f  1)  exP  (—  i  ft  ft  a)  s)  +  asexp  (ijuH(os)  —  \  —  2aJ 

E0  ist  die  Resonanzenergie,  ojs  die  Frequenz  der  s-ten  Normalschwingung 
des  Kristalles,  m  die  Kernmasse,  p  der  Impuls  des  Gammaquants,  ~e  der 
Polarisationseinheitsvektor,  32V  die  Zahl  der  unabhangigen  Freiheits- 


105 

128  Rudolf  L,  Mossbauer: 

grade  im  Kristall  und  a5  die  mittlere  Besetzungszahl  des  s-ten  Oszillators : 


Wie  sich  leicht  zeigen  laBt*  gilt  fur  die  Emissionslinie  ** : 

oo 

We  (E)  =  (2/r)  Real  /  dp  exp  [»>  (£  -  E0  +  *  T/2)  +  ge  (fi)] 
o 
mit 

&M  =  2j2maJaN  x 

1-2S.1. 


(5) 


(3  b) 


(4b) 


X  [(ocs  +  1)  exp  (ijuha)s)  +  as  exp  (—  ijuha)s) 

Die  Berechnung  der  Integrale  (3)  wird  in  Debyescher  Naherung  durch- 
gefuhrt***.  Die  Debye-Temperaturen  der  transversalen  und  der  longi- 
tudinalen  Schwingungskomponenten  werden  gleichgesetzt. 

a)  Fm  in  k  6  <Ci  folgt 

gaijA  ^  —  *'/*■?  —  A*2^  £>  (6a) 

&(/<*)  ^  +  i/uR—ju2Re.  (6b) 

ft  ist  die  RiickstoBenergie  nach  (1)  und  £  die  mittlere  Energie  pro 
Schwingungsfreiheitsgrad  des  Kristalles : 


0/ T 


e(D  =  *  r*  =  3*r(r/©)»j"(1^-1- +  |)«<. 

b)  Fur,aft6>>1  gilt 


(7) 


«.{<»;  fl 


goo(T) 


2£ 


(Pes)2     l= 


2mha>*N 


a5  + 


2       J     A^O)    \enmlkT  __x    +    2  J 


3N(ha))< 
(kG)3 


d(hcj) 


e/T 


-  (6Rlk&)  (Tie)' /(-^y  +  |)*«. 


(8) 


*  Der  Beweis  sei  kurz  angedeutet :  Die  Gl.  (8)  von  Lamb  [5]  ist  fur  die  Emis- 


sionslinie zu  ersetzen  durch  W({ccs};  {ns})  = 


(«,«>, 


£  +  £K)-£(as)  +tT/2 


wo  (as|H'|ws)  das  Matrixelement  fiir  einen  Ubergang  ns->cts  des  Gitters  bedeutet, 
der  von  der  Emission  eines  Quants  mit  dem  Impuls  p  begleitet  ist.  In  Gl.  (17) 
von  [5]  erscheint  dann  ns  an  Stelle  von  as.  Wenn  man  dann  alle  folgenden  Sum- 
mierungen  iiber  as  statt  iiber  ns  erstreckt  und  iiber  ns  statt  iiber  as  mittelt,  so  erhalt 
man  unsere  Gin.  (3  b)  und  (4  b),  wenn  man  im  Endergebnis  wieder  as  statt  ns  setzt. 
**  Die  Funktionen  W£(E)  und  Wa{E)  und  damit  auch  die  Emissions-  und  Ab- 
sorptionslinien  liegen  spiegelsymmetrisch  zur  Geraden  E  =  E0. 

***  Die  Summationen  in  (4)  enthalten  auch  die  Summationen  iiber  die  Polari- 
sationsrichtungen. 

•**•  Tjnsere  Gl.  (8)  unterscheidet  sich  um  einen  Faktor  3  von  der  bei  Lamb  [<5] 
angegebenen  Gl.  (36). 


106 

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  von  Gammastrahlung  in  Ir191  129 

Der  experimentell  bestimmbare  mittlere  Wirkungsquerschnitt  or(Tq;  Ta) 
ergibt  sich,  wenn  man  a(E)  in  (2)  mit  der  auf  1  normierten  Verteilungs- 
funktion  der  emittierten  (einfallenden)  Quanten  multipliziert  und  liber 
alle  Energien  summiert  (Tq,  Ta  =  Temperatur  von  Quelle  bzw.  Ab- 
sorber).  Wegen 

oo 

(ri27i)  f  We(E)  dE  =  i 

0 

gilt  daher 

OO 

of  =  fa(E){ri2n)Wt{E)dE 

und  mit  (2) 

dr  =  (n87i)a0JWa(E)We(E)dE. 

0 


(9) 


Wenn  der  Ubergang  in  den  Grundzustand  auch  durch  innere  Umwand- 
lung  (Kon version)  erfolgen  kann,  dann  ist  zu  unterscheiden  zwischen 
dem  Wirkungsquerschnitt  (a0)s  fur  die  Resonanz-Streuung  und  dem 
Wirkungsquerschnitt  (o0)a  fur  die  Resonanz- Absorption.  Fur  die 
Resonanz-Streuung  gilt  nach  Jackson  [6] : 

tn\    ._    (2/q+0      %      rr   rf    _       (2/fl+1)         H     „ i  ,      , 

Voh-  (27g+ 1}  2n  "■  -j*  -  {2Ig+i)  '  27Z  n  (1  +a)2  •      y™) 

Dabei  sind  2l-\-\  die  statistischen  Gewichte  des  angeregten  (a)  und 
des  Grundzustandes  (g),  H  die  relative  Haufigkeit  des  resonanten 
Isotops,  XQ  die  Resonanzwellenlange,  r  die  totale  Energiebreite  des 
Resonanzniveaus,  Ty  die  partielle  Energiebreite  fur  Strahlungsemission 
und  a  der  Konversionskoeffizient. 

Bei  der  Resonanzfluoreszenz  geht  durch  Quantenemission  nur  der 
Bruchteil  Ty\T  aller  Zwischenzustande  in  den  Grundzustand  iiber,  der 
Bruchteil  {T  —  T^\T  aber  durch  Kon  version.  Bei  der  Resonanzabsorp- 
tion  tragen  alle  Zwischenzustande  zu  dem  Wirkungsquerschnitt  bei  und 
es  gilt  daher 

k). = wrv)  ■  Ms = |^f  ^  mm  ■        (») 

Im  Falle  der  Resonanzfluoreszenz  an  Ir391  (E0  =  1 29  keV)  kann  die 
Berechnung  der  Linienformen  bis  herab  zur  Temperatur  des  fliissigen 
02  naherungsweise  in  zwei  Schritten  durchgefuhrt  werden: 

1.  Im  Bereich  \E  —  E0\^>T  ergeben  nur  die  Werte  juk&<\  einen 
wesentlichen  Beitrag  zu  dem  Integral  (3),  und  (6)  kann  noch  als  brauch- 
bare  Naherung  beniitzt  werden : 


Wj  (E)  =  (2/JT)  ftp  cos  (E  -EQ±R)fi  exp  (-  p  T\2  -  ju2Re) 


0 


(12) 


=  (4ir*MS;x) 


wobei 


107 

130  Rudolf  L.  Mossbauer: 

Dabei  gilt  fur  die  Emissions-   (e)  und  Absorptionslinie  (a)  bzw.* 

Vfe:  *«)  =  (1/2)  V»f.exp  (-1?  4/4) ,  (13a) 

Vtf.;  *J  =  (1/2)  V^f.exp (-{•  4/4) ,  (13b) 

*e  =  (£-£„  4- .R)/Ar;     *.=  (£-£,-fi)/|r.  (14) 

4=2]/^l2f;  J.=  2y«*5F,  (15) 

h  =  riAe;  £«  =  riAa.  (16) 

Zl  ist  die  Doppler-Breite  des  Niveaus  und  T*,  T*  bezeichnen  die  Tem- 
peraturen  des  Absorbers  und  der  Quelle,  die  nach  (7)  den  mittleren 
Energien  pro  Schwingungsfreiheitsgrad  des  Kristalles  entsprechen. 

2.  Im  Bereich  um  E  =  E0  erhalt  man  eine  gute  Naherung  fiir  W(E), 
wenn  man  den  Integrationsbereich  in  (3)  an  der  Stelle  fjikO  —  \  auf- 
spaltet  und  in  den  beiden  Bereichen  die  Naherungen  (6)  bzw.  (8)  beniitzt : 

ilk® 
WH(E)  =  (2/JT)  J    dju  cos  [E  —  E0±  R)juexp  (—  /*  JT/2  -  p*R  e )  + 
0 

00 

+  {21  r)  /  dp  cos  (E  -  E0)  11  exp  (goo  (T)  -  p  T/2) . 

1/kO 

Das  erste  Integral  liefert  nur  einen  kleinen  Beitrag  zu  Wn(E)  und  es 
gilt  in  guter  Naherung  (rjk&<^l) : 

WIl{E)  =  Wl{E)  +  {E^f^jA.  (17) 

Im  Bereich  \E  —  E0\^>T  kann  der  zweite  Summand  in  (17)  gegeniiber 
Wj(E)  vernachlassigt  werden  und  es  folgt  durch  Zusammenfassen  von 
(1 2)  und  (1 7)  fiir  die  Emissions-  bzw.  Absorptionslinie : 

We{E)  =  (4inf(ie;  xe)  +  ^^cSEA— ,  (18a) 

Wa(E)  =  (4/P)y(f.;«J  +  {E  r^)?™2/4  •  <18b) 

Die  durch  die  Kristallbindung  modifizierten  Emissions-  und  Absorp- 
tionslinien  des  1 29  keV-LJberganges  in  Ir191  besitzen  nach  (1 8)  **  (mit 
Ausnahme  in  der  Umgebung  der  Resonanzstelle  E0)  bei  der  Temperatur  T 
nahezu  die  gleiche  Form  und  Lage  wie  in  einem  idealen  Gas  bei  einer 
Temperatur  T*,  die  nach  (7)  der  mittleren  Energie  pro  Schwingungs- 
freiheitsgrad des  Kristalles  entspricht.    An  der  Resonanzstelle  E  =  E0 

*Vgl.  Lamb  [5],  Gl.  (32). 
**  Die    Gin.  (18)    verlieren   ihre    Giiltigkeit   bei   Temperaturen    unterhalb    der 
Temperatur  des  fliissigen  02 . 


108 

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  von  Gammastrahlung  in  Ir191  131 

erhebt  sich  dariiber  bei  Temperaturen  T<0  eine  mit  abnehmender 
Temperatur  stark  ansteigende  Linie  der  Breite  r  (Fig.  1).  Die  Resonanz- 
bedingung  wird  also  mit  abnehmender  Temperatur  fur  einen  immer 
groBer  werdenden  Bruchteil  der  Quanten  erfullt. 


Emissionsspektrum 
>*750 


E0  +R      Energie 


Fig.  1.  Lage  und  Form  der  Emissions-  und  Absorptionslinien  des  129  keV-t)berganges  in  Ir191  bei  T  =  88°  K, 

fur  eine  Lebenszeit  r  =  10~10  sec.  Nullpunkt  der  Energieskala  unterdruckt;  Einheit  der  Ordinate  willkurlich ; 

Hohe  der  Linien  bei  E  =  E0  (Resonanzenergie)  im  Vernal  tnis  1:150  verkiirzt  dargestellt 

Der  Wirkungsquerschnitt  ar  ergibt  sich  durch  Eintragung  von  (18) 
in   (9).    Dabei  liefern  nur  zwei  Integrale  einen  wesentlichen  Beitrag: 


oo  ex. 

f(4iny>(Ze;xe)(4inW(£a;xa)dE    und     J 


exp[g00(rg)  +  goo(ra)] 

{{E  -  £0)2  +  T2/4]2 


dE. 


Ausfiihrung  der  Integrationen  ergibt  fiir  den  mittleren  Wirkungsquer- 
schnitt fiir  die  Resonanzabsorption : 


K)a 


]/* 


Pi  +  A> 


exp 


4R2 


Al+Al\ 


^exV[goom+goo(Ta)].     (19) 


Die  Unscharferelation  ergibt  fiir  die  mittlere  Lebenszeit  r  des  Resonanz- 
niveaus  und  fiir  die  mittlere  Lebenszeit  ry  fiir  Zerfall  durch  Strahlungs- 
emission : 

r  =  hir=  %\Ty  (1  +  a)  =  ry/(l  +  a)  =  2]/ln  2  (20) 

(a  ==  Konversionskoeffizient,  7]  =  Halbwertszeit). 

Bei  hoheren  Temperaturen  kann  der  2.  Term  in  (19)  vernachlassigt 
werden  und  es  folgt  nach  (11),  (19),  (20)  ora~\\xy.  Bei  tiefen  Tempera- 
turen dominiert  der  von  der  Lebenszeit  unabhangige  2.  Term  in  (19). 


109 

132  Rudolf  L.  Mossbauer: 

4.  Versuchsanordnung 

Fig.  2  zeigt  die  Versuchsanordnung,  Fig.  3  den  Aufbau  des  Absorber- 
Kryostaten.  Die  Absorber,  zwei  je  etwa  0,4  mm  dicke  gewalzte  Iridium- 
bzw.  Platinbleche  von  35  mm  Durchmesser  waren  so  befestigt,  daB  bei 
der  Abkuhlung  eine  ungehinderte  Kontraktion  derselben  moglich  war. 

Untersucht  wurde  die  Absorption  der  beim  Beta-Zerfall  von  Os191 
ausgesandten  129keV  Gammastrahlung  in  Iridium.  Fig.  4  zeigt  das 
Zerfallschema  [7]  und  das  beobachtete  Spektrum,  das  neben  der  l6d- 
Aktivitat  von  Os191  noch  Komponenten  der  95  d-Aktivitat  von  Os185 
enthalt  [8].  Die  harten,  beim  iC-Einfang  von  Os185  ausgesandten  Linien 
von   Re185  bei  640  keV  und  bei   875  keV  durchsetzten   die  Absorber 

Pb 


70cm 


^-n\$^\\^ 

«t 

m 

^§§^ 

p 

1 

M^§ 

mm 

Fig.  2.    Versuchsgeometrie.    A  Absorber- Kryostat;  P  Kryostat  mit  Quelle;  D  Detektor:  NaJ(Tl)-Kristall 

(22  mm  hoch,  40  mm  Durchmesser)  und  Photomultiplier;  K  Kollimator  (Bohrung  18  mm);  A  und  P  werden 

von  den  Armen  eines  schweren  Stativs  getragen 

nahezu  ungeschwacht,  wahrend  die  weiche  129  keV-Strahlung  von 
Ir191  durch  den  Photoeffekt  stark  absorbiert  wurde.  Die  harten  Kom- 
ponenten von  Re185  uberlagerten  daher  im  Nachweiskristall  mit  ihrem 
Compton-Kontinuum  erheblich  die  129  keV-Resonanzlinie. 

Wahrend  die  Selbstabsorption  der  Resonanzlinie  in  der  Quelle 
stark  mit  der  Dicke  des  Praparates  zunimmt,  erfahren  die  harten 
Strahlungskomponenten  von  Re185  nur  eine  geringfugige  Selbstabsorp- 
tion. Die  von  der  Quelle  emittierte  Strahlungsintensitat  verschiebt  sich 
daher  mit  zunehmender  Schichtdicke  des  Praparates  zugunsten  der 
harteren  Strahlungskomponenten.  Die  Praparatsubstanz  wurde  deshalb 
flachenformig  angeordnet  (Oberflache  80  mm2)  und  die  Menge  auf  0,6  g 
beschrankt.  Die  Substanz  —  analysenreiner  pulverformiger  Osmium- 
schwamm  —  wurde  vor  der  Bestrahlung  im  Vakuum  in  eine  dunnwan- 
dige  Quarzkiivette  eingeschmolzen.  Die  65  mCurie  starke  Quelle  wurde 
an  den  Boden  eines  zur  Aufnahme  von  fliissiger  Luft  dienenden  zylinder- 
formigen  Quarzbehalters  angeschmolzen,  der  sich  mit  dem  Praparat 
in  einem  DewargefaB  befand.  Die  beschriebene  Montage  der  Quelle 
war  erforderlich,  um  Praparatbewegungen  infolge  einer  Kontraktion 
der  Aufhangevorrichtung  bei  der  Abkuhlung  auf  ein  Minimum  zu  be- 
schranken.  Derartige  Praparatbewegungen  konnten  zu  einer  Anderung 
der  von  der  Quelle  ,,gesehenen"  mittleren  Schichtdicke  des  Absorbers 


110 

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  von  Gammastrahlung  in  Ir191  133 

fiihren,  sofern  dieser  nicht  vollstandig  planparallel  ist*.  Die  haupt- 
sachliche  experimentelle  Schwierigkeit  bei  der  Lebenszeitmessung  lag 
in  einer  sicheren  Ausschaltung  eines  solchen  Einflusses  von  Anderungen 
der  Geometrie  bei  der  Abkiihlung  auf  die  Messung.  Das  Problem  wurde 


N 
sec^ 


woo- 


750- 


500- 


250  ~ 


Rew(Ka) 
Irw(Ka) 


729  keV 
(Ir191) 


—        5,6 sec 

E3  I  0,0¥2  fleV       m 
>5-70'7Osec 


m+E2 


0,729 'MeV 


Jr' 


6V0  keV 


Fig.  3 


675  keV 
(Rem) 


O       0,7      0,2      0,3      0,¥      0,5      0,6      0,7      0,6      0,9      1,0  Y\M 
b 

Fig.  4  a  u.  b 


Fig.  3.  Absorber- Kryostat  (schematisch)  mit  einer  durch  zwei  Schnurziige  bedienbaren  Drehvorrichtung,  um 
abwechselnd  zwei  verschiedene  Absorber  A1  und  A2  in  den  Strahlengang  zu  bringen.  D  DewargefaB;  S  Achse 
des  senkrecht  zur  Zeichenebene  verlaufenden  Strahlenbiindels ;  T  Trolitulisolator.  Schnurzug  und  Thermo- 
elemente  werden  durch  die  fliissige  Luft  in  Messingrohrchen  gefiihrt,  die  in  den  Boden  des  Luftbehalters 

eingelotet  sind 

Fig.  4  a  u.  b.   a  Zerf allschema  von  Os191.  b  Spektrum  des  natiirlichen  Osmiumisotopengemisches,  gemessen 
hinter  0,4  mm  Iridium  4d  nach  AbschluB  der  12d-Neutronenbestrahlung 


befriedigend  gelost  durch  die  beschriebene  Art  der  Aufhangung  der 
Quelle,  durch  die  Verwendung  von  nahezu  planparallelen  Absorbern** 

*  Eine  Anderung  der  Schichtdicke  des  Absorbers  von  nur  0,1  [i  hatte  bereits 
zu  Absorptionseffekten  in  der   GroGenordnung  der  gemessenen  Effekte  gefiihrt. 
**  Wir  danken  der  Fa.  Heraeus  Platinschmelze  fur  die  Herstellung  und  leih- 
weise  Uberlassung  der  Edelmetallabsorber. 


Ill 


134 


Rudolf  L.  Mossbauer: 


groBer  Oberflache  und  durch  die  Wahl  eines  relativ  groBen  Abstandes 
der  Quelle  von  den  Absorbern  (mindestens  50  cm).  Die  Temperaturen 
der  Quelle  und  der  Absorber  wurden  mit  Eisen-Konstantan-Thermo- 
elementen  gemessen.  Die  ganze  Anordnung  wurde  auf  optischem  Wege 
justiert. 

Fig.  5  zeigt  das  Blockschema  der  elektronischen  Nachweisapparatur. 
Der  Aufbau  und  die  Betriebsweise  waren  darauf  abgestellt,  Schwan- 
kungen  in  der  Zahlhaufigkeit  auf  ein  MindestmaB  zu  beschranken,  z.B. 


A 

B 

Ci 

07 

£1 

Fi 

c2 

D2 

5 

Fi 

Fig.  5-  Blockschaltbild  der  elektronischen  MeBanordnung.  (Die  Strom versorgung  wurde  nicht  dargestellt. ) 
A  Photomultiplier  RCA  6342  Betriebsspannung  1,3  kV;  B  Vorverstarker  [9];  C  Hauptverstarker ;  D  Ein- 
kanaldiskriminator  [10];  E  Dualuntersetzer  Untersetzungsfaktor  21*;  F  Registrierstufe  mit  mechanischem 

Zahlwerk 

durch  Verwendung  von  Schaltelementen  mit  kleinen  Temperatur- 
koeffizienten.  Die  ganze  Anlage  wurde  von  einem  auf  ±0,5%  span- 
nungsstabilisierten  Netz  betrieben.  Das  Hochspannungsgerat  und  die 
Heizung  der  Verstarker  wurden  zusatzlich  durch  einen  magnetischen 
Spannungsgleichhalter  stabilisiert. 


5.  Mefiverfahren 
Eine  direkte  Bestimmung  des  Wirkungsquerschnittes  fur  die  Kern- 
resonanzabsorption  durch  eine  Messung  des  totalen  Schwachungs- 
koeffizienten  ist  im  allgemeinen  nicht  moglich,  da  die  Kernresonanz- 
absorption  gewohnlich  sehr  klein  ist  gegeniiber  den  Absorptionseffekten 
der  Atomhiille.  Der  Kernresonanzeffekt  in  Ir191  wurde  daher  durch 
eine  Differenzmessung  bestimmt,  wobei  die  Absorption  der  Resonanz- 
linie  im  Resonanzabsorber  Iridium  bei  verschiedenen  Temperaturen 
unter  Bedingungen  gemessen  wurde,  bei  denen  die  auftretenden  Intensi- 
tatsanderungen  in  direkter  Beziehung  zu  dem  Wirkungsquerschnitt 
fur  die  Resonanzabsorption  standen  und  jegliche  Nebeneffekte  aus- 
geschaltet  wurden.  Der  Wirkungsquerschnitt  ara  ist  nach  (19)  eine 
Funktion  der  Temperaturen  der  Quelle  und  des  Absorbers.  Aus  Grunden 
der  Temperaturabhangigkeit  der  totalen  Absorption  wurden  alle  Mes- 
sungen  bei  konstanter  Temperatur  des  Absorbers  durchgefuhrt,  d.h. 
es  wurde  jeweils  nur  die  Temperatur  der  Quelle  variiert.  Die  Temperatur- 
abhangigkeit der  totalen  Absorption  hat  ihren  anschaulichen  Grund 
darin,  daB  sich  die  Zahl  der  Atome  pro  cm2  der  Oberflache  einer  ab- 
sorbierenden  Substanz  mit  der  Temperatur  andert  [1].  Dieser  Effekt 
hatte  im  vorliegenden  Fall  dem  Kernresonanzeffekt  entgegengewirkt 


112 


Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  von  Gammastrahlung  in  Ir191 


135 


und  ihn  dabei  vollstandig  iiberdeckt,  was  durch  Beschrankung  der 
Temperaturvariationen  auf  die  Quelle  verhindert  wurde.  Naturlich 
zeigt  auch  die  Selbstabsorption  in  der  Quelle  einen  (allerdings  kleineren) 
Temperaturgang.  Dieser  Effekt,  der  ebenfalls  dem  Resonanzeffekt 
entgegenwirkt,  konnte  jedoch  experimentell  eliminiert  werden  durch 
abwechselnde  Intensitatsmessungen  mit  dem  Resonanzabsorber  und 
einem  Vergleichsabsorber.  Da  der  Selbstabsorptionseffekt  der  Quelle 
die  Intensitat  hinter  beiden  Absorbern  beeinfluBt,  wahrend  der  Kern- 
resonanzeffekt  nur  beim  Resonanzabsorber  auftritt,  fallt  ersterer  Effekt 
bei  einer  Differenzmessung  heraus,  wenn 
die  Absorber  so  abgestimmt  sind,  daB 
sie  ungefahr  gleich  stark  absorbieren. 

Die  Resonanzlinie  wurde  aus  dem 
Zerfallspektrum  des  Osmium-Isotopen- 
gemisches  durch  den  Einkanaldiskrimi- 
nator  Dx  (Fig.  5)  ausgeblendet.  Um  den 
EinfluB  von  Schwankungen  des  Schwel- 
lenwertes  des  Einkanaldiskriminators  auf 
die  Messungen  zu  vermindern,  wurde  der 
Kanal  auf  25  %  des  ganzen  erfaBbaren 
Spektralbereiches  geoffnet  *.  Die  aus  dem 
Spektrum  ausgeblendete  Resonanzlinie 
wurde  durch  entsprechende  Wahl  der 
Verstarkung  der  maximalen  Kanalbreite 
angepaBt.  Die  harteren  Komponenten  des  Spektrums  fuhrten  dabei  zu 
einer  Obersteuerung  des  Hauptverstarkers,  die  jedoch  keinen  EinfluB  auf 
den  ausgeblendeten  Teil  des  Spektrums  hatte. 

Um  die  Schwankungen  der  Verstarkung  (insbesondere  des  Multi- 
pliers) aufzufangen,  wurden  die  Begrenzungen  des  Kanals  so  eingestellt, 
daB  kleine  Schwankungen  der  Verstarkung  in  erster  Naherung  keine 
Anderung  der  Impulshaufigkeit  im  Kanal  verursachten.  Das  Ver- 
fahren  wird  durch  Fig.  6  illustriert :  Eine  Anderung  der  Verstarkung 
fiihrt  zu  einer  Expansion  bzw.  Kontraktion  des  Spektrums  langs  der 
Abszisse.    Wenn    der   ausblendende    Kanal   so    eingestellt    wird,    daB 


N(E2) 


— »►  /mpu/shdhe. 

Fig.  6.   Einstellung  der  Begrenzungen  des 

Kanals    des    Einkanaldiskriminators     zur 

Stabilisierung  der  Impulshaufigkeit  gegen- 

iiber  Verstarkungsschwankungen 


N(EJE, 


N{E,)E,._ 


so   wird   die    Impulshaufigkeit,    wie   sich   leicht 


zeigen  laBt,  in  erster  Naherung  nicht  durch  kleine  Verstarkungsschwan- 
kungen beeinfluBt,  weil  sich  die  bei  einer  Verstarkungsanderung  neu 
in  den  Kanal  eintretenden  und  die  austretenden  Anteile  des  Spektrums 
kompensieren.  Diese  Beziehung  ist  annahernd  erfullt  bei  der  in  Fig.  7 
gezeigten  bei  den  Messungen  beniitzten  Einstellung  des  Kanals  auf  die 
Resonanzlinie.     Durch   das   beschriebene    MeBverfahren    konnten    die 


*  Hierzu  wurde  die  Gegenkopplung  im  Fensterverstarker  der  Schaltung  [10] 
erhoht. 


113 


136 


Rudolf  L.  Mossbauer: 


relativen  Schwankungen  nicht-statistischer  Natur  in  der  Zahlhaufigkeit 
auf  rund  0,1  %  beschrankt  werden. 

Als  Resonanzabsorber  diente  Iridium  (Z  =  77) ,  als  Vergleichsabsorber 
Platin  (Z  =  78).  Der  Intensitatsunterschied  der  die  beiden  Absorber 
durchsetzenden  Strahlung  betrug  bei  Zimmertemperatur  etwa  0,1%. 


— ■-  Impulshohe 

Fig.  7.    Einstellung  des  Kanals  des  Einkanaldiskriminators  auf  die  129keV-Linie  in  Ir191.   Aus 

schnitt  aus  dem  Zerfallspektrum  von  Osm  +  Os191  5d  nach  der  Neutronenbestrahlung.   Ausschnitt 

aus  dem  Zerfallspektrum  einer  Osmiumquelle,  deren  Os181-Aktivitat  bereits  abgeklungen  ist.  Beide  Spektren 

sind  auf  gleiche  Intensitat  bei  hohen  Energien  normiert.  —  Das  Verhaltnis  v  der  Impulshaufigkeiten  der 

129  keV-Linie  zu  alien  im  Bereich  des  Kanals  liegenden  Linien  ist  v  =  0,757 


Gemessen  wurden  die  totalen  Strahlungsintensitaten  7jr  und  If1  hinter 
dem  Resonanzabsorber  (Ir)  und  dem  Vergleichsabsorber  (Pt). 

Bei  den  Messungen  zur  Bestimmung  der  Lebenszeit  des  1 29  keV- 
Niveaus  in  Ir191  befanden  sich  die  Absorber  stets  auf  Zimmertemperatur 
und  es  wurde  nur  die  Temperatur  der  Quelle  variiert.  Bei  jeder  MeB- 
reihe  wurden  zunachst  wiederholt  abwechselnd  die  Intensitaten  I]T(T2) 
und  Ifl(T2)  gemessen,  wobei  sich  die  Quelle  auf  der  Zimmertemperatur 
T2  befand.  Nach  Abkuhlung  der  Quelle  auf  die  Temperatur  Jj  des 
flussigen  02  erfolgten  analog  wiederholte  Messungen  von  I^iTj)  und 
JfPi)-    Jeo^e  Messung  mit  dem  Resonanzabsorber  wurde  eingeschlossen 


114 


Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  von  Gammastrahlung  in  Ir191  137 

durch  zwei  Messungen  mit  dem  Vergleichsabsorber,  urn  einen  linearen 
Gang  in  der  elektronischen  Apparatur  zu  eliminieren. 

Bei  den  Messungen  zur  Untersuchung  des  Einflusses  der  chemischen 
Bindung  auf  die  Kernresonanzabsorption  befanden  sich  die  Absorber 
stets  auf  der  Temperatur  des  fliissigen  02.  Die  Temperatur  der  Quelle 
wurde  variiert  zwischen  dem  Siedepunkt  des  02  und  dem  des  Wassers. 

Mit  Hilfe  des  zweiten  Zweiges  der  elektronischen  Nachweisapparatur 
(vgl.  Fig.  5)  wurde  parallel  zum  eigentlichen  Experiment  taglich  das 
gesamte  Zerfallspektrum  des  Osmium-Isotopengemisches  aufgenommen. 
Die  hierbei  gemessenen  Spektren  dienten  zur  Ermittlung  des  (zeit- 
abhangigen)  Beitrags  des  der  Resonanzlinie  uberlagerten  Compton- 
Kontinuums  der  harten  Komponenten  von  Re185  zu  der  Zahlhaufigkeit 
im  Kanal  des  Einkanaldiskriminators.  In  der  Versuchsgeometrie  der 
Fig.  2  wurde  das  Spektrum  von  Os185  (95  d)  durch  Messungen  mit  einem 
Osmiumpraparat  bestimmt,  dessen  l6d-Os191-Aktivitat  bereits  ab- 
geklungen  war.  Subtraktion  des  auf  den  zeitlichen  Aktivitatsabfall 
korrigierten  Zerfallspektrums  von  Os185  vom  Gesamtspektrum  Os185  + 
Os191  lieferte  dann  das  Zerfallspektrum  von  Os191.  Aus  diesen  Daten 
ergab  sich  unmittelbar  das  fur  die  Auswertung  der  Messungen  benotigte 
zeitabhangige  Verhaltnis  v  der  Intensitat  der  1 29  keV- Resonanzlinie 
zur  gesamten  im  ausgeblendeten  Bereich  des  Spektrums  gemessenen 
Intensitat.   Fig.  7  zeigt  ein  Beispiel. 

6.  Auswertung  der  Messungen 

Im  folgenden  bezeichnet  der  Index  0  die  1 29  keV-Resonanzstrahlung, 
der  Index  i  =  \,2,  ...  n  die  nicht-resonanten  Strahlungskomponenten, 
die  der  Resonanzstrahlung  im  ausblendenden  Kanal  tiberlagert  sind. 
of'  und  a]1  sind  die  Wirkungsquerschnitte  (Einheit  cm2)  fur  die  Ab- 
sorption der  i-ten  Strahlungskomponente  in  Platin  (Pt)  bzw.  Iridium 
(Ir).  n  ist  die  Zahl  der  Atome  pro  cm2  Absorberoberflache  und  T  ist 
die  Temperatur  der  Quelle.  Fur  die  hinter  den  Absorbern  gemessenen 
Strahlungsintensitaten  gilt 

I}'  (2i)  =  2 I]'  (23  =  2  I,  (rj  exp  [-  nl<  ^  (7,)] ,  (21  a) 


IT  ft)  =  2  IT  ffi)  =  2  I.m  exp  [-  »PI af  (23] ,  (21  b) 

t=0  i=0 

I}'  (23  =  2 II'  (7J  =  2 1>  (2i)  exp  [-  n"  a,"  (23] ,  (21  c) 

t=0  i=0 

IT  (TJ  =  2  IT  (23  =  2 1, :  (?3  exp  [-  »pt of  (73] .  (21  d) 

t=0  i=0 


115 


138  Rudolf  L.  Mossbauer: 

Da  nur  die  Temperatur  der  Quelle  variiert  wird,  sind  nlT  und  wpt  kon- 
stant  und  es  gelten  die  Beziehungen 

<yft(T2)=(rtt(T1)  =  of  *      *  =  0,1,2,...,*,  (22a) 

^rra  =  ^r(ri)  =  crJr       *  =      1,2,...,*,  (22b) 

k;rra-<rai=i^ra-^rai<iyr.      (22c) 

Weiter  werden  eingefuhrt  die  relativen  Intensitatsanderungen  <xt>0, 
die  sich  beim  Temperaturiibergang  T1-+T2(T2>  7i)  der  Quelle  infolge 
Anderung  der  Selbstabsorption  in  der  Quelle  ergeben : 

Ii{T2)  =  (1  +  «t)  /.(TJ       i  =  0, 1,  2,  ...,  ».  (23) 

Die  Absorber  absorbieren  nahezu  gleich  stark  (vgl.  Abschnitt  5)  und  alle 
Temperatureffekte  verursachen  nur  kleine  Intensitatsanderungen,  d.h. 
es  gilt 

|/Pt(r)_7ir(r)|<7.(r)       ,-  =  0,1,2,...,*,  (24a) 

a^<l  »*0, 1,2,  ...,*.  (24b) 

Fiihrt  man  als  experimentell  bestimmbare  GroBe  die  Differenz  ein: 
M  =    lfHT2)-I?(T2)    _     /Pt^-jjt^ 

/Jr(r2)  /fcrj 

so  erhalt  man  aus  (21)  bis  (23) 

M  ^{2a,/i(rl)  [exp  (-  »»o«)  -  exp(-  «IraJr(T2))]  - 

-  1,(23  [exp  (-  n»ol<(T2))  -  exp  (-  n^tf))]}//*^) . 

Der  erste  Term  wird  nach  (24)  klein  von  hoherer  Ordnung  und  es  folgt 

if«7,(rI)e«p(-i»fc«f(r1))x  l 

xti-exP(^(Tjr(r1)-»Irof(r2))]///r(r^.  } 

Bezeichnet  man  mit  v  den  zeitabhangigen  Bruchteil,  der  von  der  ge- 
samten  im  Bereich  des  Kanals  des  Einkanaldiskriminators  gemessenen 
Intensitat  auf  die  Intensitat  der  Resonanzlinie  entfallt  (vgl.  Abschnitt  5) 

v  =  /.(T.) exp  [-  «fcaf  (rOJ/i^tr.) ,  (27) 

so  folgt  aus  (26)  und  (22  c) : 

M^i;nIr[*fa(r2)-tfrJ7i)].  (28) 

Bei  den  Messungen  zur  Bestimmung  der  Lebenszeit  wurden  die  Absorber 
nicht  gekiihlt.  Dann  kann  der  zweite  Term  in  (19)  vernachlassigt  wer- 
den und  der  Wirkungsquerschnitt  ara  fur  die  Resonanzabsorption  wird 


116 


Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  von  Gammastrahlung  in  Ir191 


139 


umgekehrt  proportional  zur  Lebenszeit  ry  des  Niveaus.   Nach  (1),  (11), 
(15),  (19),  (20)  gilt  in  diesem  Fall: 


2la+  1    h2c* 


(29) 


rj    %    "]/  m 

~Vy   \/2kn(T*  +  T*)     X 

X  exp  [-  E2j2m  c*k(Tq*  +  T*)] .  J 

Bei  der  Auswertung  wurden  folgende  numerische  Daten  verwendet: 

Spin  des  Grundzustandes  von  Ir191 :  Ig  —  f  [11] 

Spin  des  1 29  keV  Niveaus  von  Ir191 :  Ia  =  §  [7] 

Relative  Haufigkeit  des  Isotops  Ir191 :  H  =  }8,5% 

Debye-Temperatur  von  Iridium:  0  =  285°  K  [12] 

Fiir  die  Temperaturen  T*  und  7^*  von  Absorber  und  Quelle  folgt  aus  (7) : 

Zimmertemperatur  (3  03°  K) :  T*  =  3 16°  K 

Flussige  Luft  (gemessener  Mittelwert  8$°  K) :    T*  =  129°  K 


Zahl  der  Iridium-Atome  pro  cm5 


2,78  •  1021cm-2 


7.  MeBergebnisse 

Tabelle  1   enthalt  die  Ergebnisse  der  Messungen  zur  Bestimmung 
der  Lebenszeit  des  1 29  keV-Niveaus  in  Ir191.    (Temperaturen  der  Quelle 


Tabelle  1 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

Nr. 

T  =  Tf  =  303°  K 

T  =  r,  =  88°K 

M-103 

{M/v)  •  103 

1 

1,346±0,31 

1,074  ±0,24 

0,272  ±0,39 

0,341  ±0,49 

2 

4,585±0,19 

4,359  ±0,21 

0,226  ±  0,28 

0,285  ±0,35 

3 

0,580  ±0,25 

0,127  ±0,23 

0,453  ±0,34 

0,574  ±0,43 

4 

0,653  ±0,16 

0,297  ±0,28 

0,356  ±0,33 

0,453  ±0,42 

5 

0,767±0,17 

0,579±0,19 

0,188  ±0,26 

0,240  ±0,33 

6 

0,649  ±0,23 

0,504  ±0,17 

0,145  ±0,29 

0,186  ±0,37 

7 

0,249  ±0,21 

0,166±0,16 

0,083  ±  0,26 

0,108  ±0,34 

8 

0,386  ±0,24 

0,001  ±0,25 

0,385  ±0,35 

0,504  ±0,46 

9 

0,397  ±0,24 

0,038  ±0,20 

0,359±0,31 

0,474  ±0,41 

10 

0,404  ±  0,23 

0,037  ±0,25 

0,367  ±0,34 

0,488  ±0,45 

11 

0,241  ±0,40 

0,052  ±0,26 

0,1 89  ±0,48 

0,254  ±0,64 

12 

0,102  ±0,14 

0,326  ±0,1 7 

—  0,224  ±  0,22 

-0,303  ±0,30 

13 

0,786  ±0,1  5 

0,266  ±  0,26 

0,520  ±0,30 

0,711  ±0,41 

14 

0,960  ±0,29 

0,542  ±0,1 7 

0,418  ±0,34 

0,578  ±0,47 

15 

-1,797  ±0,25 

-1,775±0,20 

—  0,022  ±0,32 

-0,031  ±0,45 

16 

-2,274  ±0,19 

-2,379  ±0,28 

0,105  ±0,34 

0,149  ±0,48 

Ausgeglichen 

er  Mittelwert  (M/v 

)  -103 

0,268  ±0,07 

T1  =  88°K;  r2  =  303°K.)    Spalte  1   der  Tabelle  gibt  die  Nummer  der 
Versuchsserie :   Jede   Serie  best  and  aus  mindestens  je   10  Messungen 


117 


140 


Rudolf  L.  Mossbauer: 


jeder  der  vier  Intensitaten  I]x{T^j,  If^TJ,  IjT{T2),  I^{T2).  Bei  der 
einzelnen  Intensitatsmessung  betrug  der  statistische  Fehler  0,04  bis 
0,05  %  und  die  MeBzeit  12  bis  20  min.  Taglich  wurde  eine  MeBreihe  auf- 
genommen.  Um  systematische  Fehler  auszuschlieBen,  wurde  die  Geo- 
metrie  bei  jeder  MeBreihe  etwas  variiert,  durch  Drehung  der  Absorber 


&ra 

[barn] 


I 

%70 


« 


0% 

-1% 

-2% 

jlridium_  jP/atin 

rPlatin 

1 

\ 

1 

\ 

\ 

\ 

-i"/ 

\ 

60°  160°  2¥0°  320°K 

Tempera  fur  Tg  der  Quelle 

a 


80° 


720° 


'■I     ?nn°      p.w°     pa 


_L 


200°      2W°     280°      320°      380°K 
Tempera  fur  Tg  der  Quelle 

b 

Fig.  8  a.  Relatives  Intensitatsverhaltnis  (7Ir  —  Ipt)/Jpt  der  hinter  Iridium-  bzw.  Platinabsorbern  gemessenen 
129keV-Gammastrahlung  als  Funktion  der  Temperatur  der  Quelle.    Die  Temperatur  der  Absorber  betrug 

konstant  88°  K 

Fig.  8  b.  Der  Wirkungsquerschnitt  ara  fur  die  Kernresonanzabsorption  in  Irin  als  Funktion  der  Temperatur 

der  Quelle,  fur  eine  Absorbertemperatur  von  88°  K.  £  MeBpunkte;  theoretischer    Verlauf  fur 

ein  quadratisch  mit  der  Frequenz  v  ansteigendes  Schwingungsspektrum  (Debye-Spektrum) ; theore- 
tischer Verlauf  fur  eine  mit  v3  proportionale  Frequenzverteilung,  die  bei  der  gleichen  Qrenzfrequenz  abge- 
schnitten  wurde,  d.h.  die  gleiche  Debye-Temperatur  besitzt.    Die  Debye-Temperaturen  der  transversalen 
und  der  longitudinal  en  Komponenten  wurden  gleichgesetzt 


um  ihre  Symmetrieachsen,  sowie  durch  kleine  Ortsveranderungen 
von  Quelle  und  Absorbern.  Der  EinfluB  dieser  Geometrieanderungen 
zeigt  sich  in  den  Unterschieden  der  Intensitatsdifferenzen  der  Spalten  2 
bzw.  3  der  Tabelle  1 .  Spalte  4  enthalt  die  Dif ferenz  der  MeBwerte  der 
Spalten  2  und  3  [vgl.  Gl.  (25)].  Da  die  Geometrie  bei  der  einzelnen  MeB- 
reihe konstant  gehalten  wurde,  sollten  (in  guter  Naherung)  die  Werte 
M  der  Spalte  4  nicht  von  der  Geometrie  abhangen  und  ein  Vergleich 
etwa  der  Spalten  2  und  4  laBt  auch  keinen  EinfluB  der  Geometrie  auf  M 


118 


Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  von  Gammastrahlung  in  Ir191  141 

erkennen.  Spalte  5  enthalt  die  auf  den  Beitrag  anderer  Linien  korrigier- 
ten  MeBwerte  (M/v)  [vgl.  Gl.  (27)].  Die  relativen  Schwankungen  nicht- 
statistischer  Natur  der  Zahlrate  betrugen  etwa  0,1%  iiber  mehrere 
Stunden.  Dariiber  hinaus  zeigte  die  Zahlrate  im  Verlauf  einiger  Tage 
langsame  elektronisch  bedingte  Anderungen  von  einigen  Promille,  die 
naturlich  keinen  Einflufi  auf  die  Messung  hatten.  Die  angegebenen 
mittleren  Fehler  wurden  aus  den  Schwankungen  der  Einzelmessungen 
ermittelt.  Der  Fehler  jeder  MeBreihe  setzt  sich  zusammen  aus  den 
Fehlern  von  vier  Intensitatsmessungen  [vgl.  (25)].  Mit  dem  Mittelwert 
Wjv  der  Tabelle  1  folgt  nach  (28) : 

ry  =  (3.6±  J5)  -  lO"10  sec. 

Mit  dem  Konversionskoeffizienten  a  =  2,47  [13]  ergibt  sich  die  mittlere 
Lebenszeit  r  des  Niveaus  zu  r  =  rYl(i  +  a)  =  (1 ,0i  J;J)  •  10"10sec. 

Fig.  8  enthalt  die  Ergebnisse  der  Messungen,  bei  denen  die  Absorber 
gekiihlt  wurden.  In  Fig.  8a  wurden  die  Differenzen  der  hinter  dem 
Resonanzabsorber  und  dem  Vergleichsabsorber  gemessenen  Intensi- 
taten  I  aufgetragen,  in  Fig.  8  b  der  daraus  mit  Hilfe  von  (28)  berechnete 
Wirkungsquerschnitt  cra(Tq)  =  ara(T1).  (Bezugstemperatur  T2  —  0°  C ; 
Lebenszeit  ry  =  3 ,6  •  1 0~10  sec ;  Konversionskoef fizient  a  =  2,47  [13] .) 
Fig.  8  b  enthalt  neben  den  MeBpunkten  den  theoretischen  Verlauf  des 
Wirkungsquerschnittes  nach  (19)  fur  zwei  verschiedene  Frequenzver- 
teilungen  des  Schwingungsspektrums  von  Iridium. 

8.  Diskussion 

Die  gemessene  Lebenszeit  ist  in  Einklang  mit  der  von  Sunyar  [14] 
angegebenen  oberen  Schranke  von  5  •  1 0~10  sec  fur  die  Halbwertzeit  des 
Niveaus.  Messungen  der  Konversionskoeffizienten  ergaben  fur  die 
Multipolordnung  des  1 29  keV-t)berganges  M\-\-E2[15].  Die  Werte 
fur  das  aus  den  Konversionskoeffizienten  der  K-  und  L-Schalen  be- 
stimmte  Intensitatsverhaltnis  MijE2  liegen  im  Bereich  1,5:1  bis 
5:1  [16],  [17],  [18].  Das  hier  gefundene  ry  ergibt  mit  diesen  Daten  f in- 
die t)bergangswahrscheinlichkeit  des  1 29  keV-t)berganges  einen  Ver- 
zogerungsfaktor  von  mindestens  22  gegeniiber  den  theoretischen  Vor- 
hersagen  des  Einteilchenmodelles  [19]  fur  einen  M  l-t)bergang.  Der 
£2-t)bergang  erfolgt  dagegen  um  mindestens  einen  Faktor  64  schneller 
als  nach  dem  Einteilchenmodell  zu  erwarten  ware.  Der  129keV-Zu- 
stand  ist  daher  als  Mehrteilchenzustand  aufzufassen.  Das  Niveau  ist 
jedoch  vermutlich  kein  reines  Rotationsniveau  im  Sinne  des  Kollektiv- 
modelles,  denn  das  Verhaltnis  der  Energien  des  1.  und  2.  ,,Rotations- 
niveaus"  weicht  nach  [13]  um  rund  10%  von  dem  durch  das  Kollektiv- 
modell  fur  reine  Rotationszustande  geforderten  Wert   ab.    Tabelle  2 


119 


142 


Rudolf  L.  Mossbauer: 


enthalt  die  durch  Messungen  der  Coulomb-Anregung  bestimmten  re- 
duzierten  Ubergangswahrscheinlichkeiten  B  (E  2)  fur  die  E  2-Komponente 
des  1 29  keV-t)berganges  in  Ir191,  sowie  die  daraus  berechneten  Lebens- 
zeiten  ry(£2)*  und  Mischungsverhaltnisse  M\\ E2. 

Die  Mischungsverhaltnisse  der  Tabelle  2  deuten  auf  eine  starkere 
Bevorzugung  der  Ml-Komponente  hin,  als  aus  den  Verhaltnissen  der 
Konversionskoeffizienten  folgen  wiirde  [16],  [17],  [18],  doch  sind  die 
B(£"2)-Werte  fur  genaue  Aussagen  noch  zu  unsicher. 


Tabelle  2 


Literatur 


B(E2)** 
«*cm410+60 


Ty{E2) 

(£  =  129keV) 


Mi  IE  2 
furTv  =  3,6-1O-l0sec 


US] 

[20] 
[16] 


51 
56 
97 


6,1  •  l(T9sec 


5,6 
3,2 


10~9  sec 
10~9  sec 


16:1 

15:1 

8:1 


Die  tJbereinstimmung  der  Messungen  an  der  129  keV-Gammalinie 
in  Ir191  bei  Temperaturen  r<200°  K  mit  dem  in  Debyescher  Naherung 
berechneten  Verlauf  des  Absorptionsquerschnittes  ist  nur  qualitativ. 
Die  Debyesche  Theorie  fuhrt  in  der  hier  verwendeten  Form,  bei  der  die 
Debye-Temperaturen  der  longitudinalen  und  der  transversalen  Kom- 
ponenten  gleichgesetzt  werden,  zu  einer  Unterdruckung  der  hoheren 
longitudinalen  Komponenten.  Eine  Berucksichtigung  der  atomistischen 
Struktur  fuhrt  jedoch  umgekehrt  bei  Schwingungen  mit  Wellenlangen 
von  der  GroBenordnung  der  Gitterkonstanten  wegen  der  gegentiber  dem 
Kontinuum  groBeren  Tragheit  des  Gitters  zu  einer  Verschiebung  des 
Spektrums  zu  kleineren  Frequenzen.  Die  Messungen  deuten  auf  eine 
groBere  Dichte  der  Frequenzverteilung  des  Schwingungsspektrums  von 
Iridium  bei  den  hoheren  Frequenzen  hin,  als  sie  die  Debyesche  Kon- 
tinuumstheorie  liefert. 

Untersuchungen  des  Verhaltens  der  spezifischen  Warmen  ergaben 
bei  den  meisten  Metallen  bei  tieferen  Temperaturen  einen  Anstieg  der 
Debyeschen  Temperatur  B  [21].  Tatsachlich  lassen  sich  die  in  Fig.  8 
dargestellten  Abweichungen  der  MeBergebnisse  von  dem  nach  der 
Debyeschen  Theorie  zu  erwartenden  Verlauf  des  Wirkungsquerschnittes 
ebenfalls  durch  die  Annahme  eines  Anstiegs  von  0  mit  abnehmender 
Temperatur  erklaren.  Zur  genaueren  Untersuchung  sollen  die  Messungen 
zu  tieferen  Temperaturen  hin  ausgedehnt  werden. 

*  Es  gilt  die  Relation  (vgl.  [13]) :  iJry(E2)  =  (^\j-(?±J  2li  + 


B{E2), 


21/ +1 

wobei  If,  7j  =  Spin  des  angeregten  und  des   Grundzustandes,  E0  =  Anregungs- 
energie. 

**  Die  B  (£2)-Werte  sind  nach  Angabe  der  Autoren  um  einen  Faktor  2  unsicher. 


120 

Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  von  Gammastrahlung  in  Ir191  143 

Die  Bestimmung  der  Lebenszeiten  von  Kernniveaus  mittels  Ab- 
sorptionsmessungen  der  hier  beschriebenen  Art  sind  infolge  der  auBer- 
ordentlich  kleinen  Effekte  nur  in  Ausnahmefallen  durchfiihrbar.  Da- 
gegen  treten  bei  Untersuchungen  der  Bindungseigenschaften  von  Fest- 
korpern  bei  tiefen  Temperaturen  urn  GroBenordnungen  starkere  Effekte 
auf.  Analoge  Bindungseffekte  wie  bei  Ir191  sind  im  ganzen  Energie- 
bereich  weicher  Gammastrahlung  zu  erwarten.  Wegen  der  star  ken  Ab- 
hangigkeit  der  Absorptionsquerschnitte  von  den  Schwingungsspektren 
eignet  sich  die  Methode  der  Resonanzfluoreszenz  von  Gammastrahlung 
bei  tiefen  Temperaturen  zu  Untersuchungen  der  Frequenzverteilung 
der  Schwingungsspektren  fester  Korper.  Die  Methode  kann  daneben 
auch  bei  der  Aufstellung  von  Zerfallschemas  verwendet  werden,  da  die 
starke  Resonanzabsorption  bei  tiefen  Temperaturen  nur  bei  solchen 
Linien  auftritt,  die  einem  Ubergang  in  den  Grundzustand  entsprechen. 
Die  Untersuchungen  werden  fortgesetzt. 

Es  ist  mir  ein  Anliegen,  Herrn  Professor  H.  Maier-Leibnitz  fur  die  Anregung 
zu  dieser  Arbeit,  fur  interessante  Diskussionen  und  freundliche  Forderung  herzlich 
zu  danken.  Herrn  Professor  J.  H.  D.  Jensen  danke  ich  fur  aufschluBreiche  Dis- 
kussionen. Herrn  Professor  W.  BoTHE(f)  und  Herrn  Professor  K.  H.  Lauter- 
jung  danke  ich  dafiir,  daB  sie  die  Durchfuhrung  dieser  Arbeit  am  Max-Planck- 
Institut  fur  medizinische  Forschung  in  Heidelberg  ermoglicht  haben. 

Literatur 

[1]  Malmfors,  K.  G.:  Ark.  Fysik  6,  49  (1953)-  —  [2]  Malmfors,  K.  G.  in: 
K.  Siegbahn,  Beta-  and  Gammaray  Spectroscopy.  Amsterdam  1955-  —  [3]  Metz- 
ger,  F.  R. :  Report  at  the  Glasgow  Conference  1954,  S.  201.  —  J.  Franklin  Inst. 
261,  219  (1956).  -  Phys.  Rev.  101,  286  (1956);  103,  983  (1956).  -  Schopper,  H.: 
Z.  Physik  144,  476  (1956).  -  Swann,  C.  P.,  and  F.  R.  Metzger:  J.  Franklin 
Inst.  261,  667  (1956).  -  [4]  Franz,  W.:  Z.  Physik  98,  314  (1936).  -  [5]  Lamb  jr., 
W.  E.:  Phys.  Rev.  55,  190  (1939).  Siehe  auch  Steinwedel,  H.,  u.  J.  H.  Jensen: 
Z.  Naturforsch.  2a,  125  (1947).  —  [6]  Jackson,  J.D.:  Canad.  J.  Phys.  33,  575 
(1955)-  —  [7]  Mihelich,  I.  W.,  M.  McKeown  and  M.  Goldhaber:  Phys.  Rev. 
96,  1450  (1954).  —  [8]  Marty,  N.,  et  M.  Vergnes:  J.  Phys.  Radium  18,  233 
(1957)-  -  [9]  Foote,  R.  S.,  and  H.  W.  Koch:  Rev.  Sci.  Instrum.  25,  750  (1954).  - 
[10]  Johnstone,  C.  W. :  Nucleonics  11,  No,  1,  36  (Jan.  1953).  —  [11]  Murakawa, 
K.,  and  S.  Suwa:  Phys.  Rev.  87,  1048  (1952).  —  [12]  Seitz,  F.:  The  Modern 
Theory  of  Solids,  S.  110.  1940.  —  [13]  Davis,  R.  H.,  A.  S.  Divatia,  D.  A.  Lind 
and  R.D.Moffat:  Phys.  Rev.  103,  1801  (1956).  —  [14]  Sunyar,  A.  W.:  Phys. 
Rev.  98,  653  (1955).  —  [15]  Swan,  I.  B.,  and  R.D.Hill:  Phys.  Rev.  88,  831 
(1952).  -  [16]  Bernstein,  E.  M.,  and  H.  W.  Lewis:  Phys.  Rev.  105,  1524  (1957)- 
[17]  Mihelich,  I.  W.,  and  A.  de-Shalit:  Phys.  Rev.  93,  135  (1954).  -  [18]  McGo- 
wan,  F.  K.:  Phys.  Rev.  93,  163  (1954).  —  [19]  Blatt,  I.  M.,  and  V.  F.  Weiss- 
kopf:  Theoretical  Nuclear  Physics.  New  York  1952.  —  [20]  Huus,  T.,  I.  H. 
Bjerregaard  and  B.  Elbeck:  Dan.  Mat.  Fys.  Medd.  30,  Nr.  17  (1956).  — 
[21]  Leibfried,  G.,  u.  W.  Brenig:  Fortschr.  Phys.  1,  187  (1953). 


KERNRESONANZFLUORESZENZ 

VON  GAMMASTRAHLUNG  IN  Ir191 1 

(Nuclear  Resonance  Fluorescence 

of  Gamma  Radiation  in  Ir191) 


3.  THEORY 

According  to  Lamb5$  the  cross  section  for  resonance  absorption 
is 

a(E)=(r2/4)a0Wa(E)  (2) 

where   r=  total  width  of  the  resonance  level,  E  =  energy  of  the  inci- 
dent photons,  and  a0  =  cross  section  at  resonance. 

The  position  and  shape  of  the  absorption  line  is  given  by  Wa(E): 


a 
where 


Wa(E)  =  (2/D  Real  /  dpi  exp  [i/x(E  -  E0  +  ir/2)  +  ga(/i)]         (3a) 


,      y  (p-es)2 


x  [(as  +  l)  exp(-ip.Hws)  +  Q?s  exp  (ip.tiws)  -  1  -  2as]    (4a) 

In  these  equations  E0  is  the  resonance  energy,  cos  the  frequency  of 
the  s-th  normal  mode  of  the  crystal,  m  the  nuclear  mass,  p  the  mo- 
mentum of  the  photon,  e  the  unit  polarization  vector,  3N  the  number 
of  degrees  of  freedom  of  the  crystal,  and  ~as  the  average  occupation 
number  of  the  s-th  oscillator, 

as  =  l/[exp  (nu>s/kT)  -  1]  (5) 

As  can  easily  be  shown,  § 


t  Translation  of  Sec.  3  of  the  article  from  Z.  Physik,  151,  124 
(1958)  which  is  reproduced  in  its  entirety  preceding  this  translation. 

|For  references  see  the  German  original. 

§The  proof  may  be  briefly  indicated:  For  the  emission  line,  Eq.  (8) 
of  Lamb5  must  be  replaced  by 

(as|H'|ns) 


W({as};{ns})- 


E0-E  +  E(ns)  -  E(as)  +  ir/2 
121 


122  THEORY 

one  obtains  for  the  emission  linet 

oo 

We(E)  =  (2/D  Real  /  dM  exp  [i/Lt(E  -  E0  +  ir/2)  +  ge(/i)]  (3b) 

o 

where 

V1  (P«es)2 


ge(M) f 


*■ — ■  2mfia>sN 
s 


x  [(as  +  1)  exp  (i/iliajs)  +  as  exp  (-i/i"hws)  -  1  -  2as] 

(4b) 

The  integral  in  (3)  will  be  evaluated  in  the  Debye  approximation 
with  the  Debye  temperatures  of  the  transverse  and  longitudinal  modes 
set  equal  to  each  other.  I 

(a)  For  /ik0<^l  one  obtains 

ga(/x)»  —  i/xR  -  \i2Rz 

ge(M)«+i/uR  -  jLt2Rc  (6a) 

Here  R  is  the  recoil  energy  as  given  by  (1)  (see  the  German  original, 
p.  126), and  e  is  the  average  energy  per  vibrational  degree  of  free- 
dom of  the  crystal: 

e/rTf         1  l\ 

e(T)  =  kT*  =  3kT(T/0)3  J      -T^—  +  ±     t3  dt  (7) 

o     \el-  1      ^/ 

(b)  For   /xk0^>  1  one  has 


where  (as  |H'|ns)  is  the  matrix  element  for  a  lattice  transition  ns 
— -  as  accompanied  by  the  emission  of  a  photon  of  momentum  p.  In 
Eq.  (17)  of  Ref .  5,  as  must  be  replaced  by  ns.  Extending  all  the  fol- 
lowing sums  over  as  instead  of  ns  and  averaging  over  ns  instead  of 
as,  one  obtains  (3b)  and  (4b),  provided  as  is  substituted  for  ns  in  the 
final  relation. 

fThe  emission  and  absorption  lines  We(E)  and  Wa(E)  are  mirror 
images  of  each  other  with  respect  to  E  =  E0. 

JThe  summations  in  (4)  also  extend  over  the  polarization  direc- 
tions. 


THEORY  123 


(P*es) 


ge<-;  T)  =  ga(-;  T)  =  g„(T)  =  -2  £  ^£n  &*  +  (1/2» 

s  s 

--2R/  nss^at./sJ  a^r-d(t!a;) 

0/T  /      1  1 \ 

=  -(6R/k0)(T/0)2    /     f— pi —  +  ±     t  dt  (8)t 

To  get  the  experimentally  determined  average  cross  section 
<Jr(Tq;Ta),  where  Tq  and  Ta  are  the  source  and  absorber  tempera- 
tures, respectively,  ct(E)  in  (2)  is  multiplied  by  the  normalized  dis- 
tribution function  We(E)  of  the  emitted  (incident)  photons,  and  the 
product  integrated  over  energy.  That  is, 

oo 

ar  =    f  o  (E)  (r/27r)We(E)  dE 
6 

and,  using  (2), 

oo 

<fr  =  (r3/87r)a0  /  Wa(E)We(E)  dE  (9) 

where 


(1/2*)/  We(E)dE  =  1 
o 

If  the  transition  to  the  ground  state  can  also  take  place  by  internal 
conversion,  one  must  differentiate  between  the  cross  section  (a0)s 
for  resonance  scattering  and  the  cross  section  (a0)a  for  resonance 
absorption.  For  resonance  scattering,  according  to  Jackson,6 

2Ia  +  1    A2        it  _  2Ia  +  1    A2  1 

(cr°>s  "  2i^TT  ^T  H  r*  "  SgTl  2i  H  (T+~5p  (10) 

Here  21+1  are  the  statistical  weights  of  the  excited  state  a  and  the 
ground  state  g,  H  the  relative  abundance  of  the  resonantly  absorbing 
isotope,  A0  the  resonance  wavelength,  r  the  total  energy  width  of  the 
resonance  level,  Ty  the  partial  energy  width  for  radiative  transition, 
and  a  the  conversion  coefficient. 

In  the  case  of  resonance  fluorescence,  only  the  fraction  Ty/T  of 


aVJ-./vvei 

o 


tOur  Eq.  (8)  differs  from  Eq.  (36)  of  Lamb5  by  a  factor  of  3. 


124  THEORY 


all  intermediate  states  proceeds  to  the  ground  state  by  photon  emis- 
sion, the  fraction  (r  -  T  )/T  proceeding  through  conversion.  In  the 
case  of  resonance  absorption,  all  intermediate  states  contribute  to 
the  cross  section,  and  we  have 

r  2ia  +  l    a2       rv 

K)a=frK)s=^TT    i  Hf  (11) 

For  resonance  fluorescence  in  Ir191  (E0  =  129  kev),  the  line  shape 
down  to  liquid-oxygen  temperature  can  be  calculated  using  two  dif- 
ferent approximations. 

1.  In  the  region  |E  -  E0|^>  T,  only  values  of  /xk0<l  yield  a  sub- 
stantial contribution  to  the  integral  in  (3),  and  (6)  is  still  a  useful  ap- 
proximation: 


Wj(E)  =  (2/D  /  d/i  cos(E-E0±  R)  ju  exp(-jur/2  -  ^i2Rz) 

o 

=  (4/r2)^;x)  (12) 

Here,  for  the  emission  line 

0(«e;xe)  =  ti/2)Yv  (e  exp(-||x2e/4)  (13a) 

while  for  the  absorption  line 

^a;*a)  =  (l/2)l/5T  la  exp(-|2ax2a/4)t  (13b) 

In  the  above  equations 

xe  =  (E  -  E0  +  R)/(l/2)r  xa  =  (E  -  E0  -  R)/(l/2)r        (14) 


Ae  =  2VRkTq  Aa  =  2KRkT*/  (15) 

£e  =  r/Ae  |a  =  T/Aa  (16) 

The  quantity  A  is  the  Doppler  width  of  the  level;  T£  and  Tg  denote, 
respectively,  the  effective  absorber  and  source  temperatures,  which, 
according  to  (7),  correspond  to  the  average  energy  per  vibrational 
degree  of  freedom. 

2.  In  the  region  near  E  =  E0,  a  good  approximation  for  W(E)  is 
obtained  by  splitting  the  integral  in  (3)  at  p.k0  =  1  and  using  approxi- 
mations (6)  and  (8)  in  the  regions  of  their  validity.  Thus 


tSee  Lamb,5  Eq.  (32). 


THEORY  125 

l/k0 

Wn(E)  =  (2/r)  J        d/i  cos  (E  -  E0  ±R)  /Li,  exp  (-/jT/2-  p.2RC) 


+  (2/D        f     djLt  cos  (E  -  E0)  /x  exp  [goo(T)  -  /xr/2] 
1/ke 

The  first  integral  makes  only  a  small  contribution  to  Wji(E),  so  that 
for  (I/kO)  <$C  1  one  obtains  as  a  good  approximation, 

exp[gw(T)] 
Wn(E)  =  WX(E)  +  (E  I  Eq)2  +  r2/4  (17) 

In  the  region   |E  -  E0|^>  T   the  second  term  in  (17)  is  negligible  com- 
pared to  Wj(E).  Combining  (12)  and  (17),  the  energy  distributions  of 
the  emission  and  absorption  lines  become 

we(E)  =  (Vil  *  (Se;xe)  +  (Ee?E[og;(+TrV4  <18a> 

and 

exp[g00(Ta)] 

wa(E)  =  (4/r2)  ^(|a;xa)  +  (E  _  Eo)2  +  ry4  (18b) 

According  to  (18), f  the  crystal  binding  modifies  the  emission  and 
absorption  lines  of  the  129-kev  transition  in  Ir191  in  the  following 
way:  Except  for  the  region  near  resonance,  at  a  temperature  T,  the 
lines  have  almost  the  same  shape  and  positions  as  they  would  have  in 
an  ideal  gas  at  a  temperature  T*.  As  shown  in  (7),  T*  corresponds 
to  the  average  energy  per  vibrational  degree  of  freedom  of  the  crys- 
tal. For  temperatures  T<0  an  additional  line  of  width  r,  whose  in- 
tensity increases  greatly  with  decreasing  temperature,  appears  at  the 
resonance  energy  E  =  E0  (Fig.  1;  see  the  German  original).    Thus, 
the  fraction  of  photons  satisfying  the  resonance  condition  increases 
with  decreasing  temperature. 

The  cross  section  ar  is  obtained  by  substituting  (18)  into  (9).  Only 
two  of  the  integrals  yield  an  appreciable  contribution: 

oo 

/(4/I*)*(«e;*e)(Vl*)*(*a;xa)  dE  and 

0 

7  expfeooCTql  +  gooCTa)] 
J       [(E-E0)2  +  r2/4]2       dE 

t  Equations  (18)  lose  their  validity  at  temperatures  below  liquid 
oxygen  temperature. 


126 


THEORY 


The  average  cross  section  for  resonance  absorption  obtained  by  inte- 
gration of  these  expressions  is 


K)a 


'ra 


2  |/A2a+A| 


exp 


4R2 


A2a+A|_ 


K>; 


x  exp[g00(Tq)  +  gc0(Ta)] 
According  to  the  uncertainty  relation, 

t  =Vr  =  Vry(l  +  a)  =  Ty/(1  +a)  =  T1/2/ln  2 


(19) 


(20) 


where  r  is  the  mean  life  and  Tx/2  is  the  half- life  of  the  resonance 
level,  Ty  is  the  partial  life  for  y  decay,  and  a  is  the  conversion  co- 
efficient. 

At  higher  temperatures  one  can  neglect  the  second  term  in  (19), 
and  from  (11),  (19),  and  (20)  it  follows  that  ara  ~  1/t^.  At  low  tem- 
peratures the  second  term  in  (19),  which  is  independent  of  lifetime, 
dominates. 


NUCLEAR  RESONANCE  ABSORPTION 
OF  GAMMA  RAYS  IN  Ir19lt 


Under  normal  conditions,  it  is  difficult  to  observe  the  resonance 
fluorescence  of  nuclear  gamma  rays  because  of  the  recoil  energy  lost 
by  the  photons  during  both  emission  and  absorption.  In  general,  these 
losses  are  sufficient  to  appreciably  displace  the  emission  and  absorp- 
tion lines,  thereby  destroying  the  resonance  condition.  It  is  possible 
to  compensate  for  the  recoil  energy  losses  by,  for  example,  moving 
the  source  with  respect  to  the  absorber  with  the  aid  of  an  ultracentri- 
fuge,1  or  by  increasing  the  thermal  motion  of  the  emitting  and  absorb- 
ing atoms.2  In  performing  experiments  of  the  latter  type,  we  found 
that  at  low  temperatures,  contrary  to  what  was  expected,  a  pronounced 
increase  in  resonance  absorption  occurred.3  With  the  help  of  a  theory 
developed  by  Lamb,4  this  effect  was  attributed  to  the  fact  that  in  solids 
the  recoil  momentum  does  not  always  produce  a  change  in  the  vibra- 
tional state  of  the  crystal  lattice.  Instead,  for  a  fraction  of  the  gamma 
transitions,  the  solid  as  a  whole  can  take  up  the  recoil  momentum. 
Thus,  according  to  this  theory,  the  emission  and  absorption  spectra 


10  cm 


Fig.  1.  Experimental  arrangement:  The  detector  D  ac- 
cepts only  photons  emitted  by  the  source  while 
moving  on  the  solid  portion  of  the  path  shown. 


t  Translation  of  article  in  Naturwissenschaften,  45,  538  (1958). 

127 


128 


NUCLEAR  RESONANCE  ABSORPTION 


contain  very  strong  lines  of  natural  width  superimposed  upon  a  broad 
distribution  resulting  from  the  thermal  motion  of  the  atoms  bound  in 
the  crystal  lattice.  Because  of  the  vanishingly  small  recoil  energy 
losses,  these  lines  appear  undisplaced  at  the  resonance  energy  posi- 
tion (i.e.,  at  the  excitation  energy  of  the  nuclear  level  under  investi- 
gation). 

We  have  now  demonstrated  the  existence  of  these  unshifted  reso- 
nance lines  by  means  of  a  "centrifuge"  method,  employing  velocities 
of  only  a  few  centimeters  per  second.  The  experimental  arrangement 
is  shown  in  Fig.  1,  while  Fig.  2  shows  the  results  obtained  for  the 


0 

-0.2 

-0.4 

-0.6 

-0.8 

-1.0 

-1.2 
Fig.  2, 


jJr.jPt 
jPt 

-2xl0_s-lxl0"s      0      1x10" 

AE  *• 

2xl0~5  3xl0"5  4xl0-5  5xl0~5        ev 

1            1            |            1 

-4-2          0          2 

i            i            i            i                  ■ 
4          6          8         10        T 12  cm/sec 

1           1           |           1 

V 

i     .      .      .    j. 

Difference  in  intensity  of  the  129-kev  gamma 
transition  in  Ir191  measured  behind  a  resonance 
absorber  (iridium)  and  a  comparison  absorber 
(platinum).  This  intensity  difference  is  plotted  as 
a  function  of  v,  the  relative  velocity  of  the  source 
with  respect  to  the  absorber.  Both  source  and  ab- 
sorber are  at  a  temperature  of  88 °K.  aE  =  (v/c)E0 
denotes  the  energy  shift  of  the  129-kev  gamma 
rays. 


129-kev  transition  in  Ir191.  Thus,  a  new  method  for  the  direct  deter- 
mination of  the  level  widths  of  low- lying  excited  nuclear  states  has 
been  found.  In  our  case,  the  line  width  of  the  129-kev  level  in  Ir191 
agrees,  within  the  limits  of  error,  with  the  value  6.5  x  10"6  ev  deter- 


. 


NUCLEAR  RESONANCE  ABSORPTION  129 

mined  previously,  using  a  less  direct  approach.3  This  width  corre- 
sponds to  a  lifetime  of  1.0 x  10" 10  sec. 

Laboratorium  fiir  Technische  Physik  der  Technischen  Hochschule, 
Miinchen,  und  Max- Planck- Institut  fiir  Medizinische  Forschung, 
Heidelberg. 

RUDOLF   L.  MOSSBAUER 

Received  August  13,  1958 

REFERENCES 

1.  aP.  B.  Moon,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc.  (London),  A64,  76  (1951).  bW.  G. 
Davey  and  P.  B.  Moon,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc.  (London),  A66,  956  (1953). 

2.  aK.  G.  Malmfors,  Ark.  Fysik,  6,  49  (1952).  bF.  R.  Metzger  and 
W.  B.  Todd,  Phys.  Rev.,  95,  853  (1954).   CF.  R.  Metzger,  Phys. 
Rev.,  97,  1258  (1955);  J.  Franklin  Inst.,  261,  219  (1956).  dH.  Schop- 
per,  Z.  Physik,  144,  476  (1956). 

3.  R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Physik,  151,  124  (1958). 

4.  W.  E.  Lamb,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev.,  55,  190  (1939). 


130 


KERNRESONANZABSORPTION  VON  y-STRAHLUNG  IN  Ir1" 


211 


Kernresonanzabsorption  von  y-Strahlung  in  Ir191 

Von  Rudolf  L.  Mossbauer 

Aus  dem  Laboratorium  fiir  technische  Physik  der  Technischen  Hochschule  in  Miinchen 
und  dem  Institut  fiir  Physik  im  Max-Planck-Institut  fiir  medizinische  Forschung  in  Heidelberg 

(Z.  Naturforschg.  14  a,  211—216  [1959]  ;  eingegangen  am  5.  November  1958) 

Bei  der  Emission  und  Selbstabsorption  von  weicher  y-Strahlung  in  Kernen  treten  bei  tiefen  Tem- 
peraturen  in  Festkbrpern  sehr  starke  Linien  mit  der  naturlichen  Linienbreite  auf.  Diese  Linien  er- 
scheinen  als  Folge  davon,  daB  bei  tiefen  Temperaturen  bei  einem  Teil  der  Quanteniibergange  der 
;'-RiickstoBimpuls  nicht  mehr  vom  einzelnen  Kern  aufgenommen  wird,  sondern  von  dem  Kristall  als 
Ganzes.  Da  die  scharfen  Emissions-  und  Absorptionslinien  energetisch  an  der  gleichen  Stelle  liegen, 
tritt  ein  sehr  starker  Resonanzfluoreszenzeffekt  auf.  Durch  eine  „Zentrifugen"-Methode,  bei  der  die 
Emissions-  und  Absorptionslinien  gegeneinander  verschoben  werden,  lafit  sich  der  Fluoreszenzeffekt 
unterdriicken  und  so  eine  unmittelbare  Bestimmung  der  naturlichen  Linienbreite  von  Resonanzlinien 
vornehmen.  Erste  Messungen  nach  dieser  Methode  ergeben  fiir  die  Lebenszeit  x  des  129  keV-Niveaus 
inlr»":   T=(l,4  lj;f)  -10""  sec. 


Die    Methode,    Kernniveaus    durch    Einstrahlung 
der   eigenen   y-Linie1    zur   Fluoreszenz   anzuregen, 

1  In  besonderen  Fallen  ist  eine  Fluoreszenzanregung  durch 
Einstrahlung  eines  Quantenkontinuums  moglich :  J.  E.  Dra- 
per u.  R.L.Hickok,  Phys.  Rev.  108,  1280  [1957].  -  E. 
Haywakd  u.  E.G.  Foli.br,  Phys.  Rev.  106,  991  [1957]. 


wird  in  zunehmender  Weise  zur  Bestimmung  der 
Lebenszeiten  x  kurzlebiger  Kernzustande  (t<10-10 
sec)  verwendet. 

Die  Kernresonanzfluoreszenz  von  y-Strahlung  ist 
unter  normalen  Bedingungen  nur  schwer  zu  beob- 
achten.  weil  die  y-Quanten  bei  ihrer  Emission  und 


131 


212 


R.  L.  MOSSBAUER 


Absorption  infolge  Abgabe  von  RiickstoBimpuls  an 
die  emittierenden  und  absorbierenden  Kerne  so 
hohe  RiickstoBenergieverluste  erleiden,  daB  die 
Emissions-  und  Absorptionslinien  erheblich  gegen- 
einander  verschoben  werden  und  daher  die  Reso- 
nanzbedingung  verletzt  wird.  Es  gibt  im  wesent- 
lichen  drei  Methoden,  durch  Kompensation  der 
RiickstoBenergieverluste  meBbare  Werte  fiir  den 
Wirkungsquerschnitt  fiir  die  Kernresonanzfluores- 
zenz  zu  erzielen: 

1.  DoppLER-Verschiebung  der  Quantenenergien 
durch  mechanische  Bewegung  der  Kerne  mit  Hilfe 
von  Ultrazentrif ugen  2. 

2.  DoppLER-Verbreiterung  der  Emissions-  und 
Absorptionslinien  durch  Temperaturerhohung,  um 
die  Uberdeckung  der  beiden  Linien  zu  verbessern3. 

3.  DoppLER-Verbreiterung  oder  DoppLER-Verschie- 
bung  der  Quantenenergien  durch  einen  fruheren 
Emissions-  oder  AbsorptionsprozeB,  z.  B.  einen  dem 
y-Ubergang  vorangehenden  /?-t)bergang  oder  einen 
Teilcheneinfang  4. 

In  der  vorliegenden  Arbeit  wird  iiber  eine  Me- 
thode  berichtet,  bei  der  das  Auftreten  der  RiickstoB- 
energieverluste verhindert  wird  und  die  Resonanz- 
bedingung  daher  nicht  verletzt  wird.  Das  beschrie- 
bene  Verfahren  dient  zur  unmittelbaren  Messung 
der  Lebenszeiten  niedriger,  angeregter  Kernzustande. 
Erste  Messungen  an  dem  129  keV-Ubergang  in  Ir191 
werden  mitgeteilt. 

1.  Grundlagen  der  Mefimethode 

In  einem  fruheren  Experiment5  wurde  bei  tiefen 
Temperaturen  im  Gegensatz  zur  klassischen  Erwar- 
tung  ein  starker  Anstieg  der  Kernresonanzabsorp- 


tion  bei  dem  129  keV-Niveau  in  Ir191  beobachtet. 
Dieser  Effekt  wurde  mit  Hilfe  einer  Theorie  von 
Lamb  6  als  Folge  der  Kristallbindung  der  Absorber- 
und  Praparatsubstanzen  gedeutet  und  ist  in  Fest- 
korpern  allgemein  bei  tiefen  Temperaturen  und 
weicher  y-Strahlung  zu  erwarten. 

Die  Emission  oder  Absorption  eines  Quants  durch 
einen  in  einem  Kristall  gebundenen  Kern  fiihrt  im 
allgemeinen  zu  einer  Anderung  des  Schwingungs- 
zustandes  des  Kristallgitters,  das  den  RiickstoB- 
impuls  aufnimmt.  Wegen  der  Quantelung  der  inne- 
ren  Energie  kann  der  Kristall  die  RiickstoBenergie 
nur  in  diskreten  Betragen  aufnehmen.  Mit  abneh- 
mender  Temperatur  nimmt  die  Wahrscheinlichkeit 
fiir  die  Anregung  der  inneren  Niveaus  immer  mehr 
ab,  weshalb  bei  weicher  y-Strahlung 7  bei  einem 
Teil  der  Quantenubergange  der  Kristall  als  Ganzes 
den  RiickstoBimpuls  aufnimmt.  Die  hierbei  emittier- 
ten  bzw.  absorbierten  Quanten  erleiden  wegen  der 
groBen  Masse  des  Kristalles  praktisch  keine  Energie- 
verluste  und  erfiillen  ideal  die  Resonanzbedingung. 

Abb.  1  zeigt  die  theoretischen  Emissions-  und  Ab- 
sorptionsspektren  des  129  keV-Uberganges  in  Ir191 
bei  einer  Temperatur  von  88  °K. 

Die  Spektren  enthalten  je  zwei  Anteile: 

1.  Eine  breite,  die  thermische  Bewegung  der  im 
Kristallgitter  gebundenen  Atome  widerspiegelnde 
Verteilung.  Die  in  den  Bereich  dieser  „thermischen 
Linie"  fallenden  Quantenubergange  sind  mit  einer 
Anderung  des  Schwingungszustandes  des  Kristall- 
gitters gekoppelt. 

2.  Eine  auBerordentlich  starke  Linie  mit  der  na- 
turlichen  Linienbreite,  die  die  Quantenubergange 
enthalt,  bei  denen  kein  RiickstoBenergieverlust  auf- 
tritt,  weil  der  Kristall  als  Ganzes  den  RuckstoB- 
impuls aufnimmt.  Diese  „riickstoBfreie  Linie"  er- 


2  P.  B.  Moon,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc,  Lond.  A  64,  76  [1951].  - 
P.  B.  Moon  u.  A.  Storruste,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc,  Lond.  A  66, 
585  [1953].  -  W.  G.  Davey  u.  P.  B.  Moon,  Proc.  Phys. 
Soc,  Lond.  A  66,  956  [1953].  -  F.  R.  Metzger,  J.  Frank- 
lin Inst.  261,  219  [1956].  -  V.  Knapp,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc, 
Lond.  A  70,  142  [1957]. 

s  K.  G.  Malmfors,  Ark.  Fysik  6,  49  [1953].  -  F.  R.  Metzger 
u.  W.B.Todd,  Phys.  Rev.  95,  853  [1954].  -  F.  R.  Metz- 
ger, Phys.  Rev.  97,  1258  [1955] ;  98,  200  [1955].  -  F.  R. 
Metzger,  J.  Franklin  Inst.  261,  219  [1956].  -  H.  Schopper, 
Z.  Phys.  144,  476  [1956]. 

4  K.Ilakovac,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc,  Lond.  A  67,  601  [1954].  - 
F.  R.  Metzger,  Report  at  the  Glasgow  Conference  1954, 
S.201;  Phys.  Rev.  101,  286  [1956];  103,  983  [1956]; 
110, 123  [1958].  -  H.  Schopper,  Z.  Phys.  144, 476  [1956]. 
—  C.  P.  Swann  u.  F.  R.  Metzger,  Phys.  Rev.  108,  982 
[1957].   —  S.  S.  Hanna  u.  L.  Meyer-Schutzmeister,  Phys. 


Rev.  108,  1644  [1957].  -  L.  Grodzins,  Phys.  Rev.  109, 
1014  [1958].  -  V.  Knapp,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc,  Lond.  71, 
194  [1958].  -  P.  B.  Smith  u.  P.  M.  Endt,  Phys.  Rev.  110, 
397,  1442  [1958].  -  F.  R.  Metzger,  C.  P.  Swann  u.  V.  K. 
Rasmussen,  Phys.  Rev.  110,  906  [1958].  -  V.  K.  Rasmussen, 
F.  R.  Metzger  u.  C.  P.  Swann,  Phys.  Rev.  110,  154  [1958]. 
—  B.  Duelli  u.  L.  Hoffmann,  Z.  Naturforschg.  13  a,  204 
[1958].  -  G.  M.  Griffiths,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc,  Lond.  72, 
337  [1958]. 
s  R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Phys.  151,  124  [1958]. 

6  W.  E.  Lamb  jr.,  Phys.  Rev.  55,  190  [1939]. 

7  Bei  harter  y-Strahlung  ist  die  RiickstoBenergie  groB  gegen 
die  obere  Grenzenergie  des  Schwingungsspektrums  des 
Kristalles  und  es  ist  eine  ungehinderte  Aufnahme  der  Riick- 
stoBenergie in  Form  von  innerer  Energie  durch  den  Kristall 
moglich. 


132 


KERNRESONANZABSORPTION  VON  y-STRAHLUNG  IN  Ir191 


213 


Emissionsspektrum 
x2O0 


I(v) 


Energie 


Abb.  1.  Lage  und  Form  der  Emissions-  und  Absorptionsspek- 
tren  des  129  keV-t)berganges  in  Ir191  bei  T  =  88  °K  fiir  eine 
Lebenszeit  t  =  1,4-10-10  sec.  Nullpunkt  der  Energieskala 
unterdriickt;  Einheit  der  Ordinate  willkiirlich;  Hone  der  Li- 
nien  bei  E=E0  (Resonanzenergie)  im  Verhaltnis  1  :  200  ver- 
kiirzt  dargestellt. 

scheint  daher  in  Emission  und  Absorption  unver- 
schoben  an  der  Stelle  der  Resonanzenergie  E0 . 

In  der  vorliegenden  Arbeit  wurden  am  Beispiel 
von  Ir191  die  „riickstoBireien"  scharfen  Emissions- 
und  Absorptionslinien  mit  Hilfe  einer  „Zentrifu- 
gen"-Methode  nachgewiesen.  Dabei  wurde  die  Quelle 
gegen  den  Absorber  bewegt,  wobei  durch  den  Dopp- 
LER-Effekt  die  Emissionslinie  nach  groBeren  oder 
kleineren  Energien  verschoben  wurde.  Durch  diese 
Verschiebung  der  Emissionslinie  wurde  die  bei  ru- 
hender  Quelle  vorhandene  vollstandige  Uberdeckung 
der  „riickstoBfreien"  Emissions-  und  Absorptions- 
linien aufgehoben.  Damit  wurde  die  Resonanzbedin- 
gung  verletzt  und  der  starke  Resonanzabsorptions- 
effekt  der  „riickstoBireienu  Linien  zum  Verschwin- 
den  gebracht.  Eine  Analyse  der  den  Resonanzabsor- 
ber  (Iridium)  durchsetzenden  129  keV-y-Strahlung 
von  Iridium  als  Funktion  der  Relativgeschwindigkeit 
von  Quelle  und  Absorber  lieferte  dann  unmittelbar 
die  Breite  der  „ruckstoBfreien"  Linien,  d.  h.  die 
natiirliche  Linienbreite  und  damit  auch  die  Lebens- 
zeit des  129  keV-Niveaus  von  Ir191. 

2.  Theorie 

Wenn  die  Quelle  mit  der  Geschwindigkeit  v  in 
Richtung  auf  den  Resonanzabsorber  bewegt  wird, 
dann  gilt 8  fiir  die  Intensitat  /  der  Resonanzstrahlung 
hinter  dem  Resonanzabsorber9: 


■  const  />e  (E  +  1.  E0\  e-°(£)-"  dE . 


(1) 


mit 


n  ist  die  Zahl  der  Atome  des  resonanten  Isotops  pro 
cm2  Absorberflache  und  E0  ist  die  Resonanzenergie. 
We(E)  ist  die  Energieverteilung  der  Quanten  einer 
ruhenden  Quelle  und  a(E)  ist  der  Wirkungsquer- 
schnitt  fiir  die  Resonanzabsorption: 

0(£).-(r»/4)o,r.(£)  (2) 

Dabei  sind  /a  und  /g  der  Spin  des  angeregten  und 
des  Grundzustandes,  A0  die  Resonanzwellenlange, 
r  die  totale  Energiebreite  des  Resonanzniveaus  und 
rv  die  partielle  Energiebreite  des  Resonanzniveaus 
fiir  Strahlungsemission. 

Die  Absorptionslinie  ist  nach  Lage  und  Form  ge- 
geben  durch 

CO 

W& (E)  =  (2/r)  Real/d/*  exp [i iu(E-E0  +  i  JT/2) 

+  ga(/0]-      (4a) 
Dabei  ist 

*W"'?i^3rIft+1»  (4b) 

•  exp  (  —  ijuh <os)  +a,  exp  (i ju h  cos)  —  1  -  2  as]  . 

E0  ist  die  Resonanzenergie,  a>s  die  Frequenz  der 
5-ten  Normalschwingung  des  Kristalles,  m  die  Kern- 
masse,  p  der  Impuls  des  y-Quants,  ^T  der  Polarisa- 
tionseinheitsvektor,  3  A^  die  Zahl  der  unabhangigen 
Freiheitsgrade  im  Kristall  und  as  die  mittlere  Be- 
setzungszahl  des  5-ten  Oszillators. 

Im  Fall  der  Emissionslinie  [We(E)]  ist  ga(yu)  in 
(4  a)  zu  ersetzen  durch 


ge(/")  -  2 


(pes)' 


2  m  h  a>s  N 
+  a.sexp(-ijuho)s)  -1 


[(as  +  l)  exp(i>fecos) 

2  a,].  (5) 


Ferner  ist 


fw&(E)dE  =  fWe(E)dE  =  2n/r.      (6) 
o  o 

Fiir  ju  h  a)g  >  1  gilt  (h  a>g  =  obere  Grenzenergie  des 
Schwingungsspektrums) : 


8  Fiir  Einzelheiten  der  Ableitung  wird  auf  Anm.  5i  •  verwie- 
sen. 

9  Die  Absorption  der  Hiillenelektronen  kann  im  Bereich  der 
Resonanzlinie  als  unabhangig  von  der  Energie  angenom- 
men  werden. 


133 


214 


R.  L.  MOSSBAUER 


ge(°o;D=ga(oo;r)  (7) 

Wenn  der  Wirkungsquerschnitt  fiir  die  Resonanz- 
absorption  vorzugsweise  durch  die  „rucksto8freien" 
Linien  bestimmt  wird  und  wenn  zwischen  der  Niveau- 
breite  J"  und  der  oberen  Grenzenergie  hwg  des 
Schwingungsspektrums  die  Ungleichung  T  <^  k  <og 
besteht,  dann  gilt  in  der  Umgebung  der  Resonanz- 
stelle  E0  in  guter  Naherung  (Tq,  Ta  =  Temperatur 
von  Quelle  bzw.  Absorber)  : 


We(E)  =  (2/r)  fdju  cos  (£-£„)  fx 
6 

•exp[goo(T)-f*r/2] 

und  o(E)  =  (r2/4)  o0     expg°°(r^_ 

Damit  folgt  fiir  die  Strahlungsintensitiit  hinter  dem 
Resonanzabsorber  bei  einer  Verschiebung  der  Emis- 
sionslinie  von  der  GroBenordnung  der  natiirlichen 
Linienbreite  aus  (1),  (8)  und  (9): 


expgoo(rq) 
(E-E0)*  +  r*/4 

(9) 


I(v)  —  const  / 


expgoo(rq) 


[£+(t;/c)£0-£:0]*+rV4 


(10) 


exp 


d£. 


1+[(2ID(E-E0)]* 
I(v)  ist  eine  symmetrische  Funktion. 

Im  Fall  „schwacher  Absorption" 10,  d.  h.  fiir 
na0expgoo(T!l)<l  folgt  aus  (10)  [mit  (E  -  E0)  / 
(r/2)=xund(v/c)Ej(r/2)=y]: 

/H  =  ^Lexpg00(7'q)  (11) 


r/2 


dx 


(*+yy 


■I 


reg0expgoo(ra) 
[l+x*][l+{x  +  y)*] 


dx 


=c, 


i+.Uv/c)  sjry 


Die  Halbwertsbreite  der  Intensitatsverteilung  I(v) 
hangt  im  Fall  starker  Absorption  nach  (10)  und 
(7)  von  der  Form  des  Schwingungsspektrums  des 
Absorbers  ab.  Im  Fall  „schwacher  Absorption"  ist 
die  Halbwertsbreite  der  Intensitatsverteilung  unab- 
hangig  von  der  Form  der  Schwingungsspektren  der 
Absorber-  und  der  Praparatsubstanzen.  Dagegen 
wird  die  Konstante  C2  in  (11),  die  das  Verhaltnis 
der  resonanzabsorbierten  zu  den  nicht-resonanten 
Quanten  bestimmt,  erheblich  durch  die  Form  der 
Schwingungsspektren  beeinfluBt. 


Mit  abnehmender  Temperatur  wachst  die  „riick- 
stoBfreie"  scharfe  Linie  auf  Kosten  der  „thermi- 
schen"  Linie n.  Beim  Ubergang  zur  Temperatur 
T  =  0  erreicht  die  „riicksto6freie"  Linie  ihre  maxi- 
male  Hohe,  doch  existiert  daneben  immer  noch  eine 
breite  thermische  Verteilung,  weil  die  Quanten  bei 
^  =  0  zwar  keine  Phononen  mehr  absorbieren  kon- 
nen,  eine  Phononenemission  aber  immer  nodi  mog- 
lich  ist,  wenn  audi  nur  mit  einer  kleinen  Wahr- 
scheinlidikeit. 

Fiir  die  „riickstoBfreien"  Linien  gilt  bei  T  =  0 
fiir  ein  DEBYEsches  Sdiwingungsspektrum : 

(12) 


(8)      We(E)  -  W%{E)  -       *xp*~(0> 


(£-£:0)*+r2/4 
_^  exp[-(3/2)(M2mc2)/fc0] 
(£-£0)a  +  rV4 
Das  in  der  vorliegenden  Arbeit  besdiriebene  Ver- 
fahren  zur  Messung  der  Lebenszeiten  von  Kern- 
niveaus  ist  nur  bei  energetisch  niedrigen  Kernzu- 
standen  anwendbar,  namlich  bei  solchen  Kern- 
niveaus,  bei  denen  die  RiickstoUenergie  E02/2  m  c2 
hodistens  etwa  das  Doppelte  der  Abschneideenergie 
k  &  des  DEBYEschen  Schwingungsspektrums  betragt. 
Nur  unter  dieser  Bedingung  tritt  nach  (12)  und 
(6)  wirklidi  eine  starke  „riickstoBfreieu  Linie  aus 
dem  Untergrund  der  „thermischen"  Linie  hervor. 
Der  anschauliche  Grund  hierfiir  ist,  daB  bei  Riick- 
stoBenergien  von  der  GroBenordnung  k  0  die  Auf- 
nahme  der  RiickstoBenergie  vorzugsweise  durch 
Oszillatoren  im  energiearmen  Bereich  des  Sdiwin- 
gungsspektrums  erfolgen  muB.  Dieser  Bereidi  be- 
sitzt  aber  nur  eine  geringe  Oszillatordichte 12  und 
die  Wahrsdieinlichkeit  fiir  die  Aufnahme  des  Riick- 
stoBimpulses  ist  entsprediend  klein,  was  das  Auf- 
treten  einer  starken  „riickstoBfreien"  Resonanzlinie 
zur  Folge  hat.  Wenn  dagegen  E02/2  mc2^>  k@  ,  so 
konnen  die  im  Sdiwingungsspektrum  reidilidier  ver- 
tretenen  hochfrequenten  Oszillatoren  starker  zur 
Energieaufnahme  herangezogen  werden  und  mit 
der  Zahl  der  Kombinationsmoglichkeiten  steigt  die 
Wahrsdieinlichkeit  fiir  die  ungehinderte  Aufnahme 
des  RuckstoBimpulses. 

10  In  diesem  Fall  laBt  sich  ein  „mittlerer"   Wirkungsquer- 
schnitt ar  definieren: 

/=/„  exp  (-rear)  mit  ar=  f(r/2jt)  a{E)  We(E)  d£  , 

6 
vgl.  Anm.5,  Gl.  (9). 

11  vgl.  Gl.  (6). 

12  Die  Dichteverteilung  ist  z.  B.  im  DKBYE-Spektrum  propor- 
tional dem  Quadrat  der  Oszillatorenenergie  h  <o  . 


134 


KERNRESONANZABSORPTION  VON  y-STRAHLUNG  IN  Ir1" 


215 


3.  Versuchsanordnung  und  MeBergebnisse 

Abb.  2  zeigt  die  Versuchsanordnung.  Der  Aufbau 
der  Kryostaten  wurde  friiher5  beschrieben.  Der  Re- 
sonanzabsorber  (Iridium)  und  ein  Vergleichsabsor- 
ber  (Platin)  konnten  wechselweise  in  den  Strahlen- 


:tBE2M 


^\W^ 

s^> 

1 

« 

^^ 

Abb.  2.  Versuchsgeometrie.  A  Absorber-Kryostat ;  Q  rotieren- 

der  Kryostat  mit  Quelle;  D  Szintillationsdetektor.  M  ist  der 

bei  der  Messung  ausgeniitzte  Teil  des  Rotationskreises  der 

Quelle. 


Abb.  3.  Relatives  Intensitatsverhaltnis  (/Ir  — 7P')//Pt  der  hin- 
ter  Iridium-  bzw.  Platinabsorbem  gemessenen  y-Strahlung  als 
Funktion  der  Geschwindigkeit  der  Quelle  relativ  zu  den  Ab- 
sorbern.  E=(v/c)-E0  ist  die  Energieverschiebung  der  129  keV- 
Quanten  relativ  zu  den  ruhenden  Absorbern.  Als  Strahlungs- 
quelle  diente  eine  65  mCurie  starke  Osmiumquelle,  deren 
Zerfallsspektrum  die  129  keV-Linie  in  Irm  enthalt. 

gang  gebracht  werden.  Die  Absorber  und  die  Quelle 
befanden  sich  auf  der  Temperatur  des  fliissigen  02  • 
Das  Szintillationsspektrometer  wurde  durch  eine 
Photozelle  so  gesteuert,  daB  nur  solche  Quanten 
registriert  wurden,  die  von  der  Strahlenquelle  wah- 
rend  ihres  Aufenthaltes  langs  des  markierten  Teiles 
ihres  Rotationskreises  emittiert  wurden. 

Abb.  3   zeigt  die  MeBergebnisse.   Jeder  einzelne 
MeBpunkt  wurde  aus  etwa  je   10  Messungen  der 


Strahlungsintensitaten  hinter  den  beiden  Absorbern 
bestimmt.  Die  gesamte  MeBzeit  betrug  14  Tage.  Die 
Strahlungsintensitat  hinter  dem  Vergleichsabsorber 
(Platin)  war  innerhalb  der  Grenzen  der  MeB- 
genauigkeit  unabhangig  von  der  Relativgeschwin- 
digkeit  v .  Die  eingetragenen  mittleren  Fehler  wur- 
den aus  den  Schwankungen  der  Einzelmessungen 
bestimmt  und  sind  immer  groBer  als  die  statistischen 
Fehler.  Beim  vorliegenden  Experiment  wurde  der 
Fall  „schwacher  Absorption"  [Gl.  (II)]  noch  nicht 
verwirklicht.  Die  eingetragene,  den  MeBwerten  ange- 
paBte  Kurve  wurde  auf  numerischem  Wege  nach 
(10)  berechnet 13  und  entspricht  einer  Niveaubreite 
r-(4,6±0,6)-10-6  eV  fiir  das  129  keV-Niveau 
in  Ir191.  Bei  der  Berechnung  des  Absorptionsquer- 
schnittes  nach  (9)  wurde  das  Schwingungsspektrum 
des  Absorbers  durch  ein  DEBYEsches  Spektrum  mit 
einer  DEBYE-Temperatur  0  =  285  °K  angenahert. 
Diese  Naherung  ergibt  eine  zusatzliche,  unter  den 
Bedingungen  des  vorliegenden  Experimentcs  aller- 
dings  unerhebhche  Unsicherheit  in  der  Bestimmung 
von  r. 

4.  Diskussion 

In  der  friiheren  Arbeit5  wurde  fiir  die  partielle 
Lebenszeit  rY  fiir  Strahlungsemission  des  129  keV- 
Niveaus  in  Ir191  ein  Wert  von 

Ty=(3,6:^)-10-10sec 

gef  unden.  Mit  dem  Konversionskoef  fizienten  a  =  2,47 
nach  Davis  und  Mitarb.  16  folgt  daraus  fiir  die  Le- 
benszeit x  =  ry/(l  +  a)  =  1,0  !o'.a)  •  10-10  sec. 
Die  Unscharferelation  ergibt  mit  der  im  vorliegen- 
den Experiment  bestimmten  Niveaubreite  fiir  die 
Lebenszeit  des  129  keV-Niveaus  in  Ir191: 
T=(l,4:S:?)-10-10sec. 

Wir  sehen  den  im  vorliegenden  Experiment  ge- 
wonnenen  Wert  als  zuverlassiger  an  und  verzichten 
auf  eine  Mittelung  der  Ergebnisse  der  beiden  nach 
verschiedenen  Methoden  vorgenommenen  Messun- 
gen, wegen  der  Unsicherheit  in  dem  Wert  des  Kon- 
versionskoeffizienten  a  und  weil  sich  bei  der  friihe- 
ren Messung  systematische  Fehler  wesentlich  schwie- 

13  Fiir  die  Rechnung  wurden  verwendet  7g  =  3/2  (s.  Anm.  w) ; 
/a  =  5/2  (s.Anm.15);  n  =  l,07-1021cm-2;  Tq  =  TA  =  88°K. 

14  K.  Murakawa  u.  S.  Suwa,  Phys.  Rev.  87,  1048  [1952]. 

16  J.  W.  Mihelich,  M.  McKeown  u.  M.  Goldhaber,  Phys.  Rev. 

96,  1450  [1954]. 
18  R.  H.  Davis,  A.  S.  Divatia,  D.  A.  Lind  u.  R.  D.  Moffat,  Phys. 

Rev.  103,  1801  [1956]. 


135 


216 


H.VOSHAGE  UND  H.  HINTENBERGER 


riger  ausschlieCen  lassen  als  bei  der  vorliegeriden, 
mehr  direkten  Messung  der  Niveaubreite. 

Die  in  der  vorliegenden  Arbeit  beschriebene  Me- 
thode  der  Verschiebung  „riickstoBfreier"  j^-Linien 
auf  mechanischem  Wege  gestattet  eine  unmittelbare 
Bestimmung  der  Niveaubreiten  und  damit  audi  der 
Lebenszeiten  niedriger,  angeregter  Zustande  von 
Kernen,  die  in  Festkorpern  gebunden  sind.  Die  Me- 
thode  eignet  sich  u.  a.  hervorragend  zur  Messung 
von  Lebenszeiten  energetisch  niedriger  Kernzustande 
in  dem  Ubergangsgebiet  von  10-10  bis  10-11  sec, 
das  mit  der  Methode  der  verzogerten  Koinzidenzen 
schwer  erfaBbar  ist.  Der  groBe  Vorteil  dieser  Me- 
thode liegt  bei  Messungen  von  Lebenszeiten  der 
GroBenordnung  10-10  sec  darin,  daB  die  erforder- 
lichen  Verschiebungen  der  Quantenenergien  nur  von 
der    GroBenordnung    der    natiirlichen    Linienbreite 


sind  und  daher  nur  Relativgeschwindigkeiten  der 
GroBenordnung  cm/sec  benotigt  werden,  im  Gegen- 
satz  zu  der  um  GroBenordnungen  hohere  Geschwin- 
digkeiten  erf ordernden  Ultrazentrif ugenmethode  2, 
bei  der  die  thermisch  verbreiterten  Linien  gegenein- 
ander  verschoben  werden.  Das  beschriebene  Verfah- 
ren  bietet  dariiber  hinaus  im  Energiegebiet  weicher 
y-Strahlung  eine  einfache  Moglichkeit,  die  Resonanz- 
streustrahlung  von  der  Streustrahlung  der  Elektro- 
nenhulle,  insbesondere  von  der  RAYLEiGH-Streu- 
strahlung  gleicher  Wellenlange,  ?u  unterscheiden. 

Die  Untersuchungen  werden  fortgesetzt. 

Es  ist  mir  ein  Anliegen,  Herrn  Professor  H.  Maieb- 
Leibnitz  fur  sein  reges  Interesse  und  fordernde  Diskus- 
sionen  herzlich  zu  danken.  Herrn  Professor  K.  H.  Lau- 
terjung  danke  ich  dafiir,  daB  er  die  Durchfiihrung  der 
Arbeit  am  Max-Planck-Institut  fiir  medizinische  For- 
schung  in  Heidelberg  ermoglicht  hat. 


136 


JANUARY 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW 


VOLUME    55 


Capture  of  Neutrons  by  Atoms  in  a  Crystal* 

Willis  E.  Lamb,  Jr. 

Columbia  University,  New  York,  New  York 

(Received  November  21,  1938) 

The  precise  determination  of  the  properties  of  nuclear  resonance  levels  from  the  capture  of 
slow  neutrons  is  made  difficult  by  the  fact  that  most  of  the  substances  used  for  absorbers  and 
detectors  are  in  the  solid  state,  so  that  the  calculations  of  Bethe  and  Placzek  for  the  influence 
of  the  Doppler  effect  are  inapplicable,  since  these  were  based  on  the  assumption  of  a  perfect 
gas.  In  this  paper,  their  calculations  are  generalized  to  include  the  effect  of  the  lattice  binding. 
Under  the  assumption  that  the  crystal  may  be  treated  as  a  Debye  continuum,  it  is  shown  that 
for  sufficiently  weak  lattice  binding,  the  absorption  curve  has  the  same  form  as  it  would  in  a 
gas,  not  at  the  temperature  T  of  the  crystal,  however,  but  at  a  temperature  which  corresponds 
to  the  average  energy  per  vibrational  degree  of  freedom  of  the  lattice  (including  zero-point 
energy).  In  cases  of  somewhat  stronger  lattice  binding,  the  line  form  is  found  to  be  more  com- 
plicated, and  may  even  have  a  fine  structure.  Plots  are  given  of  the  absorption  line  in  several 
typical  cases.  An  approximate  formula  for  the  cross  section  for  self-indication  is  also  derived. 


ACCORDING  to  the  theory  of  the  compound 
nucleus  proposed  by  Bohr  and  by  Breit  and 
Wigner,1  the  cross  section  for  the  capture  of  a 
slow  neutron  with  an  energy  near  to  a  resonance 
level  of  a  nucleus  at  rest  in  free  space  is  given  by 

*  Publication  assisted  by  the  Ernest  Kempton  Adams 
Fund  for  Physical  Research  of  Columbia  University. 

«  N.  Bohr,  Nature  137,  344  (1936) ;  G.  Breit  and  E. 
Wigner,  Phys.  Rev.  49,  519  (1936). 


an  equation  of  the  form 


o-o 


(1) 


4  (£-£o-i?)2+£r2 

where  ff0,  the  cross  section  at  resonance,  varies 
inversely  With  v,  the  velocity  of  the  neutron  in 
the  rest  system,  E  is  the  kinetic  energy  of  the 
neutron,  and  E0  is  the  energy  that  the  neutron 


137 


CAPTURE    OF     NEUTRONS 


191 


would  have  at  resonance  if  the  atom  were  in- 
finitely heavy  so  that  the  compound  nucleus 
would  take  up  no  recoil  energy.  For  atoms  of 
finite  mass,  the  recoil  energy  R  =  (m/M)E  must 
be  included  in  the  energy  denominator.2  (We 
assume  that  the  mass  M  of  the  atom  is  much 
greater  than  the  mass  m  of  the  neutron,  and 
neglect  terms  of  higher  order  in  m/M.)  T  is  the 
total  half- value  width  of  the  resonance  level,  and 
is  proportional  to  the  rate  of  decay  of  the 
compound  nucleus;  in  most  cases  this  corre- 
sponds to  the  process  of  emission  of  a  high 
energy  gamma-ray. 

Actually,  of  course,  it  never  happens  that  one 
has  to  do  with  a  free  atom  at  rest.  This  somewhat 
complicates  the  determination  of  the  properties 
of  the  resonance  level  from  slow  neutron  data. 
The  atoms  in  a  gas  may  be  treated  as  free,  but 
at  finite  temperatures,  there  is  a  Maxwellian 
distribution  of  velocities,  and  Eq.  (1)  must  be 
modified,  as  has  been  done  by  Bethe  and 
Placzek3, 4  for  this  case.  It  is  here  necessary  to 
change  the  resonance  energy  denominator  ac- 
cording to  the  relative  velocity  of  the  neutron 
and  atom,  and  to  average  over  the  Maxwellian 
distribution  of  velocities  of  the  gas  atoms.  The 
proportionality  of  the  cross  section  to  1/v  is 
thereby  unaltered,  as  this  factor  arises  just  from 
the  normalization  of  the  incident  neutron  Wave 
function  to  unit  flux  required  by  the  definition 
of  a  cross  section.  The  result  of  the  averaging 
gives 

*=«#(&*),  (2) 

where 

x=(E-E0-R)/hT,     £=r/A  (3) 

and 

A  =  2(RT)>  (4) 

is  the  "Doppler"  width  of  the  level.6  The  function 


2ttU_00 


e-HHx-v)* 


l+y2 


(5) 


2  As  it  is  usually  written,  the  capture  cross  section  refers 
to  the  coordinate  system  in  which  the  compound  nucleus 
is  at  rest,  so  that  no  energy  of  recoil  appears  in  the  de- 
nominator of  Eq.  (1). 

»  H.  Bethe  and  G.  Placzek,  Phys.  Rev.  51,  462  (1937). 

*  H.  Bethe,  Rev.  Mod.  Phys.  9,  140  (1937). 

*  We  will  measure  temperatures  in  energy  units,  taking 
the  Boltzmann  constant  to  be  unity.  The  results  quoted 
here  were  derived  on  the  assumption  that  the  Doppler 
width  of  the  level  is  much  less  than  the  energy  E0  at 
resonance  of  the  neutron.  This  condition  is  satisfied  in  all 
cases  of  practical  interest,  and  we  shall  have  occasion  to 
assume  it  in  our  calculations  also. 


becomes  simple  in  the  following  limiting  cases : 

(a)  *»l/£2,     *-*l/(l+*2), 

i.e.,  far  enough  from  resonance,  the  line  has  its 
normal  form. 


(b) 


1,     ^->1/(1+*2), 


i.e.,  when  the  natural  breadth  is  much  larger 
than  the  Doppler  breadth,  the  line  is  again 
normal. 


(c) 


£«1,     *<1/S2,     iA->*ir*$e-K,*,I 


i.e.,  when  the  natural  width  is  small  compared 
to  the  Doppler  width,  the  absorption  line  has  an 
effective  width  strongly  dependent  on  the 
temperature. 

The  total  activation  induced  in  a  thin  detector 
by  a  beam  of  neutrons  distributed  smoothly  in 
energy  is  proportional  to  the  area  under  the 
absorption  curve 


/ 


dEao^iZi  x)  =  §7rrV0, 


(6) 


independently  of  the  temperature  of  the  gas. 
Another  quantity  of  experimental  interest  is  at, 
the  cross  section  for  self-indication6 


■f**/f. 


«*E-W($vZ,.0) 

(W»*W-**(«/Sfl)J     (7) 


where  $  is  the  Gaussian  error  function. 

The  above  results  are  valid,  however,  only  for 
free  atoms.  Most  of  the  experiments,  of  course, 
have  been  performed  with  solid  absorbers  and 
detectors  in  which  the  atoms  are  bound  in  a 
crystal  lattice  of  some  sort  with  a  characteristic 
Debye  temperature  of  the  order  of  room  tem- 
perature, and  if  the  chemical  binding  is  of  impor- 
tance, as  we  shall  see  is  the  case,  it  is  clearly  not 
permitted  to  apply  the  free  atom  theory  of  the 
Doppler  broadening,  as  was  done  by  Bethe,4  to 
such  cases  as  silver  at  ordinary  temperatures. 

We  shall  want,  therefore,  to  calculate  the 
shape  of  the  absorption  line  for  an  atom  which  is 
bound  in  a  crystal  lattice.  We  do  not  expect  that 
the  chemical  binding  will  cause  any  difference  in 

6  See  reference  4,  Eq.  (520). 


138 


192 


WILLIS    E.     LAMB,    JR 


the  1/v  variation  of  the  capture  cross  section. 
This  has  been  shown  analytically  for  the  case  of 
capture  by  bound  protons,7  but  the  result  is  much 
more  generally  valid,  following  in  every  case  just 
from  the  normalization  of  the  neutron  wave 
function.  The  calculation  will  be  made  without 
detailed  assumptions  about  the  crystal  model, 
but  in  using  the  final  result,  for  simplicity,  we 
will  treat  the  crystal  as  a  Debye  continuum,  and 
hence  the  results  will  not  admit  of  an  exact 
application  to  experimental  cases.  Nevertheless, 
the  general  features  of  the  dependence  of  the 
absorption  line  on  the  characteristics  of  the 
lattice  and  on  the  temperature  may  be  expected 
to  be  fairly  independent  of  the  detailed  model. 
For  just  as  in  the  theory  of  specific  heat,  there 
are  several  limiting  cases  in  which  the  results 
may  not  depend  on  the  model  of  the  lattice  as- 
sumed, so  that  any  fairly  smooth  interpolation 
should  approximate  the  rigorous  result  fairly 
closely.  For  example,  let  us  consider  a  crystal 
lattice  at  the  temperature  absolute  zero.  If  the 
lattice  binding  is  sufficiently  strong  (as  defined 
below),  the  absorption  line  will  be  normal  in 
form,  but  centered  about  E=E0,  while  for  very 
weak  binding,  as  for  instance  might  be  the  case 
with  a  different  substance  containing  the  atom  in 
question,  he  absorption  line  will  again  be 
normal  in  form,  but  centered  about  an  energy 
E=E0+R.  Since  in  practice,  this  shift  R  is  often 
of  the  order  of  T,  the  half-width  of  the  absorption 
line,  this  change  in  the  curve  can  be  experi- 
mentally important,  even  though  the  recoil 
energy  is  numerically  quite  small.  It  might  thus 
be  possible  to  detect  the  effect  of  the  chemical 
binding,  especially  at  low  temperatures,  by  use  of 
different  crystals,  containing  in  common  an 
element  with  a  slow  neutron  resonance  capture 
level,  but  in  which  the  remaining  elements  do 
not  appreciably  capture  or  scatter  slow  neutrons 
of  the  resonance  energy. 

In  the  intermediate  cases,  the  shape  of  the 
absorption  line  is  in  general  much  more  compli- 
cated. However,  in  the  case  of  weak  binding,  as 
defined  below,  it  will  be  possible  to  treat  the 
bound  atoms  as  if  they  were  in  a  gas,  not  however 
with  a  temperature  T,  but  at  a  larger  tempera- 
ture corresponding  to  the  average  energy  per 


vibrational  degree  of  freedom  (including  zero- 
point  energy)  of  the  crystal. 

We  must  now  ask  for  the  probability  W^/S,}  ; 
{ a,  \ )  for  the  capture  of  a  neutron  of  momentum 
p  by  a  definite  lattice  atom  L  of  nuclear  type  A 
to  form  a  nucleus  B  with  emission  of  a  gamma- 
ray  of  wave  vector  k  when  the  crystal  undergoes 
a  transition  from  a  state  {as\  to  a  state  {/},}. 
Here  the  set  of  numbers  denoted  by  {a,}  gives 
the  numbers  a,  of  quanta  (phonons)  in  the 
various  modes  5  of  oscillation  in  the  lattice.  We 
must  consider  that  the  final  state  is  reached 
through  an  intermediate  state  in  which  there  is 
neither  neutron  nor  gamma-ray,  but  a  compound 
nucleus8  C  with  the  lattice  in  a  state  {n,}.  The 
usual  dispersion  theory  gives,  apart  from  a 
trivial  constant  factor, 

(Bfijk  I H'  I  Cn.)  (Cn.  |  H'  \Aa,p) 


J5o-E+E(«.)-£(«.)  +  (*/2)r(«.) 


(8) 


where  r(n„)  is  the  total  half- value  width  of  the 
intermediate  state  (C,  n,).9  Because  of  the  short 
range  of  nuclear  forces  and  hence  the  inde- 
pendence of  the  motion  in  the  crystal  of  the  center 
of  gravity  and  the  internal  degrees  of  freedom 
of  the  nucleus,  the  matrix  elements  of  the 
perturbation  H'  which  appear  in  the  numerator 
of  (8)  can  be  factored  into 


(9) 


(Cn,\H'\Aa,p) 

=  {n,  I  exp  (ip-xL/h)  \  a,)Mcomp, 
(B0.\Hf\Cnt) 

-09. 1  exp  (-ik-xL/h)\nt)Mnd(k), 

where  MT*&{k)  and  MCOmp  are  the  matrix  elements 
for  radiation  and  compound  nucleus  formation, 
respectively,  for  a  free  nucleus,  and,  for  example, 

(».|exp(*p«Xi/ft)|a.) 

is  the  matrix  element  for  transfer  of  a  momentum 


W.  E.  Lamb,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev.  51,  187  (1937). 


8  We  will  ignore  throughout  the  circumstance  that  the 
compound  nucleus  C  is  heavier  than  the  atom  A.  This 
neglect  is  certainly  valid  if  m<g.M,  as  is  the  case  in  practice, 
and  may  be  seen  to  subject  our  results  to  a  limitation  on 
the  effective  width  of  the  level  analogous  to  that  met  by 
Bethe  and  Placzek  (reference  5)  for  free  atoms.  As  there, 
this  limitation  is  of  no  importance  experimentally. 

8  The  curly  brackets  denoting  a  set  of  numbers  will  be 
dropped  when  it  will  not  cause  confusion. 


139 


CAPTURE    OF    NEUTRONS 


193 


p  to  the  crystal  through  the  Lth  atom  with  ex- 
citation of  the  lattice  from  a  state  {a.}  to  a  state 
\nt).  In  practice,  the  lattice  is  in  thermal  equi- 
librium, therefore  not  in  a  definite  state  {a,}, 
and  further,  because  of  the  high  energy  of  the 
gamma-ray,  the  experiments  will  give  only  the 
total  probability  of  capture,  i.e.,  not 


W({0, 


«.)) 


but 


fit     a. 


[«.}),     (10) 


where  the  sum  over  the  initial  states  of  the  lattice 
is  weighted  according  to  the  Boltzmann  factor 
g({a,})  for  each  state  when  the  temperature  of 
the  lattice  is  T.  Because  of  over-all  conservation 
of  energy,  the  magnitude  of  the  wave  vector  k 
in  (8)  is  a  function  of  the  final  state  of  the  lattice 
{/?,}.  In  all  cases  of  importance,  however,  one 
may  neglect  a  variation  of  k  of  the  order  of  the 
zero-point  energy  of  oscillation  in  the  lattice, 
and  perform  the  sum  over  the  final  states  of  the 
lattice  by  use  of  the  completeness  relations, 
finding 


W(E)=\Mt>d\2\Meomp\*Zg(a.) 

|(».|exp(ip.x*/»)|a.)|« 


XL 


[£-£0-E(rc.-«.)W]2+Kr(tt.))2 


(ID 


where  the  energy  of  the  lattice  has  been  ex- 
pressed in  terms  of  the  frequencies  «,  of  the 
lattice  oscillations.  Thus  one  sees  that  the  prob- 
ability of  gamma-ray  emission  is  proportional 
just  to  the  probability  of  formation  of  a  com- 
pound nucleus  C  irrespective  of  the  state  of  the 
lattice,  and  this  despite  the  fact  that  very  often 
a  gamma-ray  may  be  emitted  in  a  time  short 
compared  to  the  periods  of  oscillation  of  the 
lattice,  giving  the  atom  a  recoil  energy  of  the 
order  of  a  hundred  volts.  Eq.  (11)  will  be  much 
less  complicated  if  one  may  neglect  the  depend- 
ence of  T(n,)  on  the  state  \nt)  of  the  lattice.  This 
will  be  so  except  in  the  case,  unimportant  for  our 
purposes,  that  the  main  contribution  to  V  comes 
from  the  emission  of  slow  neutrons,  i.e.,  in  case 
of  a  large  elastic  scattering  cross  section  instead 
of  a  large  capture  cross  section.  If  one  were  also 
to  neglect  the  energy  given  to  the  lattice,  the 
expression  (11),  from  which  we  will  now  drop  the 


factor   |  Mc 

completeness  relation  would  reduce  just  to 

l/l(E-E0y+iT*l, 

since  £«({a.})  =  l. 

art 

We  now  turn  to  an  evaluation  of  the  matrix 
elements  in  Eq.  (11).  In  terms  of  the  wave 
functions9 

iMxi,  •  •  • ,  Xw) 

of  the  crystal,  which  is  assumed  to  be  periodic  in 
a  large  volume  containing  N  atoms  whose  posi- 
tions are  denoted  by  Xi,  •  •  • ,  Xn,  this  matrix 
element  is 

({«.}|exp(*p.xLA)|{«.}) 


■/-/ 


dXidX2'  •  •dX^n,*(XiX2-  •  >XN) 


Xexp  (*p-  xL/h)+at{xv  •  •  xN).     (12) 

We  introduce  normal  coordinates  for  the  crystal 
in  the  usual  form  :10 


Xo=XO0+Ug 

1 
u<?= —  LLe<u'C4<i;exp  (iq-xo°A)+conj.), 

N*    q    j 


(13) 


where  x©0  is  the  equilibrium  position  of  the  Gth 
atom,  u<?  its  displacement  from  equilibrium,  e<j 
is  the  unit  polarization  vector  for  the  wave 
characterized  by  the  propagation  vector  q  and 
polarization  j.  The  spectrum  of  eigenvibrations 
is  determined  by  the  periodic  boundary  condi- 
tions, and  it  is  cut  off  at  an  upper  frequency  limit 
such  that  the  number  of  degrees  of  freedom  agrees 
with  the  number  3N  belonging  to  the  N  atoms 
in  the  fundamental  volume  of  the  lattice.  The 
single  index  5  will  often  be  used  to  denote  the 
pair  of  indices  (q,  j).  In  terms  of  the  quantities 


Q,=A.+At* 


(14) 


where  «.  is  the  frequency  belonging  to  the  5th 
normal  mode,  the  Hamiltonian  of  the  crystal 

10  See  for  instance,  A.  Sommerfeld  and  H.  Bethe, 
Handbuch  der  Physik,  vol.  24/2,  second  edition  (1933), 
p.  500. 


140 


194 


WILLIS    E.     LAMB,    JR, 


takes  the  form  appropriate  for  a  system  of  linear 
harmonic  oscillators  with  coordinates  Qs  and 
momenta  P, 


H=ZH„ 


(15) 


Hs  =  %Mo>SQ,2+P.2/2M. 

The  eigenvalues  of  this  Hamiltonian  are 

£.  =  (n.+J)A«.;    n,  =  0,  1,2,  ••• 

and  the  wave  functions  normalized  in  terms  of 

S,~Q.(h/2Mw.)-* 

are       fn.(Qt)  =  (2i)-*(».0-*r««,*».(«0. 

where  A»((&)  is  the  »«th  Hermite  polynomial.  If, 
for  convenience,  we  take  the  rest  position  of  the 
capturing  atom  Xl°  =  0,  as  may  be  done  without 
loss  of  generality,  the  matrix  element  (12)  with 
the  help  of  Eq.  (13)  takes  the  form 

n  f  <*€.*».({.)  exp  (ip-e$./(2M*«.iV)»)*«.($.), 

*J-co  (16) 

where  the  product  is  to  be  extended  over  all 
the  normal  modes.  Integrals  of  the  form 

K(n„a,;q8)  =  f  &&n****i,m.(i.) 

are  readily  evaluated11  by  use  of  the  generating 
formula  for  the  Hermite  polynomials.  In  our 
case, 


will  enter  the  final  result  only  linearly  in  sums 
like 


where  0  is  the  Debye  temperature  of  the  sub- 
stance. Any  sums  of  the  form  £s<Z«4.  etc.  would 
vanish  as  the  transition  to  the  continuum  is 
made,  which  provides  a  justification  for  neglect 
of  the  higher  powers  of  the  q82  in  Eqs.  (17). 
Consider  now  the  expression 


W(a,)  =  Z 


U8\K(n„a8;q8)\2 


-  [£-£o-L.(w.-a.)Aa>.]2+ir2 


(18) 


This  is  made  difficult  to  evaluate  only  by  the 
presence  in  the  denominator  of  the  term 
J^,(ns  —  a,)hw,.  This  suggests  that  it  will  be  con- 
venient to  group  together  the  terms  in  the 
expression  for  which  this  quantity  has  the  same 
value.  One  may  accomplish  this  most  easily  by 
the  introduction  of  a  delta-function,  writing 
(18)  as 


/: 


dp8(p  —  £  (»«— a«)  ho),) 
> 

XE 


n.|x(  ) 


(£-£0-p)2+ir2 


(19) 


Qs2- 


(p-e,)2 

2Mhw,N 


and  is  arbitrarily  small  if  we  take  the  funda- 
mental volume  of  the  crystal  large  enough,  so 
that  only  terms  to  the  first  order  in  q82  need  be 
kept  in  K(n8,  a,;  qa),  as  will  be  seen  more  clearly 
below.  Then  there  are  three  possibilities : 

\K(as,a,;q8)\2=(l-2a8q82)e-<»t,      (17a) 

|X(a,-M,a,;5a)|2  =  (a.+  l)g,2e-"2,        (17b) 

\K(a,-l,a,;qs)\2  =  a8q$2e-^,  (17c) 

as  all  the  other  K's  are  of  higher  order.  The  qs2 


F.  Bloch  and  A.  Nordsieck,  Phys.  Rev.  52,  54  (1937). 


where  for  the  delta-function,  use  is  made  of  the 
usual  representation 

1    r- 
«(*)=—/    dpe**.  (20) 

2irJ_«, 

Thus  one  finds 

i  rm     r>a  ««w 

W(aa)=—\     dpi     dn 

XLn{|ii:(n8,a,;5.)|2 

n,     s 

Xexp  (-i»(ns-aa)ho,,) }.     (21) 
From  Eqs.  (17),  one  finds 
I*  =  H  \K(n„  a8;  q,)  \ 2  exp  —ifi(n8  —  a,)hu8 

=  e-"'i\\-\-q8'i\_-2a8-\-{a8+\)e-i>iha' 

+a^<"*-]}.     (22) 


141 


CAPTURE    OF     NEUTRONS 


195 


Fig.  1.  Plot  of  the  ratio  of  "effective  temperature"  and 
real  temperature  of  a  crystal  as  a  function  of  the  real 
temperature  measured  in  units  of  the  Debye  temperature 
of  the  substance. 


At  this  point  it  is  most  convenient  to  carry  out 
the  average  over  the  values  of  the  initial  quantum 
numbers  a„  since  now  each  a,  appears  at  most 
linearly.  The  result  of  the  averaging  is  that  each 
a,  above  is  replaced  by  its  average  value  a,  at 
thermal  equilibrium,  where 


eU,lkT_\ 


(23) 


The  product  over  the  various  oscillators  5  is 
then  of  the  form 

n(i+x.2.2)  =  i+LX.g.2 

*  « 

+LI>.Xr<z.V+---     (24) 

and  if  one  remembers  the  smallness  of  the  q,2, 
the  series  may  be  summed  to  give  exp  (£,X,g»2), 
so  that 


1=  UI,  =  exp  £?«2  { (5»+  l)«-«"*- 

+a,ei>ihu'  —  2al,\, 
Thus  one  has 

W{E)=—\    dp       d» . 

where  the  function  g(/*)  is  given  by 

g(M)  =  L<Z.2{(5.+l)e-W^ 

* 

+  a,e,'"*"«-l-2a,}. 


(25) 


(26) 


(27) 


The  integral  over  p  in  (26)  may  be  done  at  once 
by  residue  formation,  and  one  has  the  generally 
valid  final  result 

PT(£)  =  2/rReal  f  dy. 

Xexp[^(£-£o+*T/2)+g(M)].     (28) 

Naturally,  it  would  be  most  difficult  to  evaluate 
W(E)  exactly.  One  may  however  easily  obtain 
simple  expressions  which  are  valid  in  the  various 
limiting  cases.  The  function  g{y)  is  the  cause  of 
the  complication,  and  it  is  possible  to  evaluate 
the  integral  (28)  analytically  only  in  cases 
where  the  values  of  n  given  by  m#~1  do  not 
play  a  dominant  role.  For  /*0<d,  one  may  expand 
in  powers  of  /x  and  obtain 

|(m)  =  -^I3«2K 


V£<z.2(5.+§)(ko.)2+ 


(29) 


The  sums  may  be  evaluated  under  the  assump- 
tion of  an  isotropic  crystal,  i.e.,  the  velocity  of 
a  wave  is  assumed  to  be  independent  of  its 
direction  of  propagation,  although  not  necessarily 
of  its  polarization ;  and  one  finds 


iGO- 


■ipR-^Ri, 


(30) 


where  R  is  again  the  recoil  energy  and  I  the 
average  energy  per  vibrational  degree  of  freedom 
of  the  crystal  (including  zero  point  energy). 
If  the  condition 

\Y+{Ri)^d  (31) 

("weak  binding") 

is  met,  only  small  values  of  ju  in  g{n)  in  the 
integral  (28)  need  be  considered,  and  one  finds 

2  /•* 

W(E)  =-       dn  cos  (i(E-E0-R) 
IVo 


Xexp  (-§rM-M2-Ri) 


LJ> 


(32) 


cos  yx  exp  (—  y— y2/£2) 

=  (4/r2),K£,*), 

where  ^(£,  x),12  x,  and  £  are  as  defined  by  Eqs. 

12  Equation  (32)  gives  Reiche's  form  of  the  ^-function. 
See  Born,  Optik  (1933),  p.  482. 


142 


196 


WILLIS    E.    LAMB,    JR 


Fig.  2.  Plot  of  the  neutron  resonance  absorption  curve  in 
cold  solid  silver  for  an  assumed  value  of  T  equal  to  0/4. 
The  curve  one  would  obtain  with  free  atoms  is  shown  for 
comparison.  The  abscissa  measures  the  distance  from 
resonance  in  units  of  §r.  If  the  lattice  binding  were  very 
strong,  the  curve  for  the  crystal  would  have  the  same 
form  for  the  gas,  except  that  it  would  be  centered  about 
the  point  shown  by  the  arrow. 


(5)  and  (3),  but  now  with  an  effective  Doppler 
width 


A  =  2(2*8)*, 


(33) 


which  involves  i  instead  of  T.  Thus  we  see  that 
provided  only  the  condition  A+V>2d  is  met, 
the  atoms  in  a  crystal  at  a  temperature  T  give 
the  same  absorption  line  as  they  would  in  a  gas 
at  a  temperature  I  equal  to  the  average  energy 
per  vibrational  degree  of  freedom  of  the  crystal. 
This  quantity  is  well  known  from  the  theory  of 
specific  heats 


i«i(ii+2i«), 


where 


™-ii)T£  **{?-?*)- 


(34) 


(34j) 


and  transverse  waves.  One  has  the  limiting 
values 

e  =  T+d-0(6/T)  T»0     (34a) 

«=!(0i+20t)+r-o(r703).       (34b) 

In  Fig.  1,  a  plot  is  given  of  l(T)/T  as  a  function 
of  T/0  for  the  case  that  the  various  charac- 
teristic temperatures  are  equal. 

The  other  limiting  case  is  /iO>l.  Here  one 
finds 

g(oo)=-2E<Z.2(5.+!)  = 

-KG(T/ei)+2G(T/et)l     (35) 
where 

2R     rVx 


2R     CVx      /    »  \ 

G(x)  = — x*        dt  t( +| )         (36) 

T     J0  \e'-l       / 


with 


G(x)=xR/T  *«1,  (36a) 

(36b) 


2R 
G(x)  = — x*    *»1 
T 


where  the  indices  /  and  /  refer  to  the  longitudinal 


For  special  ranges  of  values  of  E— E0,  one  may 
obtain  a  good  approximation  to  W{E)  by 
splitting  the  range  of  integration  in  Eq.  (28)  at 
1x0=1,  and  in  each  range,  using  the  appropriate 
expansion  for  g(n).  One  finds  in  this  way  that 
for  very  strong  binding  of  the  atoms  in  the 
crystal  (d— >°o), 

1 

W(E)= ,  (37) 

(£-£o)2+*r2 

i.e.,  the  normal  absorption  line  centered  about 
£=£„. 

In  general,  however,  a  certain  amount  of 
numerical  integration  is  required  to  find  the 
shape  of  the  line.  To  illustrate  the  possibility 
of  using  the  general  Eqs.  (28)  and  (27)  except  in 
the  two  limiting  cases  of  Eqs.  (31)  and  (37), 
we  give  plots  of  a  2^-volt  resonance  energy 
absorption  line  in  a  substance  at  a  temperature 
much  lower  than  the  Debye  temperature  of 
0  =  21O°K  (Case  of  cold  silver  if  one  abstracts 
from  the  difference  between  6i  and  6t),  for 
several  assumed  values  of  V.  In  each  case,  the 
curve  for  free  atoms  at  the  same  temperature  is 
also  shown.  One  sees  that  for  these  cases  of  inter- 


143 


CAPTURE    OF     NEUTRONS 


197 


mediate  binding,  there  is  a  rudimentary  fine 
structure  in  the  probability  of  capture  which  is 
suggestive  of  the  neutron  absorption  lines  that 
one  would  obtain  from  an  atom  harmonically 
bound,  say  in  a  molecule  with  energy  levels 
separated  by  6.  (See  Figs.  2  and  3.) 

The  area  under  the  general  absorption  curve 
(28)  may  be  evaluated  immediately,  again  under 
the  assumption  of  footnote  (4),  and  one  finds 


dEW(E)  ■■ 


(38) 


which,  of  course,  agrees  with  the  result  for  free 
atoms.  The  expression  for  the  cross  section  for 
self-indication,  which  involves  the  integral  of  the 
square  of  W(E)  is  more  complicated,  but  may 
be  reduced  to 


"I    dfiexpl- 


Tm+«00+*(-m)].     (39) 


In  the  case  T+^>6,  this  integral  may  again  be 
evaluated  by  expanding  g(n)  for  small  ju,  and  the 
cross  section  for  self-indication  has  the  value 
corresponding  to  that  for  a  gas  at  an  effective 
temperature  i  instead  of  T.  In  the  general  case 
of  arbitrary  T,  A  and  6,  however,  one  may 
derive  an  approximate  formula  by  splitting  the 
range  of  integration  at  n8=  1, 

,.=(W^,[*(i+A)-*(±)] 

-f-exp[2g(oo)-r/0],     (40) 


Fig.  3.  Same  as  Fig.  2  except  that  the  assumed  value  of 
r  is  now  equal  to  0.  For  values  of  r>40,  one  is  already 
in  the  domain  of  applicability  of  Eq.  (32).  The  precise 
value  of  r  for  silver  is  not  well  known  experimentally. 

which  may  be  used  provided  the  result  does  not 
depend  too  much  on  the  precise  value  of  6. 

This  research  was  largely  carried  out  during 
the  summer  session  at  Stanford  University,  and 
I  wish  to  thank  Professor  F.  Bloch  for  his  gen- 
erous advice  and  hospitality.  I  am  also  greatly 
indebted  to  Professor  G.  Placzek  and  to  Dr.  A. 
Nordsieck  for  many  valuable  discussions  and 
suggestions. 


1 


144 

ANNALS  OF  physics:  9,  194-210  (1960) 


Study  of  Lattice  Vibrations  by  Resonance  Absorption 
of  Nuclear  Gamma  Rays* 

William  M.  Visscher 

University  of  California,  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory, 
Los  Alamos,  New  Mexico 


It  has  recently  been  demonstrated  by  Mossbauer  that  in  a  large  proportion 
of  emissions  or  absorptions  of  gamma  rays  by  nuclei  bound  in  crystals  at  low 
temperature  the  recoil  energy  is  taken  up  by  the  crystal  as  a  whole  (no  pho- 
nons  are  emitted).  This  makes  it  possible  to  observe  resonance  absorption  of 
nuclear  gamma-rays  without  high-speed  rotors  or  elevated  temperatures,  as 
had  been  done  in  the  past.  In  the  present  paper  we  show  that  an  extension  of 
Mossbauer 's  technique  can  be  utilized  to  directly  observe  the  frequency  dis- 
tribution of  lattice  vibrations  in  the  crystal.  Specifically,  if  the  emitter  and 
absorber  have  the  same  favorable  crystal  structure,  then  the  self -absorption 
cross  section  observed  in  a  rotor  experiment  at  low  temperature  will  be  pro- 
portional to  N(S)/S,  where  N(S)  dS  is  the  number  of  phonon  states  in  an 
energy  interval  dS,  and  S  is  the  doppler  shift  in  the  gamma-ray  energy  in- 
duced by  the  rotor  motion.  Criteria  are  given  for  determining  favorable 
cases. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

The  observation  of  resonantly  scattered  or  absorbed  nuclear  7-rays  has  been 
made  difficult  in  the  past  by  the  fact  that  the  natural  width  of  nuclear  isomeric 
states  is  almost  always  small  compared  to  the  energy  of  the  recoiling  nucleus.1 
Thus  if  Eq  is  the  energy  of  the  nuclear  excited  state,  the  spectrum  of  gammas 
emitted  by  a  free  nucleus  at  rest  will  be  centered  at  energy  EQ  —  R,  where  R  = 
Eq/2Mc  is  the  recoil  energy  of  the  nucleus  whose  mass  is  M.  A  gamma  can  be 
absorbed,  however,  by  a  free  nucleus  at  rest  only  if  the  gamma  energy  is  within 
the  natural  width  V  of  E0  +  R.  The  devices  which  had  been  used  to  observe 
resonance  scattering  before  1958  all  supplied,  in  one  way  or  another,  the  2R 
difference  between  the  energy  of  the  emitted  7  and  the  energy  which  it  needs 
to  be  absorbed.  One  way  to  supply  the  difference  is  to  spin  the  source  on  a 
high-speed  rotor,  to  Doppler  shift  the  emitted  gammas.  A  Doppler  shift  of  2R 
requires  a  linear  velocity  of  Eo/Mc,  which  amounts  to  2  X  10  cm/sec  for  a  typi- 
cal case  (Eq  =  100  kev,  A  =  150).  Another  method  involves  varying  the  tem- 

*  This  work  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the  U.  S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission. 
1  For  a  review  of  this  field,  see  Malmfors  (/ ). 

194 


145 


ABSORPTION    OF   GAMMAS   BY   CRYSTALS  195 

peratures  of  the  source  and  absorber  (or  scatterer)  over  rather  wide  ranges,  to 
Doppler  broaden  the  gamma  spectra.  Temperature  ranges  comparable  to  the 
recoil  energy  must  be  used  in  order  to  observe  the  change  in  overlap  of  the  emis- 
sion and  absorption  spectra.  A  third  method  utilizes  as  a  source  a  nucleus  which 
is  recoiling  from  a  previous  decay.  The  decay  product  is  required  by  coincidence 
techniques  to  be  travelling,  in  a  certain  direction  with  respect  to  the  direction  of 
the  subsequently  emitted  gamma,  thus  fixing  the  component  of  velocity  of  the 
nucleus  along  that  direction  and  the  Doppler  shift  in  the  gamma  energy. 

A  remarkable  new  method  was  devised  last  year  by  Mossbauer  (#),  and  was 
used  to  measure  the  width  of  the  129-kev  level  in  Ir191.  His  method  is  different 
in  principle  from  those  preceding  it,  in  that  the  emitting  (or  absorbing)  nucleus 
is  not  allowed  to  recoil,  thus  obviating  the  need  to  have  the  emitting  and  absorb- 
ing nuclei  in  rapid  motion  relative  to  one  another.  This  is  accomplished  simply 
by  having  the  nuclei  bound  in  crystals  at  low  temperature.  Mossbauer  showed 
that  when  the  129-kev  gamma  is  emitted  or  absorbed  by  such  a  nucleus,  the 
recoil  momentum  is  taken  up  a  large  part  of  the  time  by  the  whole  crystal,  with 
no  energy  transferred  to  internal  excitations  of  the  lattice.  The  kinetic  energy 
associated  with  the  crystal  recoiling  as  a  whole  is  negligible  compared  to  r, 
even  for  crystals  as  small  as  a  fraction  of  a  cubic  micron  in  volume.  Thus,  the 
recoil  shift  discussed  above  is  essentially  zero,  and  many  of  the  gammas  emitted 
by  a  nucleus  in  a  crystal  at  rest  can  be  resonantly  absorbed  or  scattered  by  an- 
other nucleus  in  another  crystal  at  rest,  in  marked  contrast  to  the  situation 
when  gaseous  or  room-temperature  crystalline  sources  and  absorbers  are  used. 

The  emissions  which  take  place  without  energy  transfer  to  the  lattice  give  rise 
to  a  pip  of  width  T  in  the  energy  spectrum  of  gammas  emitted  by  the  crystal. 
The  height  of  this  "no-recoil  pip"  is  a  strongly  decreasing  function  of  tempera- 
ture. The  absorption  cross  section,  too,  contains  a  no-recoil  pip  with  similar 
properties.  In  both  cases  the  pip  is  centered  at  E  =  EQ ,  the  nuclear  excitation 
energy. 

We  will  now  give  a  brief  resume  of  some  of  Mossbauer's  experimental  results 
and  of  the  theory  due  to  Lamb  (8)  which  explains  them. 

II.  MOSSBAUER'S  EXPERIMENTS 

In  the  interest  of  brevity,  we  will  only  outline  the  essential  features  of  two 
of  Mossbauer's  observations. 

Mossbauer  measured  the  transmission  of  Ir191  129-kev  gamma  rays  through  a 
crystalline  natural  iridium  (38.5%  Ir191)  absorber.  His  source  was  Os191,  which 
i8-decays  with  a  16-day  half-life  to  a  long-lived  (5.6-sec)  state  of  Ir191  at  171  kev. 
A  42-kev  y  is  emitted,  and  the  iridium  nucleus  is  left  in  its  first  excited  state 
(129  kev)  which  has  a  lifetime  of  1.4  X  10~10  sec. 

The  most  startling  result  which  Mossbauer  obtained  was  the  "turntable 


146 

196  VISSCHER 


-4 

o 

4 

8  SOURCE  SPEED  (cm /sec) 

0 

0.4 

-20 

-10 

0 

10 

r20 

30     DOPPLERl 

SHIFT   (uV) 

~7 

i 

i 

> 

'\              / 

■ 

0.8 
i  •> 

i     i     i      i           i 

Fig.  1.  The  relative  intensity  of  129-kev  gamma  rays  transmitted  by  the  iridium  absorber 
as  measured  by  Mossbauer  with  both  source  and  absorber  at  88 °K,  as  a  function  of  source 
speed.  The  ordinate  is  dependent  upon  the  source  thickness.  The  width  of  the  dip  in  the 
transmission  for  a  thin  absorber  is  dependent  only  on  the  natural  width  of  the  129-kev  nu- 
clear level.  The  curve  here  is  theoretical  and  will  be  discussed  in  Part  IV;  the  experimental 
points  are  taken  from  the  third  of  Mossbauer's  papers  (2),  Fig.  3. 

effect."  Here  he  kept  both  source  and  absorber  at  88°  K,  but  had  the  source 
mounted  on  a  turntable,  so  that  the  relative  velocity  of  the  source  and  absorber 
during  the  time  the  source  was  seen  by  the  absorber  could  be  controlled.  Figure 
1  shows  the  variation  of  transmission  he  observed  as  a  function  of  turntable 
speed.  The  absorption  peak  is  centered  at  zero  relative  speed  of  the  source  with 
respect  to  the  absorber;  it  has  a  half -width  of  about  1  cm/sec. 

When  the  abscissa  is  converted  to  energy  units  corresponding  to  the  Doppler 
shift  in  the  gamma  energy  AE  =  (v/c)Eo ,  the  points  can  be  fitted  within  statis- 
tical error  by  a  Breit-Wigner  curve  of  width  (9.2  =fc  1.2)  X  10"  ev.  This  is 
interpreted  to  be  twice  the  natural  width  of  the  129-kev  level,  the  factor  of  2 
arising  because  the  observed  absorption  is  the  result  of  folding  an  emission 
spectrum  together  with  an  absorption  cross  section,  each  of  which  have  a  "no- 
recoil  pip"  of  width  T.  In  the  thin-absorber  approximation,  the  absorption  is 
proportional  to  the  product  of  the  emission  spectrum  with  the  absorption  cross 
section,  integrated  over  all  energies.  At  zero  relative  velocity  the  pips  overlap 
perfectly;  at  velocities  large  compared  to  Tc/E0  the  overlap  is  destroyed,  and 
the  absorption  disappears. 

The  other  measurement  of  Mossbauer's  which  we  wish  to  discuss  here  is  his 
observation  of  the  "temperature  effect."  Here  he  had  both  source  and  absorber 
at  rest,  with  the  absorber  at  a  fixed  temperature  of  88°  K,  and  the  source  tem- 
perature variable  from  88°  to  above  room  temperature.  He  measured  the  trans- 


ABSORPTION   OF   GAMMAS   BY   CRYSTALS 


147 
197 


400 


SOURCE  TEMPERATURE   °K 


Fig.  2.  The  effective  absorption  cross  section  per  Ir191  nucleus,  for  the  absorber  crystal 
at  88°K  and  the  source  temperature  given  by  the  abscissa.  The  curve  is  a  theoretical  one  to 
be  discussed  in  Part  IV;  the  experimental  points  are  taken  from  Mossbauer's  first  paper  (2), 
Fig.  8b. 

mission  of  the  129-kev  gammas  through  the  absorber  as  a  function  of  source 
temperature.  His  results,  which  were  expressed  in  terms  of  effective  absorption 
cross  sections,  are  shown  in  Fig.  2.  The  rise  in  the  cross  section  with  decreasing 
temperature  (quite  contrary  to  its  behavior  with  gaseous  sources  and  absorbers) 
is  interpreted  as  being  caused  by  the  increase  in  the  probability  of  no-recoil 
emission  by  the  nuclei  in  the  source  as  the  temperature  is  lowered.  The  absorber 
temperature  was  not  varied  in  this  measurement  because  any  temperature  de- 
pendence of  the  non-nuclear  absorption  cross  section  of  the  atoms  in  the  crystal 
(mostly  K-photoeffect)  would  obscure  the  temperature  dependence  of  the  nu- 
clear absorption  which  Mossbauer  sought  to  measure. 

An  explanation  of  these  results  was  achieved  by  Mossbauer  by  modifying  a 
theory  due  to  Lamb  (3),  describing  the  resonance  absorption  of  neutrons  by 
nuclei  bound  in  crystals,  to  apply  to  the  gamma-absorption  process. 

III.  THEORY 

We  will  now  explain  Lamb's  notation  and  outline  his  theory. 

The  crystal  is  described  by  a  wave  function  which  depends  on  the  center-of- 


148 


198 


VISSCHER 


mass  coordinate  of  each  of  the  AT  constituent  nuclei.  xG  =  xo0  +  u<?  is  the  coor- 
dinate of  the  6rth  nucleus,  where  x0°  is  its  equilibrium  position  and  u<?  is  its  dis- 
placement from  equilibrium.  If  the  interactions  between  the  nuclei  in  the  crystal 
can  be  approximated  by  harmonic  forces,  the  crystal  Hamiltonian  can  be  written 
as  the  sum  of  3N  independent  harmonic  oscillator  Hamiltonians.  This  transfor- 
mation to  normal  coordinates  is  carried  out  as  follows.  Let 

3tf  I J 

Ug  =  £  y  2M^ N  es[as  exp(iqs-xG°)  +  a*  exp(-iqs-x00)]  (1) 

be  a  Fourier  expansion  of  u<?  in  terms  of  the  3N  normal  modes  characterized  by 
polarization  vectors  es ,  frequencies  o>s  ,  and  propagation  vectors  qs  . 
If  as  and  as*  satisfy 

[as>  ,  as*]  =  8S' s  ,  (2) 

then  the  commutation  relations  between  the  components  of  u0  and  their  con- 
jugate momenta  are  satisfied,  and  if  we  define  normal  coordinates  and  momenta 

, (3) 

P8  =  —i  A/  — 2~  {as  -  as*), 

they  satisfy  [Ps>  ,  Qs]  =  —ihbs>s  . 

The  Hamiltonian  becomes  separable  into 

3N 

H   =T,HS; 

s=l 

Hs  =  PS2/2M  +  y2Mo>?Qs2  (4) 

=  fe(as*as  +  Y2)  =  hus(Ns  +  K); 

where  A^s  =  as*as  can,  with  the  help  of  Eq.  (2),  be  seen  to  have  eigenvalues  0, 
1,2,  •  •  •  .  The  state  of  the  crystal  can  therefore  be  specified  by  a  set  of  numbers 
{ as }  which  are  the  eigenvalues  of  the  phonon  number  operator  Ns  for  each  nor- 
mal mode  s.  To  describe  the  entire  system  for  a  gamma-ray  resonance  absorption 
or  emission  problem  we  must  also  specify  the  state  of  internal  excitation  of  each 
of  the  nuclei,  and  the  momentum  p  of  the  gamma  if  any  is  present.  Thus,  for 
example,  the  ket  |  A(o;s(p)  means  that  a  gamma  ray  of  momentum  p  is  present, 
the  crystal  is  in  state  { as\ ,  and  a  specific  nucleus  is  in  state  A .  All  the  effects 
due  to  excitation  of  different  nuclei  are  incoherent  with  one  another,  so  it  is 
legitimate  to  consider  each  nucleus  separately. 

If  we  assume  that  each  nucleus  has  two  states,  the  ground  state  A  and  an 


149 


ABSORPTION   OF   GAMMAS   BY   CRYSTALS  199 

excited  state  C  which  has  energy  EQ  and  decays  like  e~rtn,  then  application  of 
perturbation  theory  yields  the  following  results. 

The  probability  that  a  gamma  of  momentum  p  incident  on  the  crystal  in  state 
{ as}  will  be  resonantly  scattered  by  a  particular  nucleus  into  momentum  k,  leav- 
ing the  crystal  in  state  {&}  is  proportional  to 

7   (A{(3s}k\H'\C{ns})(C{ns]  \H'\A{aa}p) 


TT({/3.}k,  {«.}p) 


(5) 


ra]        E0  -  pc  +  E{ns)  -  E(a.)  +  iV/2 

where  pc  is  the  energy  of  the  incident  gamma,  E(aB)  =  Yl*  fc(as  +  %)  is 
the  crystal  energy  in  the  initial  state,  and  H'  is  the  energy  operator  describing 
the  interaction  between  the  gamma  ray  and  the  nucleus  in  question.  The  sum 
is  over  all  intermediate  crystal  states  \ns]  in  which  the  nucleus  is  in  its  excited 
state  C  and  no  gamma  is  present.  Energy  conservation  is  implicit  in  Eq.  (5); 
final  states  {£,}  are  possible  only  if 

E(0S)  +ck  =  E(as)  +  cp.  (6) 

In  the  derivation  of  Eq.  (5)  it  is  also  assumed  that  the  state  of  the  crystal  {ns} 
remains  unchanged  during  the  time  the  nucleus  is  excited.  It  is  therefore  valid 
only  when  the  relaxation  time  of  the  crystal  is  long  compared  to  the  lifetime 
h/T  of  the  nuclear  excited  state. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  ask  only  for  the  absorption  probability,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  assume  that  the  crystal  relaxation  time  is  long.  In  this  case  one  is 
led  to  the  expression 

for  the  absorption  probability,  where  T'  is  equal  to  the  nuclear  level  width  plus 
the  widths  of  the  crystal  states  {ns}  and  {as}.  The  calculations  will  be  greatly 
simplified  if  we  assume  the  relaxation  time  to  be  independent  of  the  crystal 
state;  we  will,  in  fact,  assume  it  to  be  infinite,  or  r'  =  T. 

The  probability  for  the.  emission  process  is  also  proportional  to  (7),  with  {as} 
and  {ns}  interchanged  in  the  summand. 

The  matrix  elements  of  W  which  occur  in  Eqs.  (5)  and  (7)  can  each  be  ex- 
pressed as  a  product  of  two  factors.  One  factor  depends  only  on  the  change  in 
internal  state  of  the  radiating  nucleus,  and  only  weakly  on  the  gamma  energy. 
It  will  be  hereafter  omitted,  since  it  is  common  to  all  subsequent  formulas.  The 
other  factor  describes  the  absorption  of  the  gamma's  momentum  by  the  lattice. 
Thus  we  make  the  following  replacements: 

(C{ns\  |  H'  |  A{as}p)  ->  [{ns}  |  exp(ip-x*/ft)  |  {«.}], 

(8) 
(A{/3.}k  |  H'  |  C{ns\)  -»  [{&}  |  exp(-ik.xL/ft)  |  {n.}] 


150 


200  VISSCHER 


for  the  absorption  and  emission  matrix  elements,  respectively.  We  have  singled 
out  nucleus  L  at  xL  =  xL  +  uL  ;  without  loss  of  generality  we  can,  following 
Lamb,  choose  xL  =  0,  the  origin  of  our  coordinate  system.  After  substituting 
uL  (Eq.  1)  into  the  matrix  elements  (8)  they  may  be  factored  into  3N  matrix 
elements,  one  for  each  phonon  state. 


ri     II       c        /*mi     n       TtT     I        /.p-es(qg  +  a*)\     1 
[{n.}  |  exp(tp-uL/ft)  |  (a,)]  =  II  |_».  |  exp  ^  -^==-  *SJ. 


(9) 


Because  of  the  factor  1/y/N  in  the  exponent,  no  term  of  order  higher  than 
(p-es)2  =  Ps2  in  the  expansion  of  the  exponential  on  the  right  can  give  a  non- 
vanishing  contribution  to  TF({asJ>  p)  after  the  sum  over  [ns]  is  performed  and 
the  limit  N  — ►  «  is  taken.  The  terms  which  do  contribute  are 

^p \j MZl a4r] « i  -  A- (ay-  +  !)  +  «' p'/^vf } -  do) 

K  L     V2MM  J  2MNfto)s  V2MNhws 

Since  as  and  as*  are  phonon  absorption  and  creation  operators,  respectively,  we 
see  that  any  phonon  state  can  change  its  occupation  number  by  at  most  one. 
Also,  Eq.  (10)  exhibits  explicitly  the  reason  for  the  existence  of  the  "no-recoil 
pip."  It  is  that  the  phonon  creation  or  absorption  matrix  element  is  of  order 
1/y/N  smaller  than  the  no-phonon  ({««)  =  \ns\)  matrix  element.  After  sum- 
ming over  phonon  states,  the  two  can  give  contributions  to  W  of  the  same  order 
of  magnitude. 

Of  physical  interest  is  the  quantity 

W(E)  =  E  g({as})W(ias},p),  (11) 

where  g({oc8})  is  the  probability  that  the  crystal  will  initially  be  in  a  state  {as}> 
and  where  we  have  assumed,  for  simplicity,  that  the  crystal  is  isotropic,  so  that 
(11)  is  dependent  only  on  E  =  pc,  and  not  on  the  crystal  orientation  relative 
to  p.  W(E)  can  be  evaluated  by  methods  standard  to  field  theory.  The  only 
information  about  g({as] )  which  is  needed  is  the  average  value  of  the  occupation 
number  as  of  each  phonon  state  s.  For  thermal  equilibrium,2 

as  =  [exp(cos/77)  -  l]"1, 

since  the  phonons  obey  Bose  statistics.  The  result  of  performing  the  sum  in 
Eq.  (11)  is  that 

W(E)  =  2/r  Re  f    dfx  expM#  -  EQ  +  zT/2)  +  gr(ju)],  (12) 

where 

2  From  now  on,  we  will  express  frequencies  and  temperatures  in  energy  units. 


151 

ABSORPTION    OF   GAMMAS   BY   CRYSTALS  201 

g(fi)  =  Z  ^^-  h**'*"*  +  (*.  +  D*"*""  "  2a8  -  1].  (13) 

W(E)  is  proportional  to  the  resonance  absorption  cross  section  of  a  nucleus  in 
a  crystal  for  a  monochromatic  7-ray  of  energy  E. 

a(E)  =LaoW(E),  (14) 

o  (2/c  +  1)   x2  r7  x    x 

"  =  2(2f,  +  Drir-  (15) 

(To  is  the  cross  section  at  resonance  for  nuclear  absorption  of  a  gamma  ray  by  a 
free  atom,  r  is  the  total  width  of  the  nuclear  excited  state,  while  Ty  is  the  partial 
width  for  y-emission;  I\  =  (1  +  «r)_1T,  where  aT  is  the  total  internal  conver- 
sion coefficient.  If  we  were  considering  resonance  scattering,  the  factor  T7/r  in 
Co  would  be  squared. 

W(E)  for  emission  differs  from  (12)  only  in  that  g(fi)  is  replaced  by  g(—  n). 
Thus  the  self-absorption  cross  section  is,  for  a  thin  absorber, 

f  <r(E)WE(E)  dE         3        f 

=  kr<r°J    W*WW*(E)  dE>  <16) 


<T      = 


f  We(E)  dE 


where  WE  and  WA  are  the  Lamb  integrals  (12)  for  emission  and  absorption, 
respectively. 

If  we  suppose  now  that  our  emitter  is"  moving  relative  to  the  absorber,  then 
the  argument  of  WE  in  (16)  should  be  E  +  v/cE0  =  E  +  S,  where  v  is  the  rela- 
tive velocity.  It  is  easy  to  show  that 


/ 


WA(E)WE{E  +  S)  dE  =^W'(S),  (17) 


where  W'(S)  is  given  by  Eq.  (12),  with  E  -  E0  replaced  by  S,  T  by  2I\  and 
g(n)  by  gA(fx)  +  ^(—  /*)•  g*  is  (13)  with  parameters  appropriate  to  the  ab- 
sorbing crystal;  gE  with  the  parameters  of  the  emitting  crystal.  Then  a'  becomes 

(/(#)  =  r*<r0W'(S)/2.  (18) 

IV.  NUMERICAL  CALCULATIONS 

If  the  assumption  is  made  that  the  crystal  is  isotropic,  ps2  in  Eq.  (13)  can  be 
replaced  by  }^p  .  Then,  on  replacing  the  sum  by  an  integral,  g(n)  becomes 

3  This  can  best  be  seen  in  Eq.  (19)  of  Lamb's  paper,  where  each  of  the  ps2's  occurs  at  most 
linearly. 


152 

202  VISSCHER 

^m)  =  #r  f  ""  —  *•  [aet>tf  +  (a  +  1)«"*"  -  2a  -  1],       (19) 

where  N(<a)  do)  is  the  number  of  phonon  states  in  dm  at  co,  and  comax  is  the  maxi- 
mum phonon  energy.  The  total  number  of  states  is  equal  to  the  number  of  de- 
grees of  freedom  in  the  crystal; 


r 


AT(co)  dco  =  3JV.  (20) 


According  to  the  Debye  model,  iV(co)  =  9Nco2/03  and  comax  =  0.  With  N(<a) 
thus  specified,  g(p)  can  be  evaluated  quite  accurately  by  making  polynomial 
approximations  to  the  hyperbolic  function  which  occurs  in  the  integrand,  and 
W(E)  can  then  be  integrated  on  a  digital  computer.  We  have  calculated  <r(E) 
and  o-'(aS)  for  the  Ir191  129-kev  7-ray  with  parameters  taken  to  be  E0  =  129 
kev,  R  =  46  millivolts,  r  =  4.6  microvolts,  aK  =  2.47,  Ic  =  5/2,  IA  =  3/2, 
and  abundance  =  38.5  percent.  For  simplicity  we  assumed  that  the  crystal 
structure  of  the  emitter  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  absorber,  and  found  that  to 
fit  the  self -absorption  cross  section  as  measured  by  Mossbauer  with  both  emitter 
and  absorber  at  88°K  one  must  use  a  Debye  temperature  0  =  316°K.  The  cal- 
culated cross  section  is  sensitive  to  the  shape  of  the  spectrum  for  moderate  and 
high  phonon  energies  where  the  Debye  spectrum  is  known  to  be  a  poor  approxi- 
mation ;  therefore  little  significance  should  be  attached  to  the  difference  between 
this  Debye  temperature  and  that  determined  from  specific  heat,  namely  285 °K. 

The  curves  on  Figs.  1  and  2,  which  respectively  show  Mossbauer's  experimen- 
tal points  for  the  turntable  effect  and  temperature  effect,  are  some  of  the  results 
of  this  calculation.  Our  adjustment  of  0  guarantees  that  the  turntable  effect 
curve  coincide  with  the  experimental  point  at  zero  velocity,  and  that  the  tem- 
perature effect  curve  agree  with  experiment  at  88°K.  These  two  experimental 
points  really  represent  the  same  measurement. 

The  curve  of  Fig.  1,  which  is  fitted  to  the  bottom  of  the  transmission  dip, 
agrees  satisfactorily  with  the  rest  of  the  points  even  though  the  calculations  are 
for  a  thin  absorber.  A  correction  for  the  moderately  thick  (1021  atoms/cm2)  ab- 
sorber which  Mossbauer  used  would  be  in  a  direction  such  as  to  improve  the  fit 
for  large  velocities. 

The  curve  of  Fig.  2  deviates  noticeably  from  the  experimental  points  at  148 
and  175°K.  This  deviation  could  probably  be  corrected  by  using  a  phonon  spec- 
trum which  is  more  realistic  than  the  Debye  spectrum. 

Figure  3  shows  the  results  of  the  calculation  for  <r(E),  Eq.  (14),  for  several 
temperatures.  The  emission  spectrum  WE(E)  has  the  same  shape  as  <r(^)  when 
it  is  reflected  through  the  pip  at  E  =  E0 .  The  pip  in  both  <r(E)  and  WE(E)  has 
width  T  =  4.6  fxv.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  the  pip  has  virtually  disappeared 
at  T  =  300°K,  and  that  the  rest  of  the  curve  has  very  nearly  acquired  the  shape 


153 


ABSORPTION   OF   GAMMAS   BY   CRYSTALS 


203 


i 

A      i 

\ 

100 

160° 

292 

4 

120° 

710             , 

88°        ; 

4°K 

120  °K 

/I 

10 

c 

(i 

300°K 

o 

1909 

/ 1 

—     3 

20 

/ 1 

■ 

z 

2( 

515 

/  i 

o 

4° 

/  i 

"N 

»- 
o 

UJ 

<n 

J,    2 

w 

o 

(T 
O 

r 

-    PIP  HEIGHT-1 
FOR  300° 

/   i   / 

- 

<ri 

VV 

0 

....  i              J 

■  i 
i 
i 

i 

i 

1 

-40 


40 


80 


120 


160 


E-E0(mv) 


Fig.  3.  The  absorption  cross  section  per  nucleus  in  a  crystal  of  natural  iridium,  for  a 
monochromatic  7 -ray  beam  and  a  Debye  spectrum  for  the  phonons.  The  lowest  temperature 
plotted  is  4°K.  20°K  would  be  indistinguishable  from  it  except  within  3  mv  of  E  —  E°  =  0, 
where  the  20°  curve  is  up  to  }{0  barn  higher,  and  at  the  Debye  energy  0  =  27.2  mv,  where 
the  corners  are  slightly  rounded. 


which  one  would  expect  for  a  gaseous  absorber;  namely,  a  Gaussian  centered  at 
E  -  EQ  =  R  =  46  mv  with  width  2 y/RT  =  69  mv. 

Some  results  of  the  calculation  of  cr'(S),  the  self -absorption  cross  section  in 
the  thin-absorber  approximation,  are  given  in  Fig.  4  as  a  function  of  Doppler 
shift  *S.  The  width  of  the  pip  in  this  curve  is  2T  =  9.2  piv. 

The  variation  of  the  self -absorption  cross  section  cr'(O)  is  shown  in  Fig.  5  as 
a  function  of  the  Debye  temperature  6,  for  both  source  and  absorber  at  88°K. 
The  curve  levels  off  below  6  =  200°K  because  here  the  no-recoil  pip  has  essen- 
tially entirely  disappeared. 

Figure  6  shows  o-'(O)  as  a  function  of  source  and  absorber  temperature.  Moss- 
bauer  measured  <r'(0)  =  10.0  ±  0.5  barns  at  T  =  88°K;  this  point  has,  as  we 
stated  above,  been  fit  by  taking  8  =  316°K.  The  calculation  predicts  that  at 
liquid  helium  temperature  the  self-absorption  cross  section  will  rise  to  80  barns 
and  that  it  will  decrease  by  only  about  10%  when  the  temperature  is  raised  to 
20°K. 


154 


204 


VISSCHER 


S(mv) 


Fig.  4.  Same  as  Fig.  3  except  in  this  case  the  7-ray  beam  is  that  coming  from  an  activated 
iridium  crystal  at  the  same  temperature  as  the  absorber.  The  abscissa  is  here  the  Doppler 
shift  in  the  emitted  gammas  induced  by  mechanical  motion  of  the  source  relative  to  the  ab- 
sorber. A  speed  of  2330  cm/sec  is  required  for  S  =  10  mv. 


V.  APPLICATION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  LATTICE  VIBRATIONS 

The  behavior  of  the  calculated  absorption  cross  section  <r(E)  (Fig.  3)  at 
liquid  helium  temperature,  with  a  fairly  linear  rise  from  the  pip  at  E  =  E0  until 
E  —  Eq  =  0,  then  a  vertical  drop,  strongly  suggests  that  the  cross  section  for 
r  <  E  —  Eq  <  6  is  due  mostly  to  absorption  accompanied  by  emission  of  a 
single  phonon.  The  bumps  at  higher  values  of  E  —  EQ  might  be  identified  with 
2,  3,  4,  •  •  •  phonon  processes. 

This  conjecture  can  be  easily  expressed  in  analytical  terms,  in  the  limit  of 
zero  temperature.  g(n)  for  T  =  0(a  =  0)  becomes 


where 


and 


g(v) 


90  = 


9o  +  0i(m), 


(21) 


'mot 


f 


NM 


do) 


155 


ABSORPTION    OF   GAMMAS   BY   CRYSTALS 


205 


Fig.  5.  The  variation  of  the  self -absorption  cross  section  as  a  function  of  Debye  tempera- 
ture 0,  for  both  source  and  absorber  at  88°K,  and  no  mechanical  motion.  JBelow  about  6  = 
200°K  the  no-recoil  pip  disappears  entirely  for  this  temperature. 


01 U)     =    KTr    /  -e  d°>> 

6l\  Jo  Q) 


gi(fx)  is  just  the  square  of  the  single-phonon  emission  matrix  element,  integrated 
over  the  phonon  spectrum,  and  e00  is  the  probability  that  no  phonons  will  be 
created  in  the  7-emission  process.  The  term  containing  exp(+z'iua>)  in  Eq.  (19) 
is  the  phonon  absorption  matrix  element ;  since  T  =  0  and  there  are  no  phonons 
in  the  initial  state,  it  does  not  occur  in  Eq.  (21).  We  now  expand 


Mn) 


e°°    1  +  0xU)  + 


toi(/i)f 

2! 


+ 


156 
206 


VISSCHER 


100  150 

TCK) 

Fig.  6.  The  self-absorption  cross  section  as  a  function  of  temperature  of  source  and  ab- 
sorber. This  curve  has  been  fitted  to  Mossbauer's  measurement  of  a'  =  10  barns  at  T  —  88c 
by  taking  0  =  316°K. 


and  substitute  into  Eq.  (12),  which  then  becomes 

W(E)  =  Wo(E)  +  Wi(E)  +  W2(E)  + 
where 


9,000  /•« 

W.(B)  ^  %  Re  /     [g^)WiE~B'+m)  dM. 
nil         Jo 


(22) 


(23) 


It  is  clear  that  Wn(E)  is  the  contribution  to  W(E)  from  n-phonon  emission. 

W(E)  is  not  directly  observable  but  W'(S)  is,  because  it  is  proportional  to 
the  absorption  cross  section  <r'(S)  in  a  thin  absorber  in  a  Mossbauer-type  ex- 
periment. If,  for  simplicity,  we  again  assume  that  the  structures  of  the  absorber 
and  emitter  crystals  are  the  same,  then  W'(S)  can  be  written,  in  the  limit  of 
zero  temperature, 


W'(S)  =  W0'(S)  +  Wi'(8)  +  • 


where 


Wo'(S)  = 


?H 


is  the  no-recoil  pip,  and 


Wi(S)  = 


2ttR 
3NT 


S2  +  r2 

N(S) 


2yr 


(24) 
(25) 

(26) 


157 


ABSORPTION   OF   GAMMAS   BY   CRYSTALS 


is  the  single-phonon  contribution.  In  general 


»••<»- SKI)"/; 


NM 


COi 


dcoi 


[ 


N(o>n) 


207 


(27) 


doin  d(S   —    OJi 


.). 


If  one  could  find  a  crystal  which  contains  an  isomer  with  parameters  such  that 
Wn(S)  for  n  ^  2  could  be  neglected  compared  to  W\  for  S  ^  <omax  ,  then  a 
measurement  of  the  self -absorption  cross  section  a'(S)  for  r  <  S  ^  wmax  would 
yield  a  result  proportional  to  N(S)/S.  This  experiment  would  require  a  moder- 
ately high-speed  rotor  (capable  of  speeds  up  to  104  cm/sec),  and  ideally  would 
be  done  with  source  and  absorber  both  at  absolute  zero.  At  a  finite  temperature 
which  still  is  very  small  compared  to  the  Debye  temperature,  the  measured  <r'(S) 
would  be  proportional  to  N(S)/S  smeared  out  over  a  range  in  S  of  the  order 
of  the  temperature;  thus  any  structure  oiN(S)  with  wavelength  AS  <  T  would 
be  lost. 

In  order  to  find  criteria  which  indicate  whether  or  not  a  given  nucleus  and  a 
given  crystal  could  form  a  system  with  which  the  above  experiment  could  profit- 
ably be  performed,  we  will  once  again  use  the  Debye  model. 

For  a  Debye  crystal  g0  =  —SR/26,  and 


Wo'(S) 


Wi'(S)  = 


-sine 


s2  +  r2' 


67r.R0   —  zr/b 


T03 
0  otherwise, 


0.^  S  ^  0, 


S3 
6 


6  ^  SS 


se*-s-±^      $<a*»,     (28) 


WXS)  «  i  (f )  e-3*"  X  I 


6 
otherwise, 


Wn'(S)    -   \ 


n!     \03/    T  (2n  -  1 


)! 


0  ^  S  ^  0; 
s  <  0 

5  >   710. 


158 

208  VISSCHER 

^jjn-oWn(S)  always  converges  rapidly  f or  0  ^  S  ^  0,  since  in  this  range,  for 
n  >  0, 

W'n+1(S)  =  6R  S2  ( 

Wn'(S)    "     03  2n(2n  +  l)(n  +  1)'  ^  y; 

Equation  (29)  attains  its  maximum  value  at  S  =  0,  so  W2/W1  is  at  most  R/2d, 
Wz/Wi  at  most  72/100,  etc.  Therefore  an  ideal  crystal  would  be  one  which  has 
a  relatively  high  Debye  temperature,  while  containing  nuclei  having  an  isomeric 
state  such  that  E02/2Mc2  =  R  is  fairly  small. 

In  choosing  examples  of  nuclei  which  might  be  usable,  the  mechanisms  by 
which  the  isomeric  state  can  be  excited  must  be  considered.  The  first  possibility 
which  suggests  itself  is  that  used  by  Mossbauer,  who  used  a  source  of  Os191  which 
/3-decays  to  an  isomeric  state  of  Ir  .  This  scheme,  however,  involves  different 
crystals  in  the  source  and  absorber;  thus  W\  would  be  a  superposition  of  phonon 
spectra  for  the  two.  If  the  source  crystal  were  mostly  constructed  of  the  same 
nuclei  as  the  absorber,  with  only  a  small  doping  of  the  parent  nucleus,  then  this 
difficulty  would  be  avoided,  at  the  expense  of  intensity. 

Another  possibility  is  excitation  by  bremsstrahlung.  One  might  think  in  this 
case  that  one  of  the  basic  premises  on  which  the  theory  rests,  namely  that  the 
initial  state  in  the  emission  process  is  one  of  thermal  equilibrium,  is  violated. 
It  can  be  shown,  however,  by  using  Eq.  (5)  rather  than  Eq.  (7)  as  a  starting 
point,  that  as  long  as  the  incoming  bremsstrahlung  beam  contains  a  range  of 
frequencies  large  compared  to  comax  ,  that  the  same  result  obtains  for  W(E), 
provided  that  the  relaxation  time  of  the  crystal  is  long  compared  to  the  isomer 
lifetime.  Excitation  by  particle  bombardment  generally  will  leave  the  nucleus 
with  enough  recoil  energy  to  remove  it  from  its  lattice  site. 

For  a  system  for  which  R/2B  <<C  1,  the  absorption  cross  section  per  atom  in 
the  absorber  is  given,  in  the  Debye  approximation,  by 

aAS)  =  „NN  +  I  „,*->«»  [_^  +  5^5] ,  (30) 

for  0  ^  S  ^  0.  <rNN  is  the  non-nuclear  absorption  cross  section  per  atom;  pre- 
dominantly due  to  K-photoeffect  for  gammas  near  100  kev,  it  varies  from  only 
a  few  barns  to  many  thousand  barns,  depending  on  Z  and  gamma  energy.4  The 
one-phonon  term  in  Eq.  (30)  can  be  rewritten  as 

,,  Cv        121  /300V  21  c  +  1  e~3Rie  S  v  in8 ,  ,Q1  v 

<ri  (S)  =  —r-  [  —  )  or     .    - X  10  barns,  (31) 

A         \      6       )       21 A     +      1  Ty  d 

where  R  =  6.19#02M  °K,  if  E0  is  expressed  in  kilovolts,  6  and  S  in  °K,  and 
Ty  =  fi/Yy  in  units  of  10"    sec. 

4  Tables  of  7-absorption  cross  sections  are  given  by  Davisson  (4). 


159 


ABSORPTION   OF   GAMMAS   BY   CRYSTALS  209 

cri  will  be  large  for  a  short-lived  isomer  of  low  excitation  energy,  two  condi- 
tions which  are  hard  to  satisfy  simultaneously.6  As  an  example,  if  an  isomer  were 
found  with  ry  =  1CT10  sec,  E0  =  80  kev,  A  =  200,  0  =  300  °K,  then  R/26  = 
0.33,  and  <t\{8)  —  2000  barns,  much  larger  than  o-NN  if  80  kev  is  just  below  the 
if -absorption  edge.  The  listed  isomers  seem  not  to  have  properties  this  favorable; 
Te125  for  example  has  </(0)  »  5  barns,  but  at  an  energy  (35  kev)  where  the  non- 
nuclear  absorption  is  several  thousand  barns.  Since  the  background  is  nearly  all 
absorption  by  bound  electrons,  however,  a  resonance  scattering  measurement 
would  be  better  from  the  point  of  view  of  statistics  and  might  be  preferable  to 
an  absorption  experiment.  The  scattering  cross  section  is  just  Ta/T  =  (1  +  aT)~l 
times  the  self -absorption  cross  section  a'(S). 

VI.  SUMMARY 

The  technique  of  resonance  absorption  of  gamma  rays  by  nuclei  bound  in 
crystals  at  low  temperature  has  been  shown  by  Mossbauer  to  be  a  valuable  tool 
in  the  measurement  of  natural  level  widths  of  nuclear  isomers.  In  the  present 
paper  we  have  shown  that  it  can  also  be  used  to  determine  the  frequency  distri- 
bution of  crystal  lattice  vibrations,  in  a  different  and  perhaps  easier  manner  than 
the  methods  used  previously.6 

The  assumption  has  been  made  throughout  the  calculations  that  we  are  deal- 
ing with  simple,  isotropic  crystals,  and  the  numerical  estimates  have  all  been 
based  on  the  Debye  model.  The  theory  describing  more  complicated  situations 
will  of  course  be  more  involved,  but  its  results  should  be  proportionately  richer 
in  interpretation.  If,  for  example,  one  had  anisotropic  crystals  as  source  and 
absorber,  a  Mossbauer  type  experiment  could  separate  the  frequency  distribu- 
tions of  the  normal  modes  with  different  polarizations.  If  the  nuclei  were  aligned, 
still  more  information  would  be  obtainable,  about  the  spins  of  the  nuclear  states 
and  possibly  about  the  crystal  structure,  too. 

Numerous  and  fruitful  discussions  of  these  problems  with  many  colleagues  at 
Los  Alamos  are  hereby  appreciatively  acknowledged.  Nuclear  gamma-ray  reso- 
nance absorption  experiments  are  currently  in  progress  at  this  Laboratory. 

Note  added  in  proof:  Some  experiments  have  been  completed  both  at  this  laboratory 
(Craig,  et  al.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3,221  (1959)),  and  at  Argonne  (Lee,  et  al.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters 
3, 223  (1959)).  The  results  agree  with  and  extend  those  of  Mossbauer  to  lower  temperatures. 

Received:  May  7,  1959 

5  A  table  of  short-lived  isomeric  states  is  given  by  Alburger  (5).  The  half -life  of  Au197, 
given  there  as  1.90  X  10"10,  should  be  1.90  X  10~9  sec. 

6  These  methods  involve  scattering  of  slow  neutrons  or  x-rays.  The  field  of  neutron  inter- 
actions with  solids  has  recently  been  reviewed  by  Kothari  and  Singwi  (6). 


160 

210  VISSCHER 

REFERENCES 

/.  K.  G.  Malmfors,  in  "Beta-  and  Gamma-Ray  Spectroscopy,"  K.  Siegbahn,  ed.,  p.  521. 
Interscience,  New  York,  1955. 

2.  R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Physik  151,  124  (1958);  Naturwiss.  22,  538  (1958);  and  Z.  Natur- 

forsch.  14a,  211  (1959). 

3.  W.  E.  Lamb,  Phys.  Rev.  55,  190  (1939). 

4.  C.  M.  Davisson,  in  "Beta-  and  Gamma-Ray  Spectroscopy,"  K.  Siegbahn,  ed.,  p.  857. 

Interscience,  New  York,  1955. 

5.  D.  E.  Alburger,  in  "Encyclopedia  of  Physics,"  Vol.  42,  p.  83.  Springer,  Berlin,  1957. 

6.  L.  S.  Kothari  and  K.  S.  Singwi,  in  "Solid  State  Physics,"  Seitz  and  Turnbull, 

Eds.,  Vol.  8.  Academic  Press,  New  York,  1959. 


161 


annals  of  physics:  9,  332-339  (1960) 

Some  Simple  Features  of  the  Mossbauer  Effect* 

Harry  J.  LiPKiNf 

Department  of  Physics,  University  of  Illinois,  Urbana,  Illinois,  and 
Argonne  National  Laboratory,  Lemont,  Illinois 

A  simple  description  is  given  of  the  change  in  the  state  of  a  crystal  lattice 
upon  emission  or  absorption  of  a  nuclear  gamma  ray.  A  sum  rule  is  derived 
for  the  average  energy  transfer  to  the  lattice.  The  probability  of  zero  energy 
transfer  is  calculated.  The  results  are  general  and  do  not  assume  a  particular 
model  for  the  crystal.  Conclusions  are  presented  as  simple  principles  which 
may  be  useful  as  a  guide  to  experimentalists. 

INTRODUCTION 

Recent  experiments  by  Mossbauer  (1)  and  others  {2)  have  shown  that  it  is 
possible  for  nuclei  bound  in  crystal  lattices  to  emit  or  absorb  gamma  radiation 
having  an  energy  equal  to  that  of  the  nuclear  transition.  The  recoil  momentum 
is  taken  by  the  crystal  as  a  whole,  with  negligible  energy  transfer,  and  there  is  an 
appreciable  probability,  although  small,  that  there  is  no  energy  transfer  to  or 
from  the  lattice  vibrations. 

The  theory  of  this  Mossbauer  effect  is  similar  to  that  of  other  phenomena  in- 
volving transitions  in  atoms  or  nuclei  bound  in  lattices  (3,  4)  such  as  excitons 
or  neutron  capture.  Calculations  based  on  the  treatments  of  these  other  cases 
have  been  made  (5).  These  are  rather  complicated,  involving  the  evaluation  of 
difficult  integrals  to  obtain  detailed  information  in  specific  cases.  Results  can 
only  be  obtained  when  certain  simplifying  assumptions  are  made  regarding  the 
nature  of  the  crystal. 

Because  the  experimental  effect  is  small,  it  is  of  interest  to  look  for  simple  quali- 
tative conclusions  having  a  general  validity  (i.e.,  independent  of  the  details  of  a 
particular  model  of  a  crystal)  which  can  serve  as  a  guide  to  experimenters  in 
choosing  experimental  parameters.  These  can  be  obtained  rather  simply,  avoiding 
the  complications  of  the  other  treatments,  if  we  only  consider  the  property  of 
greatest  interest;  namely,  the  change  in  the  lattice  state  when  a  gamma  ray  is 
emitted  or  absorbed.  For  this  calculation,  the  line  shape  of  the  nuclear  transition 
is  irrelevant,  and  the  Breit-Wigner  formula  does  not  appear.  All  nuclear  proper- 

*  This  research  was  supported  in  part  by  the  joint  program  of  the  U.  S.  Atomic  Energy 
Commission  and  the  Office  of  Naval  Research. 

t  On  leave  from  the  Weizmann  Institute  of  Science,  Rehovoth,  Israel. 

332 


162 


MOSSBAUER   EFFECT  333 

ties  drop  out  in  the  calculation  except  the  momentum  transfer  in  the  transition 
and  the  nuclear  mass. 

THE  TRANSITION  MATRIX  ELEMENT 

Let  us  first  consider  the  emission  or  absorption  of  a  gamma  ray  by  a  free  nu- 
cleus which  is  not  bound  in  a  lattice.  This  transition  can  be  described  in  terms  of 
a  matrix  element  M  of  some  operator  A  between  the  initial  state  i)  and  the  final 
state  /)  of  the  nucleus: 

M  =   {j\A{xi,Vi,ai)\l).  (1) 

The  operator  A  depends  upon  the  coordinates,  momenta  and  spins  of  the  particles 
in  the  nucleus.  Let  us  now  express  the  operator  A  in  terms  of  the  center-of-mass 
coordinate  of  the  nucleus,  X,  and  a  set  of  relative  coordinates  q  which  include 
spins.  The  dependence  of  A  upon  the  center-of-mass  coordinate  X  is  determined 
completely  by  the  requirements  of  translational  and  Galilean  in  variance;  i.e.,  by 
the  requirements  that  momentum  should  be  conserved  and  that  the  transition 
probability  for  a  moving  observer  (nonrelativistic)  should  not  depend  upon  the 
velocity  of  the  observer.  For  the  emission  of  a  gamma  ray  of  momentum  hK,  the 
above  requirements  are  satisfied  only  if  the  operator  A  has  the  form 

A  =  exp(iK -X)a(q),  (2) 

where  the  operator  a(q)  depends  only  upon  the  relative  variables  and  spins  of  the 
particles  and  has  an  explicit  form  depending  upon  the  nature  of  the  transition 
(electric,  magnetic,  dipole,  quadrupole,  etc.).  The  explicit  form  of  a(q)  is  of  no 
interest  for  our  present  purposes. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  emission  or  absorption  of  a  gamma  ray  by  a  nucleus 
bound  in  a  crystal.  The  operator  describing  the  transition  is  the  same  operator  A, 
but  we  must  now  take  the  matrix  element  between  initial  and  final  states  of  the 
whole  lattice,  rather  than  of  the  free  nucleus.  Because  the  crystal  forces  are  very 
weak  compared  to  the  internal  nuclear  forces,  we  can  assume  that  the  binding 
forces  act  only  upon  the  center-of-mass  motion  of  the  nucleus  and  do  not  perturb 
the  internal  degrees  of  freedom.  We  can  now  write  down  an  expression  for  the 
matrix  element  describing  the' transition  in  which  a  gamma-ray  of  momentum  UK 
is  emitted  by  a  nucleus  whose  center-of-mass  coordinate  is  XL  ,  while  the  lattice 
goes  from  a  state  specified  by  quantum  numbers  n*  to  a  state  specified  by  quan- 
tum numbers  rif  ,  and  the  internal  state  of  the  emitting  nucleus  changes  from  i) 
to/).  This  is 

ML  =  (n/|exp(zX.XL)  |  n,-).(/  |  a(q)  \i).  (3) 

The  matrix  element  thus  separates  into  the  product  of  a  factor  depending  only 
upon  the  lattice  and  a  factor  depending  only  upon  the  internal  structure  of  the 


163 


334  LIPKIN 

nucleus.  The  transition  probability  is  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  matrix 
element  (3).1  We  are  not  interested  in  the  absolute  transition  rate,  but  in  the  rela- 
tive probability  of  different  energy  transfers  to  the  lattice.  That  is,  we  are  in- 
terested in  the  probability  P(nf  ,  n»)  that  the  lattice  will  be  in  a  particular  state 
nf  after  the  transition  if  it  is  initially  in  the  state  n,- .  The  probability  P{nf  ,  n») 
is  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  matrix  element  (3),  with  the  constant  of  pro- 
portionality chosen  to  make  the  total  probability  of  a  transition  from  the  state 
Ui  to  any  other  state  to  be  unity, 

T,P(nf,m)  =  1.  (4) 

nf 

The  dependence  of  the  matrix  element  ML  upon  the  nuclear  structure  matrix  ele- 
ment (/ 1  a(q)  \i)  occurs  as  a  common  factor  for  all  lattice  states  and  can  be 
dropped  in  calculating  the  relative  probability.  We  therefore  have 

P(nf  ,  m)  =  I  (nf  |  exp^X-XL)  |  n«)  |2.  (5) 

The  proportionality  constant  turns  out  to  be  unity,  as  can  be  verified  by  substi- 
tuting (5)  into  (4)  and  evaluating  the  sum  by  closure. 

A  SUM  RULE 

We  can  now  derive  a  sum  rule  by  making  the  following  assumption;  that  the 
interatomic  forces  in  the  crystal  depend  only  upon  the  positions  of  the  atoms  and 
not  upon  their  velocities.  The  only  term  in  the  Hamiltonian  H  for  the  lattice 
which  does  not  commute  with  XL  is  the  kinetic  energy  of  that  nucleus,  PL2/2M, 
where  M  is  the  mass  of  the  nucleus  and  PL  is  the  momentum.  We  therefore  have 

[H,XL]  =  -iKPL/M  (6a) 

{[H,exp(iK-XL)],  exp(-iK-XL)}  =  -(hK)2/M  (6b) 

Writing  Eq.  (6b)  as  a  matrix  equation  and  taking  the  diagonal  element  for  the 
state  rii  we  obtain  the  sum  rule 

D  {E(nf)  -  E(m)}  I  (nf  |  exp^K-Xj  |  m)  I2 

=  Z  \E(nf)  -  EMMn,,*)  =  ^-, 

where  E(nf)  and  E(rii)  are  the  energies  of  the  states  n/  and  n; . 

1  We  neglect  the  dependence  of  the  density  of  final  states  of  the  emitted  7-ray  upon 
the  energy  transfer  to  the  lattice.  This  is  justified  since  the  7-ray  energy  is  greater  than 
lattice  energies  by  a  factor  of  at  least  106.  This  approximation  is  not  valid  for  neutron 
capture. 


164 


MOSSBAUER   EFFECT  335 

The  sum  rule  (7)  says  that  the  average  energy  transferred  to  the  lattice  is  just 
the  energy  which  the  individual  nucleus  would  have  if  it  recoiled  freely.2 

Note  that  the  Mossbauer  transitions  in  which  no  energy  is  transferred  to  the 
lattice  [E(nf)  =  E(rii)]  do  not  contribute  to  the  sum  rule.  Thus  if  we  want  an 
appreciable  probability  that  there  be  no  energy  transfer  to  the  lattice  the  sum  rule 
requires  an  appreciable  probability  for  an  energy  transfer  which  is  greater  than 
that  which  a  freely  recoiling  nucleus  would  receive*  We  will  tend  to  get  an  in- 
creased Mossbauer  effect  when  the  nucleus  can  transfer  energy  to  high  frequency 
lattice  modes;  i.e.,  in  a  crystal  with  a  high  Debye  temperature.  If  the  nucleus 
under  consideration  is  an  impurity  in  a  lattice,  it  should  be  strongly  bound  in  a 
localized  position. 

An  ideal  situation  would  occur  if  the  nucleus  were  bound  in  a  localized  well  and 
could  oscillate  in  this  well  without  appreciably  perturbing  the  other  lattice  modes. 
If  the  excitation  energy  of  this  mode  were  larger  than  the  free  recoil  energy 
(hK)2/2M),  the  sum  rule  (7)  would  be  exhausted  by  a  probability  less  than  unity 
for  exciting  this  mode.  The  remaining  probability  would  all  go  into  the  Moss- 
bauer effect. 

A  MORE  DETAILED  CALCULATION 

Let  us  now  attempt  to  calculate  explicitly  the  probability  P(w,- ,  n»)  that  the 
lattice  remains  in  its  initial  state  after  the  emission  of  the  gamma  ray,  which 
therefore  carries  the  full  energy  of  the  nuclear  transition.  We  now  need  a  more 
detailed  model  of  the  lattice.  Let  us  assume  that  the  interatomic  forces  are  har- 
monic, so  that  a  simple  transformation  to  normal  modes  is  possible.  These  modes 
will  be  described  by  normal  coordinates  £s  .  The  state  of  the  lattice  can  be  speci- 
fied by  the  set  of  quantum  numbers  {nsj  describing  the  state  of  excitation  of  each 
normal  mode. 

Let  us  express  the  coordinate  XL  in  terms  of  the  normal  coordinates  and  intro- 
duce this  into  Eq.  (5).  We  have 

ck'Xz,  =  22  aLsi;s ,  (8) 

8 

where  ck  is  a  unit  vector  in  the  direction  of  the  vector  K.  We  can  choose  the 
normalization  of  the  normal  coordinates  such  that 

E  (<^)2  =  1-  (») 

8 

2  This  result  has  been  derived  for  the  emission  process.  The  author  is  indebted  to  W. 
M.  Visscher  for  pointing  out  that  it  applies  as  well  to  absorption  only  if  the  incident  7- 
radiation  has  a  flat  spectrum  over  the  resonance  region. 


165 

336  LIPKIN 

We  then  have 
P({ng},{ns})  =  |  ({ns}  |  exp(iK  £  a**)  |  {n.})  |2 

=  II  |  (n,  |  exp(z7faL8£8)  |  n8)  |2. 

8 

Elegant  methods  have  been  developed  for  the  evaluation  of  expressions  having 
the  form  (10)  including  averaging  over  all  states  {n8|  with  the  appropriate  sta- 
tistical factor  corresponding  to  thermal  equilibrium  at  a  given  temperature  (6). 
We  shall  use  a  simple  approximate  method.  We  note  that  if  we  expand  the  ex- 
ponentials in  (10),  only  the  even  powers  of  £s  have  non vanishing  matrix  elements. 
We  can  therefore  write 

P(M,M)  =  [lid  -hs)]\  (11) 

8 

where 

hs  =  (n,\  (KaLs£s)2  \  ns)/2  -f-  terms  of  order  KAais(ns  \  £4 1  n8). 
Let  us  expand 

II  (1  -  h8)  =  1  -  E  h8  +  E  hsht/2  +  •  •  •  .  (12) 

We  note  that  the  expansion  (12)  is  the  same  as  that  for  exp(—  E«M,  except  for 
the  exclusion  of  repeated  indices.  If  each  hs  is  small  compared  to  unity,  even 
though  E*  hs  may  not  be  small,  we  can  write 

H  (1  —  hs)  =  exp(—  E  ^«)  +  terms  of  order  E  hs2.  (13) 

s  s  s 

We  therefore  have 

P({w.},{n.} )  =  exp  E  {  -K2<*L(ns  I  & 1  n.) } 

(14) 
+  terms  of  order  K4E  als(£s4). 

s 

The  expectation  value  of  £s2  in  the  state  ns  is  easily  evaluated  by  noting  that  the 
potential  energy  for  a  harmonic  oscillator  }^  -Mcos2£82,  has  an  expectation  value  of 
(n8  -f-  %)fto)s/2,  where  w8  is  the  oscillator  frequency  for  the  s-mode.3  We  there- 
fore obtain 

P({ns\,{ns})  «  exp  E  {~(2ns  +  l)[(^)2/2MMfll)  (15) 

s 

neglecting  the  higher  order  terms. 

3  The  mass  M  is  the  mass  of  the  nucleus  emitting  the  7-ray.  This  relation  is  valid  even  if 
the  crystal  consists  of  different  types  of  atoms  having  different  atomic  masses. 


166 


MOSSBAUER   EFFECT  337 


The  factor  (%K)2/2Mho)s  is  just  the  ratio  of  the  free  recoil  energy  to  the  energy 
of  the  sth  lattice  vibration  normal  mode.  If  the  lattice  is  in  its  lowest  state  (at 
0°K),  every  ns  is  zero  and  the  exponent  in  (15)  is  just  the  ratio  of  the  free  recoil 
energy  to  some  average  lattice  vibration  energy  ho)Av  denned  by 

(/kdAv)-1  =  z2  als/hus  .  (16) 

8 

This  is  a  harmonic  mean,  in  which  each  mode  is  given  a  statistical  weight  cor- 
responding to  the  contribution  of  that  mode  in  the  expansion  of  XL  in  normal 
modes  (Eqs.  8,  9).  We  see  that  the  probability  of  an  effect  (15)  decreases  very 
rapidly  if  the  free  recoil  energy  increases  above  this  average  lattice  energy. 

The  neglect  of  the  higher  order  terms  in  (15)  is  justified  in  the  region  of  inter- 
est, where  the  argument  of  the  exponential  is  of  the  order  of  unity.  If  the  number 
of  relevant  normal  modes  is  large,  then  each  individual  term  is  small.  The  sum 
of  the  squares  of  these  terms  is  therefore  very  small  and  can  be  neglected. 

At  finite  temperatures  the  effect  is  reduced  because  of  the  presence  of  the  factor 
2ns  +  1  in  the  exponent  of  Eq.  (16).  This  reduction  becomes  serious  at  tempera- 
tures corresponding  roughly  to  the  mean  lattice  energy  (16)  where  the  factor 
2n8  +  1  is  different  from  unity  in  a  region  which  contributes  appreciably  to  the 
sum  (16). 

The  results  (15)  and  (16)  are  general  in  that  they  apply  to  any  crystal  in 
which  the  forces  are  harmonic.  The  particular  case  of  the  Debye  model  has  been 
considered  by  Visscher  (5).  We  can  get  his  result  by  setting  aLs  =  constant  and 
taking  a  density  of  lattice  modes  which  is  proportional  to  ws2.  For  this  case 

(fooAv)Debye   =    %(fta>max)    =    %  /C0.  (17a) 

r=o° 

Thus 

P({ns},K})Debye  =  exp  { -  y2(hK)2/2Mke } .  (17b) 

r=o° 
CONCLUSIONS 

The  expressions  (15)  and  (17)  lead  to  the  same  conclusions  as  the  sum  rule 
(7) ;  that  probability  of  gamma-ray  emission  without  energy  transfer  to  or  from 
the  lattice  increases  with  the  average  energy  of  the  lattice  modes  which  are 
coupled  to  the  recoiling  nucleus  and  the  effect  becomes  appreciable  when  this 
average  energy  is  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  the  free  recoil  energy.  From 
the  explicit  form  of  the  relations  ( 15)  and  ( 17)  with  their  exponential  dependence 
upon  the  parameters  of  interest,  we  see  that  the  effect  is  very  sensitive  to  the 
experimental  conditions.  The  experimental  results  (1,  2)  indicate  that 

P(M,{n,}) 


167 


338  LIPKIN 

is  of  the  order  of  a  few  per  cent.  In  this  region,  a  change  in  the  exponent  in  (15) 
or  (17)  by  a  factor  of  two  can  change  the  effect  by  an  order  of  magnitude. 

The  influence  of  the  ambient  temperature  upon  the  effect  [the  factor  (2n8  -f-  1) 
in  Eq.  (15)]  is  easily  understood  as  "stimulated  emission  and  absorption"  of 
phonons:  the  probability  of  energy  exchange  between  the  lattice  and  the  recoiling 
nucleus  increases  with  the  degree  of  excitation  of  the  lattice. 

The  results  might  be  summarized  crudely  by  the  following  simple  statement 
which  could  have  been  made  in  advance  without  any  calculation :  The  Mossbauer 
experiment  is  described  in  terms  of  three  characteristic  temperatures  or  energies ; 
(1)  the  energy  of  the  free  recoil,  (2)  a  characteristic  temperature  for  the  lattice 
(e.g.,  the  Debye  temperature),  and  (3)  the  ambient  temperature.  To  obtain  an 
effect,  the  lattice  temperature  should  be  of  the  same  order  as  the  free  recoil 
energy,  and  the  ambient  temperature  should  be  low  compared  to  these.  The  ex- 
plicit results  add  two  further  important  features  which  are  of  considerable  in- 
terest to  the  experimentalist  trying  to  increase  the  effect  by  varying  parameters. 
First,  there  is  the  exponential  dependence  in  Egs.  (15)  and  (17),  indicating  that 
a  small  change  in  these  parameters  can  have  a  large  effect  on  the  experiment. 
Second,  there  is  the  definition  of  the  average  lattice  vibration  energy  (16),  which 
is  clearly  a  different  kind  of  an  average  from  those  used  by  solid  state  physicists  to 
compute  properties  such  as  specific  heats.  There  is  therefore  no  simple  relation 
between  the  characteristic  lattice  temperature  for  Mossbauer  scattering  and  the 
Debye  temperature,  except  for  very  simple  models  which  are  generally  not  ex- 
actly valid.  These  two  temperatures  will  be  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude,  but 
the  effect  of  the  difference  is  very  much  accentuated  by  the  exponential  de- 
pendence of  (15). 

It  is  therefore  of  interest  for  the  experimentalist  to  look  for  transitions  hav- 
ing a  low  free  recoil  energy,  and  for  crystals  having  a  high  "effective  Mossbauer 
temperature,"  Eq.  (16).  More  complicated  crystals  (compounds,  alloys,  or  im- 
purities) should  be  chosen  for  strong  binding  of  the  source  or  absorber  atoms, 
rather  than  for  high  Debye  temperatures.  The  latter  may  be  due  to  irrelevant 
normal  modes.  This  is  particularly  true  in  light  elements  where  low  mass, 
rather  than  strong  binding  gives  high  Debye  temperature  (7). 

The  author  would  like  to  express  his  appreciation  to  F.  Seitz,  T.  D.  Schultz, 
G.  Rickayzen,  and  R.  Knox  for  illuminating  discussions  on  the  solid-state  aspects 
of  the  problem;  to  D.  R.  Inglis  for  many  stimulating  discussions;  to  J.  P.  Schiffer 
and  L.  Meyer-Schiitzmeister  for  discussions  of  experimental  results;  and  to  R. 
M.  Thaler  and  W.  M.  Visscher  for  information  about  the  Los  Alamos  calculations. 


Received:  September  25,  1959 


REFERENCES 


1.  R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Physik  151,  124  (1958);  Naturwiss.  45,  538  (1958);  Z.  Naturforsch. 
14a,  211  (1959). 


168 

MOSSBAUER   EFFECT  339 

2.  L.  L.  Lee,  Jr.,  L.  Meyer-Schutzmeister,  J.  P.  Schiffer,  and  D.  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev. 

Letters  3,  223  (1959);  P.  P.  Craig,  J.  G.  Dash,  A.  D.  McGuire,  D.  Nagle,  and  R.  R. 

Reiswig,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3,  221  (1959). 
8.  W.  E.  Lamb,  Phys.  Rev.  55,  190  (1939). 
1.  R.  E.  Peierls,  Ann.  Physik  13,  905  (1932). 

5.  W.  M.  Visscher,  Annals  of  Physics  9,  194  (1960). 

6.  L.  S.  Kothari  and  K.  S.  Singwi,  Solid  State  Phys.  9,  109  (1959). 

7.  J.  P.  Schiffer  and  W.  Marshall  (private  communication). 


RESONANCE  RADIATION  OF 
NUCLEI  BOUND  IN  A  LATTICE 


DAVID  R.  INGLIS 

Argonne  National  Laboratory 

Lemont,  Illinois 

The  understanding  of  the  processes  involved  in  resonance  radiation 
emitted  and  absorbed  by  nuclei  bound  in  crystal  lattices  has  acquired 
a  new  interest  as  a  result  of  the  recent  revealing  experiments  of  Moss- 
bauer1  and  others.  In  the  literature  the  interpretation  of  these  experi- 
ments has  been  based  on  analogy  with  a  similar  problem  involving  res- 
onance absorption  of  neutrons  by  bound  nuclei,  a  problem  treated  by 
Lamb,2  who  took  results  from  the  earlier  neutron  resonance  work  of 
Breit  and  Wigner,  and  of  Bethe  and  Placzek,  who,  in  turn,  had  based  the 
treatment  of  neutron  resonances  on  analogy  with  radiation.   For  the 
sake  of  a  concise,  qualitative  understanding  of  the  problem  it  seems 
desirable  to  have  a  simple  treatment  of  the  electromagnetic  radiation 
problem  itself,  eliminating  the  detour  via  neutrons. 

Some  of  the  features  of  the  problem  may  be  presented  most  simply 
in  terms  of  the  analogous  one-dimensional  problem,  and  this  is  the  ap- 
proach we  shall  use.  We  consider  a  nucleus  as  one  bead  of  a  string  of 
beads,  connected  by  springs  and  vibrating  longitudinally.  The  lattice 
points  are  at  lr  =  ra,  where  r  =  1,2,  ...  N,  and  each  has  a  longitudinal 
displacement  xr,  which  may  be  Fourier -analyzed  into  normal  coordi- 
nates qs: 

xr  =  (2/N)^/2  Zsqs  sin  (rS7r/N)  (1) 

Here  v  is  the  number  of  dimensions;  for  the  string  of  beads  v  =  1.  The 
exponent  v /2  is  introduced  for  the  sake  of  a  later  discussion  of  a  crys- 
tal in  which  these  longitudinal  modes  are  a  subset  of  a  much  larger 
number  of  modes,  and  where  the  coefficients  for  these  modes  accord- 
ingly become  smaller  (varying  inversely  as  the  square  root  of  the  num- 
ber of  atoms,  which  in  a  square  or  cube  is  N"). 
The  Lagrangian  of  the  mechanical  lattice  is 


tWork  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the  U.S.  Atomic  Energy 
Commission. 

*R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Physik,  151, 124  (1958);  Naturwiss.,  45,  538  (1958). 
2W.  E.  Lamb,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev.,  55,  190  (1939). 

169 


170  RESONANCE     RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI 

£0  =  (M/2)  Zx2,  -  (K/2a)  2  (xr+1  -  xr)2 

=  (M/2)2q|  -  (K/a)  2q|[l  -  cos  (tts/N)]  (2) 

We  consider  N  large,  without  detailed  concern  for  the  end  conditions, 
as  we  make  the  following  approximation  in  this  substitution: 

I  r  sin2  (rs7r/N)  =  N/2  Zr  sin  (rs;r/N)  cos  (rs7r/N)  =  0      (3) 

The  integer  s  here  refers  to  a  mode  of  vibration  of  the  string,  indi- 
cating the  number  of  nodes  in  what  becomes  a  sine  wave  along  the 
string  as  the  string  becomes  continuous  with  large  N;   (2/N)     qs  is 
the  amplitude  of  such  a  wave,  normalized  to  become  small  with  large 
N  so  that  a  mass  factor  M  is  retained  in  the  last  line  of  (2),  even 
though  a  total  mass  NM  is  involved  in  the  vibration. 

We  first  assume  a  monochromatic  incident  electromagnetic  wave 
described  by  the  vector  potential  (or  by  its  x  component) 

A(x,t)  =  aei(kx-Wt)  (4) 

and  consider  the  absorption  by  one  nucleus  in  the  string  endowed  with 
an  electric  dipole  x'e.  In  the  real  lattice,  of  course,  each  nucleus 
has  a  charge  Ze,  and  the  elastic  force  constant  K  results  from  the 
interaction  of  this  charge  with  the  charges  of  the  electrons,  as  it 
appears  in  the  quantum-mechanical  treatment  of  the  whole  elec- 
trostatic energy  of  the  system  unperturbed  by  (4).  Thus,  the  absorbing 
nucleus  (which  we  call  R)  is  endowed  with  a  charge  Ze,  which  is  in 
effect  at  the  nuclear  center  of  mass  when  averaged  over  the  time  of 
lattice  vibration,  plus  an  electric  dipole  that  shows  how  this  nucleus 
differs  from  the  others  in  interacting  with  the  electromagnetic  field 
(4).   The  dipole  consists  of  a  positive  charge  e  on  a  proton  of  mass  m 
and  the  rest  of  the  nucleus  which  we  call  a  core  (though  it  need  not  be 
a  closed  shell),  of  mass  (M  -  m).  In  order  not  to  deviate  from  the 
total  charge  Ze  assumed  in  K,  the  core  is  given  an  equivalent  charge 
-e. 

It  is  then  fairly  obvious  that  the  coupling  with  the  radiation  comes 
essentially  through  the  acceleration  of  the  proton,  in  the  approxima- 
tion M  ^>  m,  but  let  us  nevertheless  formulate  this  point  and  see  how 
the  correct  position  coordinate  enters  in  the  vector-potential  term. 
The  vector  potential  enters!  the  Lagrangian  of  a  many-particle  sys- 
tem thus: 


tThe  simple  proof  of  this  consists  in  showing  that  the  Lagrange 
equations  in  cartesian  coordinates  then  include,  among  other  terms, 
the  deflecting  force  of  the  magnetic  field,   Fmag  =  (e/c)v  x  H  with 
H  =Vx  A,  as  is  shown  for  example  in  Van  Vleck's  book,  "Electric  and 


RESONANCE     RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI  171 

£  =  (1/2)  2n  mv^  -  V  +  Zn(e/c)vn  -  A  (5) 

If  we  neglect  the  interaction  of  A  with  the  nuclear  charges  Ze  and 
with  the  electrons,  which  would  be  of  importance  in  problems  of  crys- 
tal optics,  we  have  for  our  system 

£  =(1/2)M2(N"1)4+(1/2)(M-  m)4  +  (l/2)mx£ 

-  (K/2a)Z(xr  +1  -  xr)2  -  V(xp  -  xc)  +  (e/c) 

x  [xpA(xp)  -  xcA(xc)]  (6) 

The  sum  (N  -  1)  includes  all  N  values  of  r  except  r  =  R.  Here  xp 
and  xc  are  the  positions  of  the  proton  and  core,  and  we  of  course  re- 
duce them  to  the  center-of-mass  and  difference  coordinates  for  the 
R-th  nucleus, 

xr  =  [(M  -  m)xc  +  mXpJ/M  x'  =  xp  -  xc  (7) 

and  have 

£  =  £v  +  (l/2)/ix'2  -  V(x')  +  (e/c)[(xR  +  (/i/m)x')A(xR  +  (/x/m)x;) 

-  (xR  -  (m/M)x')A(xR  -  (m/M)xO]  (8) 

Here  we  have  the  usual  reduced  mass,  n  =  m(M-  m)/M,  and  the  first 

term  in   £0  is  a  sum  over  N  terms,  not  just  Z  over  (N  -  1) 

terms  excluding  x„  as  in  Eq.  (6).  The  two  cartesian  momenta  are 

PR  =  8£  /3xR  =  MxR  +  f  f  =  (e/c)[A(xR  +  (/i/m)xO 

-  A(xR  -  (m/M)x')] 

p  =  3  £/dk'  =  \xk'  +  g  g  =  (e/c)[(M/m)A(xp)  -  (m/M)A(xc)] 

(9) 

If,  neglecting  the  mass  of  the  proton  compared  to  the  mass  of  the 
core,  we  put  m/M  a  0,  ju/m  «  1,  we  have 

f « (e/c)[3A/ax]x     x'  +  -  g  « (e/c)A(xp)  (90 

Magnetic  Susceptibilities,,,  Oxford  University  Press,  New  York, 
1932,  p.  19.  The  fact  that  the  acceleration  in  the  transverse  direc- 
tion is  involved  in  the  longitudinal  radiation  process  means  that  the 
problem  is  not  truly  one -dimensional,  although  the  essential  lattice 
part  of  the  formulation  is. 


172  RESONANCE     RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI 

The  Hamiltonian  contains  for  these  two  coordinates  the  terms 

(PR  -  f)2/2M  +  (p  -  g)2/2M  (10) 

and  we  may  here  first  use  the  approximation  (9')  and  further  neglect 
f  altogether,  both  because  it  appears  as  f/M,  which  is  small  com- 
pared to  g/jLt  from  the  mass  disparity,  and  because  the  gamma- ray 
wavelength  of  interest  is  rather  large  compared  to  nuclear  dimensions. 
With  these  approximations,  and  with  neglect  of  g2,  the  Hamiltonian 
JC=  2pq-  £  is 

JC  =  (1/2M)[2(N_  1]  P2  +  (PN  -  f)2]  +  (K/2a)Z(xr  +1  -  xr)2 

+  (p-g)2/2ju  +  V(x') 

«  (1/2M)  2P2.  +  (K/2a)Z(xr  +1  -  xr)2  +  p2/2p.  +  V(x') 

-  (e/mc)p.A(xp)  (11) 

as  some  readers  would  have  considered  obvious  without  all  this  talk. 
One  purpose  of  this  detailed  discussion  has  been  to  show  why  it  is  xp 
that  appears  as  the  argument  of  A. 

In  the  approximation  f  =  0,  the  lattice -point  momenta  are  simply 
Pr  =  Mxr,  and  the  transformation  to  the  normal  coordinates  and  mo- 
menta ps  and  qs  proceeds  as  in  (2),   3C  =  2S3CS  +  3Cn  +  3C1 

3CS  =  p|/2M  +  (Mw|/2)Qs  ws  ~  (2K/Ma)(l  -  cos  tts/N) 

ps  =  d£/dqs  =  Mqs   —   (ft/i)3/8qs 
JCN  =  p2/2^l  +  V(x') 

3C'=-(e/mc)p-A(xp)  (12) 

The  lattice  part  of  the  Hamiltonian,  I3CS,  is  the  sum  of  terms  s  re- 
ferring to  the  normal  modes  separately,  and  so  is  separable  into  os- 
cillator equations  each  of  which  involves  one  factor  in  the  composite 
wave  function.  The  time -independent  oscillator  wave  equation, 

[-(1i2/2M)82/aq2s  +  (Mu)|/2)q|  -  Es]  Us(qs)  =  0  (13) 

is  expressed,  as  shown  in  Eq.  (13'),  in  the  usual  convenient  oscillator 
coordinates  ?s  =  (wsM/h^qgi 

(-92/9«s+  *l  -*s)Us(!s)=0  As=2EsAx)s=2ns+  1  (130 


RESONANCE    RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI  173 

The  well-known  solutions  Us(|s)  have  between  them  the  following 
matrix  elements  of  £2,  which  we  shall  need  shortly: 

<n||2|n+2>  =  (l/2)(n+l)1/2(n+2)1/2 

<n  ||2|n>       =  (n+1/2) 

<n  ||2|n-2>=(l/2)n1/2(n-l)1/2 

<n|«  |n  +  l>=[(n+lj/2].* 

<n||  |n-l>  =  (n/2)V2  (14) 

The  nuclear  part  of  the  wave  equation 

(Hn  -  en)un(x)  =  0  (15) 

need  not  be  specified  in  any  detail,  as  all  we  shall  demand  of  the  nu- 
clear wave  functions  un(x)  is  that  there  be  an  electric  dipole  transi- 
tion between  two  of  them,  Ui  and  Uf,  characterized  by  an  energy  dif- 
ference ei  -  ef  =  hco0. 

The  interaction  with  the  electromagnetic  field  (4)  is  of  course 
treated  as  the  perturbation,  and  we  shall  be  particularly  interested  in 
the  relative  contributions  made  by  various  Fourier  components  that 
enter  here,  without  concern  for  the  absolute  strength  factor  C. 

ac'  =  (ine/mc)(a/ax')A[xR  +  (/x/mjx'] 
w  Cei[k(xR  +  x')  -  cot] 


=  Ce"icjt  eikx'  neibs*s 
s 

=  Ceiwt(l  +  ikx'+-.)IV  eibs^s 
s=  1 

N  ^2 


N 

1  +  i     L  Ms 

s  =  n 


\s  =  n 

C  =  ietefi/mc  bg  =  C^g"17*  sin  (Rstt/N) 

C1=(2/Nf/2(t/M)1/2k  (16) 

We  see  that  the  lattice  Fourier  components  of  the  motion  of  the 
nucleus  R,  on  which  the  dipole  rides,  enter  the  coefficients  bs,  which 

-  v/2 
contain  a  factor  N  and  thus  in  general  become  small  as  N  be- 

comes large,  but  we  shall  see  that  they  make  a  finite  contribution  be- 
cause one  obtains  a  sum  of  about  N^  terms  in  bg. 

In  the  fourth  line  of  Eq.  (16)  the  terms  in  the  product  have  been 


174  RESONANCE     RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI 

separated  into  two  classes  and  only  those  exponentials  with  s  ^n 
have  been  expanded  in  a  power  series.  The  others  have  been  retained 
as  exponentials  to  avoid  the  "infrared  catastrophe."!  For  the  long- 
wave lattice  vibrations,  s  <^N,  we  have  from  Eq.  (12) 

w|  =  (2K/Ma)(l  -  cos  77s/N)  *  772Ks2/N2Ma  =  (ti/2)2(swn/N)2 

bs  <  bs/sin  (Rstt/N)  =  (2/N)^/2  (li/Mu>s)1/2k 

=  23/4  (2/N)1/2(l" "  X)  (h/7TMs)l/2  (Ma/K)1/4  w/c  (160 

-  (l/4)23/4(2/N)1/2(l'  "  ^(meAMs)1'2  {mec2/^2  (a/v)V» 

«2(2/N)1/2(^1)s-V2 

Here  we  have  introduced  the  velocity  of  sound,  v  =  (Ka/M)1/2,  and  in 
the  sample  evaluation  following  the  arrow  we  have  used  the  typical 
value  v/a  =  3x  1013  sec-1  (the  frequency  corresponding  to  the  time 
for  sound  to  travel  a  lattice  distance,  or  approximately  the  Debye 
frequency)  and  we  have  used  "no;  =  mec2/4,  since  the  gamma  ray  of 
Ir191  used  in  Mossbauer's  first  demonstration  of  the  effect  has  the  en- 
ergy 129  Kev.  We  have  taken  M  =  Am  =  200 x  1840  me. 

Thus,  the  dividing  line,  which  we  have  called  n  in  Eq.  (16),  between 
bs  greater  than  and  less  than  unity,  is  in  the  neighborhood  of  s  «  4 
for  one  dimension  and  there  exists  no  such  distinction  for  more  di- 
mensions (given  the  crystal  constants  and  gamma  energy  of  our  ex- 
ample).! For  considerably  larger  s  one  may  expand  the  individual 
exponentials,  but  there  are  so  many  terms  in  the  sum  of  factors  in 
the  product  that  the  validity  of  the  expansion  must  be  further  examined. § 

Formulation  of  the  Transition  Probabilities 

In  the  usual  time -dependent  wave  equation 

[JC  -  (VDO/at)]*  =  0  (17) 

one  considers  the  approximate  solution  of  interest  to  be  a  superposi- 
tion of  the  initial  state  i  and  a  growing  admixture  of  the  final  state  f, 


tThe  infrared  catastrophe  does  not  occur  for  three  dimensions,  as 
we  shall  see.  For  that  case,  v  =  3,  one  may  set  n  =  1  and  eliminate  a 
part  of  the  following  discussion,  which  applies  explicitly  to  the  one- 
dimensional  model  and  is  presented  in  order  to  facilitate  an  under- 
standing of  the  importance  of  the  three  dimensions  of  actual  crystals 
in  determining  the  shape  of  the  absorption  spectrum. 

jThe  dividing  integer  n  becomes  greater  as  the  crystal  binding 
becomes  weaker  and  the  limit  of  weak  binding  will  be  of  interest. 

§See  page  187. 


RESONANCE    RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI 


175 


^/  =  ai(t)^i+af(t)^f 


18) 


where 


i(Ei/R)t 


^  =  Ui(x')nsUng(?s)e 


are  solutions  of  Eq.  (17)  without   3C'.  The  coefficient  ai  is  initially 
unity  and  the  initial  rate  of  growth  of  af  is 


af  =  (l/ffl)/*f  ac'^i  d|>  ...  d^N  dx'  =  Dei(2sK  -  ns)cs  +  u,0-  c)t 

=  DeiAa;t 
D  =  (Ck/fi)  <  f  |  x'|  i  >  D^ 

ik  <f  |x'|  i>  w  /  u*  elkx'ui  dx'  =  /  u*(l  +  ikx'  +  •••)ui  dx' 

n-1 


D1  =  <nl*  •••  nn_i 


n    e 
s  =  l 


ibs^s 


ni'"nn-l> 


D2  -  <  nn/  •  •  •  nN 


N  /    N  \ 

l  +  i  £    Vs-U/2)     £     bs^s 
\s  =  n  i 


s  =  n 


nn--nN> 
(19) 


Here  oj0  =  (ef  -  ei)/h  is  the  resonant  frequency  of  the  nucleus  at  rest 
without  recoil,  Ef  =  ef  +  2sns'a;s  is  the  final  energy  of  the  system 
and,  similarly,  E^  =  ei  +  Zsnsojs,  and  Aco  is  the  amount  by  which  the 
incoming  wave  is  out  of  exact  resonance  with  the  energy  change  from 
the  initial  to  the  final  condition  of  the  system  as  a  whole,  nucleus  plus 
lattice.  In  Eq.  (19)  we  have  selected  the  electric  dipole  term  of  the 
nuclear  transition  as  the  usual  case,  but  this  is  not  essential.  The 
early  values  of  af ,  for  small  t,  are 


H 


f  DeiAwt  dt  =  (D/iAo>)(eiAajt  -  1) 


and  thus  the  probability  per  unit  time  that  the  transition  has  been 
made  to  the  final  state,  for  t  small  enough  that  a^  remains  not  far 
from  unity,  is 


176  RESONANCE    RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI 


(l/t)|afp  =  (D/Aco)2  |eiAwt/2f  |eiAwt/2  -e^^f 

■^W  (20> 

The  last  factor,  the  square  of  the  square  bracket,  is  clearly  a  func- 
tion which  approaches  unity  for  very  small  Au>t  and  becomes  zero 
for  Aco  =  2ir/t.  Thus  it  describes  a  resonant  peak  of  half -width  about 
fl/t,  becoming  narrower  as  the  time  becomes  longer,  in  keeping  with 
the  uncertainty  principle,  and  the  factor  t  in  Eq.  (20)  makes  the  peak 
higher  as  the  time  becomes  longer.  For  larger  values  of  Au>t,  the 
function  goes  through  a  series  of  small  maxima  of  rapidly  decreasing 
amplitudet  which  have  no  great  importance  compared  to  the  central 
sharp  peak. 

In  the  resonant  absorption  of  gamma  rays,  the  time  t  during  which 
the  radiation  causing  the  transition  takes  place  is  taken  to  be  essen- 
tially the  half- life  of  the  emitting  state  (the  same  as  the  half- life  of 
the  final  state  of  the  absorbing  nucleus,  the  two  nuclei  being  identi- 
cal). 

The  shape  of  the  resonant  peak  given  by  Eq.  (20)  is  similar  to,  but 
not  the  same  as,  the  shape  factor  of  the  dispersion  formula, J 
|(Ao>)  -  ir/2|*2.  The  latter  is  derived  by  treatment  of  the  steady  state 
resulting  from  the  equilibrium  between  the  absorption  here  treated 
and  the  corresponding  emission  that  is  responsible  for  the  half- life 
of  the  final  state  f ;  the  nonresonant  "tail"  obtained  does  not  display 
the  "beats"  found  in  Eq.  (20)  for  large  Aw.  To  obtain  a  qualitative 
understanding,  it  does  not  matter  which  resonant  line  shape  is  used. 

As  the  half-life  in  a  case  of  interest  is  known  from  experiment, 
we  consider  t  given.  The  structure  of  the  theory  is  then  as  follows: 
In  exploring  the  shape  of  the  absorption  spectrum,  we  consider  at 
first  a  given  o>.  There  is  then  a  range  of  energies  of  cu  within  about 
Aw  =  2u/t,  in  which  some  final  states  f ,  nsr  may  be  found  for  which 
the  matrix  elements  in  D  of  Eq.  (19)  do  not  vanish.  One  could  think 
of  searching  out  these  states,  and  then  computing  their  contributions 
by  means  of  Eq.  (20),  and  adding  the  values  obtained  to  get  the  absorp- 
tion intensity  at  oj. 

Alternatively  and  more  conveniently,  we  may  first  consider  all  the 
final  states  to  which  matrix  elements  exist,  and  calculate  for  each 
state,  by  means  of  (20),  the  contribution  it  can  make  to  the  absorption 


tThe  shape  of  this  function,  as  well  as  the  formulation  of  this  sim- 
ple (Dirac)  approach  to  the  radiation  problem,  is  to  be  found  conven- 
iently in  L.  I.  Schiff,  "Quantum  Mechanics,"  McGraw-Hill,  New  York, 
1949,  pp.  189-193. 

JG.  Breit  and  E.  Wigner,  Phys.  Rev.,  49,  519  (1936). 


RESONANCE    RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI 


177 


at  various  a>'s  within  the  range  Aa;  of  its  resonant  frequency 
u)0  +  2(ns  i  -  ns)a>s,  as  its  influence  is  spread  out  by  the  line  shape. 
The  various  contributions  at  each  a?  must  then  be  added  to  obtain 
the  absorption  spectrum. 

To  do  this  we  must  examine  the  lattice  matrix  elements.  When  the 
constant  and  nuclear  elements  which  are  the  same  for  all  terms  are 
left  out,  the  lattice  factor  for  the  low  frequencies,  Dx  of  Eq.  (19)  is  a 
product  of  (n-  1)  factors  of  the  type 


<n£ 


iM 


sss 


ibsl 


*S>=/U*     tt)Un({)e1D**  d{ 


(20') 


-£2/2 
where  Un(|)  =  Hn(£)  e      '    .  The  hermite  polynomial  Hn  is  a  sum  of 

about  n/2  powers  of  £  in  terms  of  alternating  sign,  giving  about  n/2 
nodes  on  each  side  of  zero,  and  about  n/2  maxima  of  Hn  with  ampli- 
tudes that  increase  until  the  wave  function  is  cut  off  by  the  exponential 
factor.  The  appearance  of  Uf0  is  shown  in  Fig.  1,  along  with  dotted 
lines  giving  the  classical  probability  distribution  for  a  harmonic  oscil- 
lator. The  faithfulness  to  the  correspondence  principle  is  clear,  and 
in  the  central  region,  where  the  parabolic  potential  curve  is  relatively 
flat,  Un(£)  is  given  approximately  by  the  standing- wave  wave  function 


of  a  free  particle  in  a  box,  Un  «  e 


iA1^ 


iAl/2| 


with  A=  2ns+  1, 


Fig.  1.  Square  of  the  oscillator  wave  function  for  ns  =  10.  The 
broken  lines  show  the  probability  distribution  for  a  clas- 
sical  oscillator  which  slows  down  and  stops  at  the  end 
of  its  swing. 


178  RESONANCE    RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI 

satisfying  Eq.  (13')  with  £=  0.  In  the  matrix  elements  (20'),  with 
bs^>l,  the  exponential  factor  e^°s*  varies  rapidly  in  phase  and 
makes  the  integral  very  nearly  vanish  if  the  product  of  the  two  wave 
functions  varies  much  more  slowly,  as  it  does  if  ns/»ns.  For  the  in- 
tegral (20')  to  have  a  value  nearly  unity,  it  is  necessary  for  the  prod- 
uct of  the  wave  functions  in  the  important  central  region  to  have  the 

same  periodicity  as  e    s   .  If  ns=  0,  as  it  would  be  at  a  very  low 
temperature,  Uj  varies  slowly  and  has  no  periodicity;  the  periodicity, 
therefore,  comes  from  Uf  and  we  have  A1/2  =  (2ns>  +  1)1/2  =  ±bs  if 

e      s  is  to  keep  the  same  phase  through  the  important  range 

of  integration  and  if  the  matrix  element  is  thus  to  be  large.  With 
v  =  1  and  with  bs  taken  as  an  average  over  several  adjacent  modes 
s  (because  the  radiating  nucleus  R  is  in  a  position  to  have  good  "lev- 
erage" in  interacting  with  some  of  the  normal  modes  of  vibration  and 
not  with  others),  we  may  use  (sin2)av  =  1/2  in  Eq.  (16)  and  then  have 

(2n's-  l)ws  =fik2/NM 

The  contribution  to  Aw  of  Eq.  (19)  by  all  terms  of  this  type  is 

n-1 

£    nJ3WS~nfik2/2NM 
s=  1 

This  is  the  recoil  Doppler  shift  produced  by  the  motion  of  the  radiating 
atom  in  phase  with  other  atoms  in  the  same  region  in  these  long-wave 
vibrations.  A  large  block  consisting  of  about  N/n  atoms  can  move  to- 
gether without  exciting  too  much  photon  energy  and  can  recoil  as  a 
unit.    In  the  limit  of  very  weak  binding,  all  the  bg  values  become 
large,  the  sum  extends  to  N,  and  we  obtain  the  usual  recoil  Doppler 
shift  for  a  free  atom  initially  at  rest,  6oo  =  Hl^/^M. 

If  ns  and  n's  are  both  large,  we  may  use  the  free-particle  stand- 
ing-wave approximation  for  both  and  have  (2n^  +  1)  -  (2ns  +  1)  =  ±bs. 
The  contribution  to  Au>  of  a  given  normal- mode  excitation  n's  is 

K  -ns)cos  =  (nfcVi  +  nV2)(n^/2_n^)Ws«(2n^±bs/21/2)(±bs/21/2) 

Addition  of  these  contributions  from  the  various  modes  s  would  in- 
volve a  combinatorial  problem,  such  as  taking  account  of  the  fact  that 
there  are  relatively  many  states  with  very  small  total  contribution 
because  the  ±  sign  is  about  equally  divided  between  plus  and  minus. 
This  would  amount  to  a  treatment,  by  means  of  fourier  analysis,  of 
the  ordinary  Doppler  shift  that  results  from  the  thermal  motion  of 
that  large  block  of  atoms  whose  common  motion  may  be  described  by 
these  long-wave  modes.  One  sees  that  the  same  large  block  is  again 


RESONANCE     RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI  179 

involved  by  noting  that  the  statistical  problem  may  give  a  factor  n1/2 
from  summing  over  n  terms  with  random  sign,  and  one  thus  has  a 
factor  (n/NM)  where  a  factor  (1/M)  would  appear  in  the  Doppler  shift 
of  a  free  atom. 

In  favorable  cases,  n  is  less  than  N  by  several  orders  of  magni- 
tude, a  fact  which  both  keeps  the  spike  sharp  and  which  means  that  the 
great  majority  of  normal  modes  fall  in  the  category  of  s  greater 
than  n. 

Now  let  us  consider  the  high-frequency  end  of  the  phonon  spectrum. 
We  do  so  with  the  idealized  approximation  that  the  bs  values  are  suf- 
ficiently small  for  us  to  use  the  expansion  in  D2  of  Eq.  (19).  There 
we  have  made  the  expansion  with  the  summation  in  the  exponent,  and 
require  the  sum  to  be  small.  We  could  take  instead  a  product  of  ex- 
ponentials for  the  individual  modes  s,  expand  each,  and  require  only 
that  the  individual  term  bs£s  be  small,  a  seemingly  less  stringent 
requirement.  Even  in  this  case  the  expansion  would  be  questionable 
as  s  approaches  the  borderline  n.  We  must  thus  leave  some  region 
untreated,  and  consider  the  lower  limit  n  somewhat  larger  than  that 
borderline  n.  After  expanding  the  individual  exponentials,  one  has  a 
product  of  (N-  n)  sums  and,  in  any  order  above  the  first,  one  has  an 
enormous  number  of  products  which  are  not  obviously  negligible  and 
which  yet  do  not  appear  when  one  expands  as  in  (16).  It  will  be  shown 
below  that  the  two  forms  are  equivalent,  and  thus  the  less  stringent 
requirement  is  sufficient. 

With  this  limitation  on  the  range  s  under  consideration,  the  short- 
wave factor  obtained  by  taking  the  square  of  D2  in  Eq.  (19)  is 

|D2|2~|<nn  -Dfc|l+  i2sbs|s  -  (l/2)2sb||||nn  -  nN>|2 

U-(l/2)2sb|<ns||2s|ns>]2    if  all  npnj 

k|  |<ns±  1  ||s  |ns  >  |2  if  all  nj=m  except  ng=ns±l 

{l/4)b||<ns±2  ||||ns>  |2  if  all  nj=nj  except  ng  =  ns±2 

(21) 

For  a  given  initial  state  nx  ,,,nN  there  is  just  one  final  state  of  the 
first  type,  and  its  lattice  factor  may  be  written  more  explicitly, 

|D2|2~{l-Is[ns  +  (l/2)]b2s+".}  if  all  nj  =  nj  (210 

1 
There  are  about  N  states  with  lattice  factors  of  the  following  type, 

one  for  each  of  the  lattice  modes  s  that  may  be  excited: 

|D2|2~(l/2)(ns  +  l)b|  if  all  nj  =  nj  except  ng  +  1  (21") 


180  RESONANCE    RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI 


As  long  as  most  of  the  nj  are  not  zero  there  are  about  N  states  with 
factors  of  the  type 

|D2|2~  (l/2)nsb|  if  all  nj  =  nj  except  ng  =  ns  -  1  (21'") 

If  we  confine  our  attention  to  powers  of  bs  no  higher  than  b|,  these 
are  all  the  transitions  we  need  to  consider.  Transitions  to  the  single 
state  of  the  type  (21')  give  an  absorption  line  having  the  natural  width 
at  the  undisplaced  resonant  frequency  u>0,  except  as  slightly  broad- 
ened and  displaced  by  the  long-wave  modes  in  D1.  The  second  type 
(21  '0  gives  the  possibility  that  any  one  of  the  lattice  modes  may  ab- 
sorb one  quantum  of  excitation,  contributing  to  the  spectrum  in  the 
immediate  neighborhood  of  (oj0  +  ws)-  Since  there  are  many  lattice 
modes  and  thus  many  u>s,  these  modes,  through  this  term,  can  con- 
tribute a  broad  part  of  the  spectrum.  The  last  type  (21'0  corresponds 
to  the  nuclear  excitation  receiving  most  of  its  energy  from  the  gamma 
ray,  but  part  of  it  from  the  crystal  mode  s,  and  the  factor  ns  as- 
sures that  this  cannot  happen  unless  mode  s  is  excited.  This  process, 
of  course,  contributes  to  the  spectrum  of  the  low -energy  side  of  co0. 
In  the  single  term  of  type  (210  there  is  subtracted  a  sum  of  n  terms 
in  bs.  This  compensates  in  the  total  intensity  the  absorption  by  the  N 
states  of  type  (21")  and  of  type  (21'"),  in  this  order,  leaving  the  total 
intensity  unaffected  by  the  influence  of  the  lattice. 

It  is  clear  that  the  shape  of  the  absorption  spectrum  depends  on 
the  prevailing  magnitude  of  the  ns,  that  is,  on  the  degree  of  excita- 
tion of  the  crystal  modes,  and  this,  of  course,  depends  on  the  temper- 
ature. At  absolute  zero,  with  all  values  of  ns  =  0,  the  "central  spike," 
or  almost  undisplaced  line,  at  u)0  is  considerably  weakened  by  a  wing 
covering  the  range  of  crystal-mode  energies  on  the  high-energy  side. 
At  moderately  low  temperatures,  ns  will  be  fairly  large  for  the  low- 
frequency  modes  with  small  s,  and  ns  will  be  small  for  large  s,  as 
s  approaches  N.  The  low-frequency  modes  will  make  their  very 
small  contribution  to  the  Doppler  broadening  of  the  spike,  and  the 
high-frequency  modes  (as  well  as  the  untreated  intermediate  modes), 
will  start  to  develop  a  wing  on  the  low-frequency  (phonon  de-excita- 
tion) side,  which  further  detracts  from  the  intensity  of  the  spike.  As 
the  temperature  becomes  higher,  the  central  spike  disappears  and  the 
strong  outer  part  of  the  wings  is  also  much  enhanced.  The  fact  that 
according  to  Eq.  (22)  the  spike  is  even  negative  (and  not  only  in  the 
limit  of  large  ns)  shows  that  the  simple  approximation  used  is  not 
valid,  particularly  in  its  neglect  of  terms  of  order  bj.  An  improved 
approximation  is  discussed  below. 

As  a  simple  extreme  case,  let  us  consider  further  the  shape  of  the 
spectrum  in  the  limit  of  very  low  temperatures  where  few  phonons 
are  present.  Consider  in  particular  the  shape  of  the  high- energy  wing 
given  by  (21")  with  all  ns  =  0.  The  energies  of  the  lattice  modes  are 


RESONANCE    RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI 


181 


fujOs  with  u>s  =  (l/2)w|^(l  -  costts/N)  and  cu|g  =  4K/Ma,  according  to 
Eq.  (12).  This  type  of  frequency  spectrum  as  a  function  of  a>s  is  il- 
lustrated vertically  in  Fig.  2,  for  the  case  N  =  20.  As  a  function  of 
u>s,  or  oscillator  energy,  it  is  plotted  horizontally,  the  transfer  being 


Fig.  2.  Distribution  of  frequencies  of  the  normal  modes  of  a 

string  of  twenty  beads  (N  =  20),  showing  graphically  how 
they  bunch  at  the  high-frequency  end,  in  terms  of  the 
first  line  of  Eq.  (12).  The  lower  graph  gives  the  corre- 
sponding density  of  states  for  a  larger  value  of  N. 


made  by  means  of  the  parabola  shown.  For  the  large  values  of  N  that 
are  of  interest,  the  lines  crowd  together  in  the  extreme  cos  -  u>n>  to° 
closely  to  permit  drawing  them.  For  a  very  large  N,  the  spectrum  is 
almost  a  continuum  of  varying  density  and  the  number  of  modes  per 
unit  io  is 


182  RESONANCE     RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI 

N(cos)  =  (awg/as)"1  =  (23/2N/ncoN)(l  -  cos  77s/N)l/2/sin  (tts/N) 

=  (2N/ff«N)/[l  -  (cos/coN)2] 1/2  (22) 

Here  we  have  used  the  relation  sin  7rs/N  =  2(cos/con)[1  -  (cos/con)2]  / 
in  transforming  from  a  function  of  s  to  a  function  of  cos.  This  is 
plotted  to  show  the  comparison  with  the  horizontal  spectrum  in  the 
lower  part  of  Fig.  2. 

In  practice  the  natural  line  width  w  of  the  gamma  line  will  be 
greater  than  the  spacing  of  the  levels,  particularly  at  the  crowded 
upper  end  of  the  spectrum,  because  N  is  very  large,  and  the  intensity 
of  absorption  is  given  by  the  integral  of  (21 ")  multiplied  by  (22),  or  of 
b|N(cos)  -WsVtl  -  (cos/con)2]     ,  multiplied  further  by  the  line  shape 
and  integrated  over  the  entire  width  of  the  line.  For  qualitative  pur- 
poses it  suffices  to  square  off  the  line  shape  and  let  it  have  a  constant 
height  over  the  width  w  (on  the  scale  of  cos).  The  number  of  states 
involved,  or  the  integral  of  (22)  is  then  indicated  by  the  shaded  areas 
given  as  examples  in  the  lower  part  of  Fig.  2,  and  these  are  to  be 
multiplied  by  the  median  Wg1  to  obtain  the  relative  intensity  of  absorp- 
tion (since,  again  with  an  average  sin2  =  1/2,  we  have  b|  =  (l/2)Cf/cos, 
and  C\  is  a  common  factor). 

The  line  width  thus  blunts  the  singular  peak  of  the  function  N(cos) 
at  the  upper  limit  of  the  spectrum,  con-  The  area  of  the  shaded  region 
under  this  peak  is 

coN  w/coN 

/        dw/[l  -  (co/coN)2] V2  «  coN  !        oV(2e)1/2  =  (2coNw)1/2      (23) 
con~w  0 

The  intensity  at  the  peak  is  thus  approximately  given  by  (2w)1/2wjJ 
The  corresponding  intensity,  that  is,  the  intensity  with  the  common 
factor  (NC?/7tcon)  again  omitted  from   /b|N(cosN(cos)  dcos,  in  the  non- 

w 

singular  part  of  the  spectrum  is  w/cos[l  -  (cos/con)2]       and  the  ratio 
of  this  to  the  intensity  at  the  peak  is 

Kcos)/I(coN)  =  (w/2wN)1/2  (WN/a;s)/[l  -  (u>s/wN)2] 1/2  (24) 

Here  we  have  considered  w<^Ccon>  and  nave  called  the  peak  intensity 
I(con)>  although  in  this  treatment  the  peak  is  reached  more  exactly  at 
con  ~  U/2)w  and  the  intensity  falls  to  zero  again  at  con  +  (1/2 )w. 
These  points  are  used  in  the  sketch  of  the  ratio  (24)  shown  in  Fig.  3 
for  the  case  in  which  w  =  (1/10)con  is  rather  large.  For  a  smaller  w 
the  peak  is  obviously  narrower  and  higher,  relative  to  the  rest  of  the 
spectrum.  The  peculiar  shape  of  the  peak  is  artificial,  arising  from 


RESONANCE  RADIATION  OF  NUCLEI 


183 


Fig.  3.  Rough  sketch  of  absorption  spectrum  of  a  gamma  ray 

with  assumed  square  intrinsic  line  shape  having  a  width 
w  =  wn/10)  of  a  nucleus  in  a  one- dimensional  lattice.  The 
broken  curve  indicates  that  the  rise  toward  a  cusp  at  the 
undisplaced  line  is  steeper  at  finite  temperatures  than  at 
T  =  0. 

our  use  of  a  rectangular  line  shape.  With  the  realistic  line  shape  given 
by  Eq.  (20)  it  would  of  course  be  rounded  off  nicely. 

For  small  cjs,  much  less  than  co^,  the  spectrum  is  linear  in 
u>n/ws'  This  maY  still  apply  in  the  low  end  of  the  high-frequency  re- 
gion n  <  s  «  N.  When  we  introduce  a  small  but  finite  temperature, 
T,  with  kT<fiu>N,  there  is  a  region  of  small  ojs  with  'ha;s<kT 
wherein  there  is  a  Boltzmann  distribution  of  excitation  of  the  phonon 
quantum  numbers  ns,  and,  for  our  qualitative  discussion,  we  may  in- 
sert the  average  excitation  ns  =  kT/ncos.  Equation  (21")  with  ns  =  0 
was  used  as  a  factor  in  obtaining  (24),  and  in  the  region  of  (24)  where 
ws<a)jj,  reintroduction  of  ns  has  the  effect  of  multiplying  by  ns  +  1 
«ns.  For  small  u>s  Eq.  (24)  then  becomes 

Kws)/I(wN)  *  (kT/Ha4)(wa>N/2)1/2 


This  gives  a  steep  approach  to  a  singularity  at  cos  =  0  and  for 
w  =  (l/10)w£j,  and  kT/hu;N  =  1/2  suggests  a  curve  about  like  that 
shown  by  the  dotted  line  in  Fig.  2a,  the  peak  at  s  =  N  being  practically 
unaffected.  In  the  region  s«n  we  expect  (21")  and  thus  also  this  dot- 
ted curve  to  be  an  upper  limit.  For  a  higher  temperature,  kT>nu>N, 


184  RESONANCE    RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI 

(23)  is  also  to  be  multiplied  by  a  factor  n^-kT/ftoJN  and  thus  (24)  is 
multiplied  by  u;N/a>s,  giving 

It(wS)At(wn)  =  (w/2coN)1/2  (coN/u>s)2/[l-  (u>s/uN)2]  ^  (25) 

for  (jos<  (o>n~ w)*  Tnis  curve  is  similar  to  the  previous  one  indicated 
by  the  dotted  line  but  with  the  low  frequencies  further  enhanced. 

This  gives  us  an  idea  of  the  shape  of  the  absorption  spectrum  for 
the  one-dimensional  problem  on  the  high-energy  side,  gamma-ray  en- 
ergy having  been  absorbed  by  the  lattice  vibrations  as  well  as  by  the 
nucleus.  In  the  last  step  we  have  considered  the  temperature  high 
enough  for  us  to  consider  n  +  1  «ns.  In  this  approximation  the  emis- 
sion strength  (21 '")  is  the  same  as  the  absorption  strength  (21"),  and 
we  have  on  the  low -energy  side  a  distribution  of  approximately  the 
same  shape,  part  of  the  energy  for  the  nuclear  transition  being  sup- 
plied by  the  lattice  vibrations.  Thus,  we  expect  the  spectrum  to  con- 
sist of  two  wings,  each  with  something  like  a  peak  near  its  outer  ex- 
tremity, and  both  flanking  a  central  ' 'spike. "  The  peak  at  the  high- 
frequency  end  of  each  wing  is  probably  not  to  be  expected  to  be  so 
sharp  in  nature,  because  it  comes  at  the  frequency  where  one  cuts 
off  the  idealized  "Debye"  spectrum  of  the  crystal,  and  the  actual  cut- 
off at  high  frequencies  is  doubtless  somewhat  different,  depending  on 
details  of  the  crystal  structure. 

As  cos  decreases  below  about  (1/2)o>n,  the  intensity  rises  seem- 
ingly toward  a  cusp  at  the  center,  but  the  approximation  becomes  un- 
reliable as  the  cusp  is  approached.  If  we  take  w/w^  <  0.07,  let  us  say 
w/ojn  =  1/20  rather  than  1/10  as  above,  then  the  line  width  would 
pick  out  individual  lines  in  Fig.  2  for  small  values  of  ws,  and  for  each 
of  them  would  contribute  a  peak  to  the  absorption  spectrum,  with  a 
small  energy  shift  corresponding  to  a  one-phonon  jump  at  that  fre- 
quency cos.  If  w  spans  the  undisplaced  position  ws  =  0  on  the  scale 
of  Fig.  2,  it  gives  rise  to  the  undisplaced  peak  in  the  spectrum  corre- 
sponding to  no  phonon  jump  for  any  s.  For  this  no-phonon  transition, 
the  intensity  at  zero  temperature  is  given  by  the  term  unity  from  Eq. 
(210  for  all  s,  rather  than  to  have  (l/2)b|  from  Eq.  (21")  for  one  of 
the  s  values.  Thus,  the  intensity  of  the  peak  of  the  wing  relative  to 
that  of  the  central  peak  [according  to  both  Eq.  (23)  and  the  remark 
following  it]  is 


[(l/2)(2w/coN)1/2(NC2/7io)N)]  =  (2w/u)N)1/2-hk2/7rWNM 
*  =  Ey/fic,  this  becomes 

[(2w/wN)1/2A](Er/hwN)(Er/Mc2)«(l/2)(w/wN)V2  x  104  x  10"4 

«(l/2)(w/u)N)1/2 


RESONANCE    RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI  185 

if  we  use,  for  example,  Ey  ~  105  ev  and  "Rc^n  ~  10  ev-  Thus  the 
central  peak  becomes  relatively  rather  high  as  the  line  becomes  nar- 
row. The  suppression  of  this  peak  at  higher  temperatures  is  dis- 
cussed in  the  next  section.  The  line  is  undisplaced  by  recoil.  This  is 
possible  (despite  the  physical  expectation  that  the  crystal  should  re- 
coil as  a  whole)  because  in  the  Fourier  analysis  (1)  it  is  assumed  that 
the  ends  of  the  string  are  fixed. 

This  simple  remark  about  the  height  of  the  central  peak  only  ap- 
plies, however,  if  the  springs  are  stiff  enough  so  the  zero-phonon 
transition  may  be  evaluated  by  Eq.  (21')  for  all  s  values  down  to 
s  =  1,  that  is,  that  the  dividing  line  between  Dx  and  D2  becomes  n  =  1 
and  that  none  of  the  factors  fall  into  Dx.  This  requires  that  b\  be 
considerably  less  than  unity.  For  a  string  of  beads  Nws  =  soj^,  and 
b|  may  accordingly  be  written  in  two  ways,  b|  =1ik2/sMwjsj  or 
b|  =-nk2/NMu>s.  The  requirement  b2  =  "nk2/Ma>N  <  1  *s  verY  nearly 
satisfied  by  the  sample  numbers  (104  x  10" 4)  given  above.  If  it  is  not 
satisfied  for  s  =  1  but  the  corresponding  requirement  is  satisfied  for 
s  =  2,  that  is,  if  b^  1,  or  only  slightly  less,  and  b2  is  well  below 
unity,  then  Dx  contains  a  factor  for  s  =  1  and  D2  contains  no-phonon- 
transition  factors  about  equal  to  unity  for  all  values  of  s. 

This  provides  a  simple  illustration  with  small  quantum  numbers, 
similar  to  the  more  general  discussion  above  of  Eq.  (20')  for  large 
quantum  numbers.  Even  here  in  this  simple  case  we  have  the  compli- 
cation that  Dxcan  have  a  value  not  only  for  the  one-phonon  jump  but 
also  for  the  sever al-phonon  jumps  of  nlf  from  0  to  several  values  of 
nx .  We  may  simply  evaluate  the  first  few  transition  probabilities  D2 
by  explicit  use  of  the  normalized  Hermite  polynomials. 

Ho  =  V V*  H2(|)  =  21/27r-V4(|2  _  1/2) 

H^)  =  21/2iT1/<l  I  HgU)  =  3"  V2  ^-1/4(2^2 -3|) 

From  Eq.  (20')  we  have 

IDjI  =  e-U/2)b?  i/h^,  [,  .  (i/2)ibl]  e""2  dr?|2 

and  find  that  the  successive  transition  probabilities  for  the  zero-, 

_(1  /2)b2 
one-,  two-,  and  three-phonon  jumps  are  e  1  multiplied  by 

1,  (l/2)b2,  (l/2)(b2/2)2,  and  (l/3)(b2/2)3,  respectively.    This  is  again 

a  question  of  obtaining  an  approximate  match  between  the  peri- 

odicity  of  e       s     and  of  Hng,(£)  so  as  to  destroy  as  effectively  as 
possible  the  orthogonality  between  the  latter  and  H0.  For  bx=  1,  we 
see  that  the  strongest  peak  of  the  spectrum  is  still  at  the  undisplaced 
position;  then,  half  as  strong  as  that,  there  is  the  one-phonon  peaK  at 
the  s  =  1  position  in  the  sequence  of  Fig.  2,  and  then,  one- eighth  as 


186  RESONANCE    RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI 


strong,  there  is  the  two-phonon  peak,  which  happens  to  be  near  the 
s  =  2   line  in  Fig.  2  because  the  lines  are  almost  equally  spaced.  With 
h\  =  2,  the  zero-phonon  peak  is  reduced  to  equality  with  the  one-pho- 
non  peak  and,  as  bx  increases,  the  highest  intensity  moves  further  out 
through  several  phonons.  As  the  spring  grows  weaker  and  bx  increases 
further,  the  other  modes  s  =  2,  3,  etc.,  start  to  contribute  to  the  inten- 

_(l/2)b2 
sity  of  the  "wings"  in  a  similar  fashion  and  their  factors  e  s 

for  the  no-s-phonon  jump  further  detract  from  the  intensity  of  the 
zero-phonon  peak. 

Thus,  in  this  very  simple  system  we  see  with  especial  clarity  that 
we  first  start  to  get  phonon  excitation  to  detract  from  the  intensity  of 
the  central  peak  when  the  originally  very  stiff  springs  become  weak 
enough  to  satisfy  the  condition  b^»  1.  The  momentum  carried  away 
by  the  y-ray  is  fik,  and  this  condition  (see  previous  page)  may  be 
written  either  as 

(tik)2/2NM  =  (1/2)110)! 
or  in  the  form 

(fik)2/2M  =  (l/2)ficoN 

The  first  form  suggests  that  we  have  the  proper  "impedance 
match"  when  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  recoil  (provided  the  recoil  mo- 
mentum is  divided  among  all  the  N  atoms  which  move  in  phase  with 
each  other  in  the  first  vibrational  mode)  is  about  equal  to  the  kinetic 
energy  involved  in  the  one-quantum  excitation  of  this  mode.  (The 
specification  of  kinetic  energy  is  here  not  essential,  for  there  are 
still  factors  2  floating  around  depending  on  such  details  as  whether 
or  not  nucleus  R  is  at  the  middle  of  the  string,  R  =  (1/2)N,  to  give  it 
maximum  "leverage"  for  this  and  other  odd  modes.)  This  is  perhaps 
the  most  graphic  physical  explanation  of  the  sharp  central  peak:  when 
the  y-ray  momentum  is  less  than  enough  to  supply  this  collective  mo- 
tion of  the  atoms  in  the  middle  relative  to  the  ends  of  the  string,  there 
is  apt  to  be  no  phonon  excitation. 

In  our  simple  model,  with  the  ends  of  the  string  fixed,  the  central 
peak  is  undisplaced  by  recoil.  In  a  more  realistic  model,  we  could 
merely  constrain  the  end  atoms  (by  a  light  frame)  to  remain  a  fixed 
distance  apart  and  to  conserve  total  momentum.  The  central  peak 
would  then  be  slightly  displaced  by  recoil  of  the  whole  system  and  the 
s  =  1  line  would  be  further  displaced  by  this  additional  recoil  [if 
R^  (1/2)N]    arising  from  excitation  of  the  first  one-phonon  jump. 

The  second  form  of  the  condition  shows  that  the  recoil  momentum 
of  the  free  nucleus,  not  shared  with  any  others,  corresponds  to  an  en- 
ergy about  great  enough  to  excite  even  the  highest-frequency  mode  of 
vibration.  The  interesting  fact  is  that  high-frequency  modes  are  nev- 
ertheless not  excited.  One  might  say  that  there  is  an  impedance  mis- 


RESONANCE     RADIATION    OF     NUCLEI  187 


match,  or  that  there  is  no  way  for  a  gradual  transfer  of  momentum  to 
the  vibratory  system  via  nucleus  R  to  excite  the  various  nuclei  in 
their  high-frequency  motions  with  contrary  phases.  If  nucleus  R 
should  shoot  off  a  bullet  with  this  much  momentum  at  a  given  time, 
classically,  for  any  finite  stiffness  of  spring,  the  nucleus  and  bullet 
act  as  an  isolated  system  with  no  time  for  transfer  of  momentum  to 
them  during  the  instant  of  ejection.  The  full  free  recoil  of  the  nucleus 
would  be  detracted  from  the  energy  of  the  bullet,  and  the  energy  of  re- 
coil would  first  excite  a  localized  traveling  wave  packet  which  could 
then  be  expanded  in  terms  of  various  fairly  high  frequency  vibrational 
modes  with  specified  phases.  If  the  y  ray  we  have  discussed  were 
emitted  at  a  given  instant,  this  energy  would  be  sufficient  to  excite  a 
localized  wave  of  much  higher  amplitude  than  the  one -quantum  ampli- 
tude of  o>n-  Corresponding  to  the  expansion  of  the  localized  wave, 
there  should  be  perhaps  a  one-  or  several-quantum  excitation  of  a 
few  of  the  moderately  high  frequency  waves.    Such  excitation  does  not 
occur  with  y-ray  emission  because  the  emission  does  not  take  place 
at  a  given  time.  Instead,  it  takes  place  at  an  unknown  time  with  a  prob- 
ability which  builds  up  very  gradually  in  a  coherent  manner  as  we  have 
seen  in  Eqs.  (19)  and  (20),  and,  in  the  case  discussed,  it  may  either 
excite  a  low-frequency  phonon  or  none  at  all. 

Discussion  of  the  Approximation  in  Expanding  the  Exponentials 

The  insufficiency  of  the  approximation  in  expanding  exponentials 
is  apparent  in  the  possibility  that  the  diagonal  element,  Eq.  (210,  may 
go  negative  even  with  all  the  ns  =  0,  and  a  fortiori  at  a  higher  tem- 
perature. In  one  dimension,  if  we  use  the  approximation  and  constants  of 
Eq.  (160,  we  have 

N 
(1/2)7]  b| «  (3/4)  /(ds/s)  =  (3/4)  In  N  >  1  (26) 

s  0 

Here  we  have  used  a  factor  1/2  from  a  mean  value  of  sin2  (Rs/N)  of 
Eq.  (16).  In  three  dimensions  the  corresponding  sum  is 

N 
(1/2)  £  b|tu  «  (3/4N2)(tt/2)  /    (p2dp/p)  =  Sir/16 
stu  0 

p2  =  g2  +  t2  +  u2  (26/) 

which  is  still  of  order  unity,  although  the  importance  of  the  long 
waves  has  been  suppressed.  We  should  therefore  examine  the  expan- 
sion of  the  exponentials  more  carefully. 

In  place  of  the  square  bracket  representing  the  high-frequency 
modes  toward  the  end  of  Eq.  (16),  we  may  write  a  product  of  expo- 


188  RESONANCE     RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI 

nentials  and  for  its  matrix  element  in  place  of  Eq.  (21)  we  may  write 

|D2|2~<nn-4j|elbs^s  |nn...nN>|2=|    n    <n^|  elbs^  |  ns>|2 

s^n 

*  |n<n's  |1  +  ibs|s  -  (l/2)b2s||  -  |ns>|2 

=  |n[l+ibs<n's|£s|ns>-  (l/2)b|<n^||2|  ns>-]|2    (27) 

Considering  now  only  the  diagonal  element,  ng  =  ns,  we  have  matrix 
elements  of  only  the  even  powers  of  £,  as  follows: 

|ns[l-(l/2)b2s<ns|4||ns>+  (l/4!)<ns||||ns>+  -]|2        (28) 

This  product  is  of  the  form 

ns(l  +  es)  =  1  +  ^s  +  £s*tes£t/2!  +  ^r*  s*  t  erEset/3!  '" 
which  differs  from  the  exponential 

e£es  =  1  +  Lzs  +  (Les)2/2\  +  (Ees)3/3!  ••• 

only  by  about  N  of  the  N2  terms  in  e|  and  by  about  N2  of  the  terms 
in  s|,  etc.,  leaving  us  one  order  better  off  than  one  might  otherwise 
expect.  We  can  now  in  this  approximation  put 


|D2|  =  e-Z]b2s<ns|l2s|ns>  +  (2/4!)Z:b4s<ns|l||ns>+  •■ 
„    -£b2s<ns|42s|ns>_     -£(ns  +  l/2)b| 


(29) 


This  replaces  Eq.  (21')  and  is  clearly  more  satisfactory  in  that  it  in- 
dicates a  gradual  reduction  of  the  intensity  of  the  central  peak  to  zero 
as  the  sum  increases. 


Shape  of  the  Wings  in  One  and  Three  Dimensions 

The  derivation  is  slightly  modified  for  two  or  three  dimensions. 
We  are  of  course  interested  in  three,  but  shall  write  the  equations  in 
two  dimensions  for  the  sake  of  economy  of  symbols.  Each  component 
of  the  vector  displacement  of  atom  qr  can  be  described  in  normal  co- 
ordinates, but  we  shall  write  only  the  x  component  of  such  a  displace- 
ment.  (The  Lagrangian  also  contains  the  other  components  independ- 
ently.) The  force  constant  between  adjacent  atoms,  owing  to  a  relative 
displacement  in  the  x  direction,  is  a  longitudinal  force  constant,  K, 
if  they  are  neighbors  in  the  x  direction,  a  transverse  one,  Ktransv 


RESONANCE     RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI  189 

=  fK,  if  they  are  neighbors  in  the  y  direction.  The  Lagrangian  is 

£  =  (M/2)  L*?qr  -  (K/2a)  L  [(xq+  1§  r  -  xq>r)2  +  i(xq>r  +  1  -  xq>r)2 

=  (M/2)  £q|t-  (K/a)Z!q2t{[l  -  cos(tts/N)]  +f[l  -  cosfrt/N)]} 

(20 
where 

xqr  =  (2/N)1^2  ]T   qst  sin  (qsir/N)  sin  (rtir/N)  v  =  2 

st 

Taken  for  all  lattice  points  qr,  this  is  a  wave  of  x  displacement  hav- 
ing q  nodes  in  the  x  dimension  and  r  nodes  in  the  y  dimension.  The 
frequency  of  a  normal  mode  is  given  by 

w|t  =  (2K/Ma){[l  -  cos  (tts/N)]  +  f[l  -  cos  (?rt/N)]} 
«  (K/Ma)(7r/N)2  (s2  +  ft2) 
The  perturbation  term   3C'  contains  a  factor  [see  Eq.  (16)] 
eikxQR  =  nsteibst*st 
bst  =  (2/N)*^2  (VMwst)V2k  sin(qs7r/N)  sin  (rt7r/N)  (16") 


or,  averaged  over  the  factors  sin2«  (1/2),  in  the  neighborhood  of  a 
given  st, 

Wt  =  N-"  (ii/Mwst)  k2  »  (3/2N^  "  V(s2  +  ft2)1/2 

or,  in  three  dimensions, 

b|  tu  =  (3/2N2)/[s2  +  f  (t2  +  u2)] 1/2  (16"') 

In  three  dimensions,  the  number  of  modes  with  cust  between  wand 
it)  +  doois  N(co)  dw,  with 

N(w)  =  (N3/27r2)(Ma/K)3/2co2  (30) 

for  the  simple  extreme  case  f  =  1.  For  the  other  extreme,  f  =  0  (no 
shear  strength),  we  have  instead 

N(w)  =  (NA)(Ma/K)1/2  (220 

independent  of  u>,  just  as  in  the  one-dimensional  case.  For  f  =  I,  the 


190 


RESONANCE     RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI 


shape  of  the  wings  (in  the  lower-frequency  part  of  the  spectrum)  is 
given  by 


[ns  +  (l/2)]b2sN(ws) 


to). 


ns  =  ° 


const.,  ns  +  l/2«ns=  kT/nws    (24') 


as  indicated  by  the  broken  line  and  the  solid  line,  respectively,  in 
Fig.  4. 


Fig.  4.  Spectrum  for  a  three-dimensional  lattice.  The  outer  peak 

corresponds  to  the  upper  limit  of  the  (oversimplified  Debye) 
spectrum  for  compression  waves,  the  peak  at  fcojsj  similarly 
corresponds  to  the  upper  limit  for  shear  waves. 


Here  we  see  the  real  source  of  the  difference  between  the  behavior 
in  one  and  in  three  dimensions.   In  one  dimension,  there  is  a  low- 
frequency  divergence  in  the  shape  of  the  absorption  wing.  The  same  is 
true  in  three  dimensions  without  a  consideration  of  shear  strength.  In 
the  latter  case  one  has  justification  for  the  intuitive  feeling  that  the 
problem  is  mainly  one-dimensional  in  its  essence,  because  the  photon 
excites  vibratory  motion  along  its  direction  of  incidence.  However,  in 
three  dimensions  with  shear  strength  taken  into  account,  the  frequency 
of  this  longitudinal  vibration  of  the  absorbing  atom  is  affected  by  the 
transverse  variation  of  the  wave  amplitude.  There  are  so  many  possi- 
ble wave  numbers  in  the  two  transverse  dimensions  that  there  are 
many  more  high-frequency  than  low-frequency  modes.  Thus,  the  low 
frequencies  are  effectively  suppressed,  and  the  shape  of  the  wing, 


RESONANCE     RADIATION    OF     NUCLEI  191 

rather  than  going  up  as  Wg1  as  the  central  spike  is  approached,  is 
linear  in  ws  at  zero  temperature.  For  finite  temperature,  it  is  con- 
stant over  the  low -frequency  part  of  the  spectrum  for  three  dimen- 
sions with  shear  strength,  as  compared  with  the  ws2   dependence  for 
one  dimension. 

Meaning  of  the  Sharp  Peak 

Perhaps  the  greatest  surprise  that  one  encounters  when  thinking 
intuitively  about  the  dynamics  of  the  crystal  motion  is  that  there  can 
exist  such  a  very  sharply  defined  component  of  the  absorption  as  the 
central  spike,  so  nearly  exactly  at  its  undisplaced  position,  in  spite 
of  the  complexity  of  the  motion  of  the  absorbing  nucleus  and  in  spite 
of  the  normal  process  of  recoil,  which  for  a  free  atom  gives  a  very 
appreciable  Doppler  shift.  Between  free  nuclei  the  recoil  Doppler 
shift  is  quite  enough  to  throw  them  out  of  resonance,  unless  they  have 
an  initial  velocity  toward  each  other  to  compensate,  whereas  between 
the  nuclei  in  solids  of  Mossbauer's  experiments  the  resonance  is 
quite  exact  when  the  solid  bodies  are  at  rest,  and  is  destroyed  by  a 
relative  velocity  of  a  few  centimeters  per  second  in  either  direction. 

In  this  analysis  we  see  how  it  is  possible,  in  principle,  for  the  cen- 
tral line  to  be  quite  sharp  and  almost  undisplaced,  even  in  the  pres- 
ence of  a  considerable  amount  of  excitation  of  the  lattice  vibrations. 
The  sharpness  is  a  typical  quantum  effect,  like  the  sharpness  of 
atomic  spectral  lines  that  was  not  expected  classically.  It  arises 
from  the  fact  that  the  crystal  vibrations  are  quantized  and  that  they 
may  not  receive  an  arbitrarily  small  amount  of  excitation  energy  ex- 
cept in  arbitrarily  large  wavelength.  There  is  indeed  a  small  broad- 
ening and  shift  due  to  the  long  waves.  If  the  process  of  gamma  ab- 
sorption or  emission  were  to  be  thought  of  as  a  completely  sudden 
process,  giving  the  nucleus  a  sudden  kick  in  a  time  much  shorter  than 
a  lattice  vibration,  one  would  expect  this  impulsive  initial  motion  to 
show  up  as  a  recoil  Doppler  shift,  as  it  does  in  a  free  atom,  and  sub- 
sequently to  have  its  energy  divided  between  the  various  lattice  modes 
in  a  manner  equivalent  to  a  Fourier  analysis  of  the  impulsive  velocity. 
Actually,  as  we  see  in  the  theory,  the  possibility  of  transition  is  not 
determined  merely  by  the  energy  and  instantaneous  momentum  bal- 
ance, but  rather  the  probability  of  transition  is  built  up  by  integration 
over  the  mean  life  of  the  nuclear  state  involved.  This  is  time  enough 
for  ample  transfer  of  momentum  between  the  nucleus  and  the  lattice 
by  way  of  the  forces  involved  in  the  lattice  vibrations.  In  some  cases, 
the  recoil  momentum  is  divided  equally  between  all  the  atoms  of  the 
crystal,  with  no  phonon  excitation,  and  the  corresponding  contribution 
to  the  sharp  line  is  practically  undisplaced  by  recoil.  With  phonons 
initially  excited  and  the  radiating  nucleus  thus  in  a  vibrational  motion, 
the  transition  involving  no  additional  phonon  excitation  continues  to 


192  RESONANCE     RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI 

occur.  For  this  transition,  the  to-and-fro  motion  of  the  radiating  nu- 
cleus does  not  make  any  Doppler  contribution  to  the  character  of  the 
radiation,  even  though  it  would  classically. f    This  is  exactly  analogous 
to  the  fact  that  the  to-and-fro  motion  on  the  charge  on  an  electron  in 
a  Bohr  orbit  does  not  contribute  to  the  radiation  without  a  quantum 
jump,  even  though  it  would  contribute  classically.  For  high  phonon 
quantum  numbers,  the  one-phonon  transition  between  states  of  the  vi- 
brational motion  should  correspond  to  a  classical  result,  just  as  the 
An  =  1  quantum  jump  does  in  the  more  familiar  correspondence- 
principle  discussion  of  the  radiation  from  large  Bohr  orbits.  As  the 
temperature  is  raised  well  above  zero,  the  wings  we  have  described 
thus  have  a  close  correspondence  to  the  classical  "side  bands"  from 
a  moving  source.    As  in  the  classical  case,  the  wings  merely  detract 


f  The  classical  Doppler  contribution  due  to  a  sinusoidal  motion 
x  =  a  sin  com  t  of  a  radiating  source  is  in  the  form  of  weak  "side 
bands."  These  one  obtains  analytically  from  the  Doppler -shifted  fre- 
quency co(t)  =  co0[l  +  (act)m/c)  cos  comt]  in  the  expression  exp  (i  /  o>  dt) 
by  simply  treating  act>m/c  as  small  in  expanding  the  exponential  and 
by  expressing  sin  u>mt  in  terms  of  exponentials.  In  physical  terms, 
the  appearance  of  a  strong  central  line  o>0  flanked  by  weak  lines  at 
u)Q  ±  com  may  be  understood  by  thinking  of  the  effect  of  this  slightly 
varying  co(t)  on  a  tuned  detector.  At  the  end  of  a  swing,  co(t)  becomes 
instantaneously  stationary  at  co0  ±  ojm  and  comes  back  in  phase  at  this 
frequency  at  the  end  of  the  following  swing,  so  that  a  detector  will  re- 
spond to  these  frequencies.  Now  consider  a  detector  tuned  to  oj0.  If  it 
is  in  phase  with  the  signal  just  when  co(t)  =  cu0  and  if  co(t)>  co0  for  the 
next  half- cycle,  then  the  signal  will  gradually  get  ahead  of  the  detec- 
tor in  phase  during  this  half- cycle.  If  the  cycle  is  short  enough  so  that 
the  phase  lead  remains  less  than  tt/4,  there  will  be  no  destructive  in- 
terference (and,  if  less  than  tt/2,  there  will  still  be  a  preponderance 
of  constructive  interference).  The  unique  feature  of  w0  is  that  for  it 
alone  this  advance  in  phase  will  be  exactly  compensated  for  by  the  re- 
tardation in  the  following  half-cycle,  so  that  the  response  will  con- 
tinue to  build  up,  being  fed  by  most  of  each  later  cycle  and  giving  a 
strong  line.  The  condition  that  the  phase  lead  remain  less  than  7r/4  is 
a<7rc/4w0  =  A/2.  The  y-ray  wavelength  A  =  (h/mc2)(mc2/137E  J  is 
much  smaller  than  the  atomic  unit  of  distance  h/mc2,  and  the  inten- 
sity of  the  central  line  dies  away  as  the  vibrations  of  the  atoms  in  the 
crystal  attain  an  amplitude  larger  than  A.  The  corresponding  condi- 
tion for  zigzag  motion  over  a  distance  a  is  a  <  A/4.  This  may  be  un- 
derstood from  the  picture  used  in  the  usual  graphic  explanation  of  the 
Doppler  shift,  showing  an  original  wave  train  and  one  compressed  into 
a  shorter  space  by  the  motion  of  the  source.  The  detector  tuned  to  re- 
ceive the  uncompressed  wave  receives  the  compressed  wave  instead. 


RESONANCE    RADIATION    OF    NUCLEI  193 

from  the  intensity  of  the  central  line  and  do  not  widen  it  except,  even- 
tually, by  making  it  disappear  in  the  wider  background  as  the  proba- 
bilities of  phonon  transitions  increase  with  the  pre -excitation  of  many 
modes. 

Acknowledgments 

I  am  indebted  to  Dr.  Maria  G.  Mayer  and  Dr.  H.  J.  Lipkin,  partic- 
ularly for  discussion  of  the  situation  with  three  dimensions  and  of  the 
improved  expansion  of  the  exponentials,  also  to  Dr.  John  Schiffer  for 
informing  me  of  the  experimental  phenomenon. 


194 


Resonance  Absorption  of  Nuclear  Gamma  Rays  and  the  Dynamics 
of  Atomic  Motions* 

K.    S.    SlNGWI   AND   A.    SjOLANDER 

Argonne  National  Laboratory,  Argonne,  Illinois 
(Received  June  13,  1960) 


The  theory  of  resonance  absorption  of  nuclear  y  rays  is  generalized  for  an  arbitrary  system  of  interacting 
particles  by  expressing  the  relevant  transition  probability  in  terms  of  a  space-time  self-correlation  function ; 
and  thus  relating  the  resonance  line  shape  to  the  incoherent  differential  scattering  cross  section  for  slow  neu- 
trons. Two  limiting  cases :  (i)  a  gas  and  (ii)  a  solid  have  been  considered.  Discussion  regarding  the  justifica- 
tion of  the  use  of  a  classical  self -diffusion  function  for  a  liquid  is  given  and  expressions  for  the  broadening  of 
the  resonance  line  due  to  diffusive  motions  of  the  atoms  of  the  interacting  system  are  derived.  It  is  suggested 
how  Mdssbauer-type  experiment  could  be  used  to  give  information  regarding  the  diffusive  motions  of  atoms 
in  a  solid  and  also,  under  more  favorable  circumstances,  in  a  liquid. 


INTRODUCTION 

THE  observation  by  Mossbauer1  that  nuclear  y 
rays  can  be  resonantly  absorbed  or  scattered  by 
nuclei  bound  in  a  crystal  lattice  has  recently  led  to  some 
very  interesting  applications2  and  holds  promise  for 
more  applications  particularly  in  the  field  of  solid-state 
physics.  Mossbauer's  observation  rests  on  the  fact  that 
in  the  case  of  a  nucleus  bound  in  a  crystal,  a  y  ray  can 
be  emitted  or  absorbed  without  any  energy  transfer  to 
and  from  the  lattice.  The  probability  of  such  a  recoilless 
transition  is,  in  most  cases,  small  and  is  governed  by  the 
usual  Debye- Waller  factor,  familiar  in  the  theory  of 
x  ray  and  neutron  scattering.  Mossbauer  explained  his 
experimental  results  on  the  basis  of  a  theory  due  to 
Lamb3  for  the  Doppler  broadening  of  neutron  absorp- 
tion resonance.  Both  in  the  theory  of  neutron  and  y- 
ray  resonance  absorption  the  relevant  matrix  element 
corresponding  to  a  transition  of  the  crystal  lattice  from 
one  state  to  the  other  is  the  same. 

The  purpose  of  this  paper  is  two-fold :  one  is  to  gen- 
eralize the  theory  for  an  arbitrary  system  of  interacting 
particles  by  expressing  the  transition  probability  in 
terms  of  a  space-time  self-correlation  function,  which  as 
is  well  known,  determines  the  incoherent  scattering  for 
slow  neutrons;  and  the  second  is  to  show  how  Moss- 
bauer technique  can  be  used  to  gain  information  con- 
cerning the  nature  of  diffusive  motions  of  atoms  in  a 
solid  and  also,  under  more  favorable  circumstances,  in 
a  liquid.  The  cross  section  for  7-ray  resonance  absorp- 
tion in  the  case  of  a  gas  (Bethe  Placzek  formula  in  the 
case  of  neutrons)  and  in  the  case  of  a  solid,  in  the  limit 
of  both  weak  and  strong  binding  (two  limiting  cases 
of  Lamb's  theory  in  the  case  of  neutrons),  follows  very 
simply  from  one  general  formula.   Furthermore,   the 


*  Based  on  work  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the  U.  S. 
Atomic  Energy  Commission. 

■R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Physik  151,  124  (1958):  Naturwissen- 
schaften  45,  538  (1958);  Z.  Naturforsch  14a,  211  (1959). 

2  During  the  last  year  and  this  year  a  number  of  communica- 
tions concerning  the  Mossbauer  effect  and  its  various  applications 
have  appeared  in  the  Physical  Review  Letters  to  which  the  reader 
is  referred. 

» W.  E.  Lamb,  Phys.  Rev.  55,  190  (1939). 


generalized  formula  can  be  of  great  help  in  more 
complicated  systems  as  for  instance  liquids,  where  it  is 
difficult  to  treat  the  dynamics  of  atomic  motions  in 
detail. 

MATHEMATICAL  FORMULATION 

We  are  interested  in  calculating  the  probability  of 
absorption  or  emission  of  a  7  ray  of  momentum  p  by  a 
single  nucleus  of  an  interacting  system  (say  solid  or 
liquid)  such  that  the  nucleus  makes  a  transition  from  a 
state  A  to  a  state  B  and  at  the  same  time  the  interacting 
system  makes  a  transition  from  a  state,  say  |  nO)  to  a 
state  I  n).  Since  the  interaction  within  a  nucleus  is  much 
stronger  than  that  between  two  nuclei,  the  total  wave 
function  can  be  written  as  a  product  of  wave  functions 
one  of  which  depends  only  on  the  coordinates  of  the 
centers  of  masses  of  different  nuclei  and  the  other  de- 
pends on  the  coordinates  of  the  nucleons  relative  to  the 
centers  of  masses  of  their  respective  nuclei.  The  transi- 
tion matrix  element,  corresponding  to  the  absorption  of 
a  photon,  can  be  written  as  (Bn\H'\nOAp),  where  H' 
represents  the  interaction  between  the  radiation  field 
and  the  nucleus  and  has  the  following  form : 

H'=Y,ica9  exp (ip •  ti/h) 

=  exp(z'p-  Ra/h)  H«  cap  exppp-  (r,—  Ra)/A]. 

c  is  a  constant  depending  on  p,  av  is  the  annihilation 
operator  for  a  photon  with  momentum  p,  r,  is  the  co- 
ordinate of  a  nucleon  of  the  nucleus  a,  and  Ra  is  the 
coordinate  of  the  center  of  mass  of  the  nucleus.  The 
interaction  operator  H'  is  thus  a  product  of  two  terms, 
one  of  which  depends  only  on  the  coordinates  of  the 
nucleons  relative  to  their  center  of  mass  and  the  other 
depends  only  on  the  coordinates  of  the  center  of  mass. 
Thus  the  matrix  element  of  the  transition  is  a  product 
of  two  matrix  elements,  one  of  which  corresponds  to  the 
change  in  the  internal  state  of  the  nucleus  and  the 
other  is  («|exp(ip-Ro/Ai)|«0),  corresponding  to  a 
change  in  the  state  of  the  collective  motions  of  the 
centers  of  masses.  The  first  matrix  element  is  just  a 
constant  for  our  purpose,  and  it  is  the  second  one  with 
which  we  shall  be  mainly  concerned  here.  It  then  follows 


1093 


195 


1094 


K.     S.     SINGWI     AND    A.    SJOLANDER 


from  the  usual  dispersion  theory4  that  the  absorption  and   |»0)  of  the  interacting  system,  T  is  the  natural 

cross  section  per  nucleus  for  a  y  ray  of  energy  E  is  width  of  the  excited  state  of  the  nucleus  and  gn0  is  the 

given  by  statistical  weight  factor  for  the  state  |«0).  In  Eq.  (1) 

<r0r2               I (n I exp (ip •  R/h)  \n0)\2  tne  nuclear  width  T  has  been  assumed  to  be  independent 

aa{E)  = E  gno ,     (1)  0I  tne  state  |  n).  Also  the  suffix  a  in  R  has  been  omitted. 

4    n.Tto       (E0— E+en—  eno)2+r2/4  The  constant  before  the  summation  sign  has  been  so 

chosen   that  aa(E)   goes  over  to   the  familiar  Breit- 

where  Eo  is  the  energy  difference  between  the  final  and  Wigner  formula  for  a  fixed  nucleus,  a0  being  the  reso- 

the  initial  nuclear  states  of  the  absorbing  nucleus,  t„  nance  absorption  cross  section. 

and  e„o  are,  respectively,  the  energies  of  the  states  \n)  Now  Eq.  (1)  can  be  written  as  follows: 


<Ta(E)- 


r0r2 


4 

cr0r2  i 

4 


E  g„o|<n|exp(ip-R/ft) 


«0)|2f 


«[>-(e»-e»o)/ft] 


dp 


(E-E0-hPy+T*/4: 
—  f  dt{Z  ^o|<n|exp(iP-RA)KO>|2expP/(6n-eno)/^]} 
exp(-i*p) 


-dp 


J_.  (E-E0-hp)2+T*/4 
= —  I     txpl~U(E-Eo)/h-  (T/2h)  \t\Jdt 
X[ E  gno(nO\ exp(-ip- H/h+itH/h) \ n)(n\exp(ip-R/h-itH/h) \ «0>] 

n,n0 

<r0r  /•* 
= —  I     exp[-t7(£-£o)/*-r/2*|  /|  ]<exp[-*p-  R(0)/»]  exppp-  R(/)/*]>t*, 
4A  •/  _ 


(2) 


where  R(*)  is  the  Heisenberg  operator  denned  by 

R(0  =  exp(afl/ft)R  exp(-UH/h). 

H  being  the  Hamiltonian  of  the  interacting  system,  and 
<•  •  -)T  means  both  the  quantum  mechanical  and  the 
statistical  average  at  temperature  T.  We  shall  here 
restrict  ourselves  to  a  system  for  which  Boltzmann 
statistics  is  applicable.  In  the  above  derivation  the 
Fourier  representation  of  the  8  function  and  the  identity 
En|»)(»|  =1  have  been  used.  We  now  define  a  func- 
tion G,(x,t)  through  the  following  equation 

(expd-ip-  R(0)/ft]  exppp-  R(fl/*]>r 


/ 


exp(tp-r/ft)G,(r,/)<Zr.     (3) 


The  inversion  then  gives 

G,{tfy-  (It)-3  f  exp(-tp-r/ft) 

X(exp[-ip-  R(0)/*]  exppp-  R{t)/K])Td(?/h) 

=  ^Jjr'5[r+R(0)-r']5[r'-R(/)])  .  (4) 

4  W.  Heitler,  The  Quantum  Theory  of  Radiation  (Oxford  Uni- 
versity Press,  New  York,  1944),  2nd  ed.,  p.  110. 


For  t=Q,  G,(r,0)  =  5(r).  G,(t,t)  describes  the  correlation 
between  the  position  of  one  and  the  same  particle  at 
different  times.  It  gives,  in  the  classical  case,  the  proba- 
bility of  finding  a  particle  at  time  /  at  position  r,  if  the 
same  particle  was  at  the  origin  at  time  t=0.  The 
interpretation  of  this  function  is  not  quite  clear  in  a 
quantum  mechanical  treatment  and  is  discussed  in  the 
Appendix.  Van  Hove6  has  discussed  the  G,(r,t)  func- 
tion in  detail  and  we  shall  refer  to  his  original  paper. 
From  (2)  and  (3)  we  have 


,(£)  = 


cor  r 

—  I   expp(K-r-c 

4h  J 


*)-(T/2ft)|*|] 

XG,(i,t)dTdt,     (5) 
where  hw=E—Eo,  #tc=  p. 

As  shown  by  Van  Hove,5  the  incoherent  differential 
scattering  cross  section  for  slow  neutrons  is  propor- 
tional to  the  integral  in  (5)  with  T=0.  In  Lamb's 
theory,3  the  probability  of  resonance  absorption  of 
neutrons  of  energy  E  is  also  given  by  Eq.  (1)  besides  a 
constant  factor  and  is,  therefore,  proportional  to  the 
integral  in  (5).  Thus  the  relevant  term  in  the  cross  sec- 
tion for  all  the  three  processes — resonance  absorption 
of  neutron  and  y  rays  by  nuclei  and  neutron  scattering 
(with  T  =  0)  is  given  by  an  expression  of  the  type  (5). 
We  shall  see  in  the  sequel  that  the  cross  section  for  the 


'L.  Van  Hove,  Phys.  Rev.  95,  249   (1954).  See  also  R.  J. 
Glauber,  Phys.  Rev.  98,  1092  (1955). 


196 


RESONANCE    ABSORPTION     OF     NUCLEAR    GAMMA     RAYS 


1095 


resonance  absorption  of  y  rays  by  nuclei  whether  in  a 
gas  or  bound  in  a  solid  or  a  liquid  will  follow  from  (5) 
depending  on  the  explicit  form  of  Ge(r,t).  It  is  possible 
to  calculate  the  function  G,(T,i)  rigorously  in  the  case 
of  a  Maxwellian  gas  and  in  the  case  of  a  solid  in  the 
harmonic  approximation  but  it  is  not  possible  to  do  so 
in  the  case  of  a  liquid.  Nevertheless,  in  the  latter  case 
one  could  use  in  an  approximate  way  the  classical  form 
of  G,(r,t)  ;  e.g.,  the  solution  of  the  usual  diffusion  equa- 
tion or  better  the  solution  of  Langevin's  equation  for 
Brownian  motion.  The  behavior  of  G,(r,t)  for  very 
small  and  very  large  times  is  known  and  for  inter- 
mediate values  of  the  time  one  could  try  different  forms 
of  G,(r,t)  so  as  to  fit  the  experimental  data.  Thus,  a 
general  formulation  of  the  absorption  probability  (the 
same  holds  for  emission)  in  terms  of  the  self-correlation 
function  G,{x,t)  as  expressed  by  Eq.  (5),  has  a  definite 
advantage. 

It  has  been  shown  by  Van  Hove6  that  the  self- 
correlation  function  in  the  case  of  a  gas  or  a  solid  (cubic 
symmetric  crystals)  has  the  general  form 


Ga{r,t)  =  [2m{t)-]-%  exp[-rV2T(/)]. 


(6) 


There  is  no  obvious  reason  to  believe  that  in  the  case 
of  a  liquid  Ga(r,t)  has  also  the  above  general  form.  It 
seems,  however,  reasonable  to  assume  that  (6)  is  a 
good  approximation  for  a  liquid  too.  We  know  that  it  is 
correct  for  small  as  well  as  large  times. 

The  probability  we{E)  for  the  emission  of  a  y  ray  is 
also  given  by  Eq.  (1)  except  that  the  signs  of  e„  and  e„o 
are  interchanged  and  the  constant  is  different.4  Pro- 
ceeding as  before,  it  is  easy  to  show  that  we{E)  is  given 
by 

wt(E)= f  exp[i(K-r-wt)-(T/2h)\tn 

2irhJ 

XG,(t,  -t)dtdt.     (7) 

It  is  normalized  such  that  Jlxwe{E)dE=\. 

The  quantity  of  experimental  interest  is  the  self- 
absorption  cross  section  <x  which  for  a  thin  absorber  is 
defined  by 

o=  f  <ra(E)we(E)dE  I  f  we(E)dE 

=  f  aa(E)we(E)dE.     (8) 

In  a  y-ray  resonance  absorption  experiment  if  the 
emitter  is  made  to  move  with  velocity  v  relative  to  the 
absorber,  the  emitted  y  ray  gets  an  energy  Doppler 
shift  s=(v/c)Eo,  c  being  the  velocity  of  light,  and  in 
that  case  the  argument  of  aa{E)  should  be  replaced  by 
s-\-E.  If  we  do  this  and  make  use  of  (5),  (6),  and  (7)  in 
(8),  it  follows  that  the  self-absorption  cross  section  is 
given  by,  noticing  that  the  integration  over  E  can  be 


extended  to  —  °o  without  any  appreciable  error, 
(70r  r        /     its    T 


is) 


=— I  exp( 1*|) 

4h  J         \     h     k      / 


h     h 
Xexp 


-Ct.(0+t.(0]*-    (9) 

2  J 


And  if  the  emitter  and  the  absorber  are  identical  (9) 
becomes 

«r.(*)=W),  (10) 

where  <ra(s)  is  given  by  (5)  with  T  replaced  by  2T  and 
y(t)  replaced  by  2y(l).  Before  we  proceed  to  calculate 
<t(s)  for  a  nucleus  bound  in  a  solid,  we  shall  evaluate  the 
absorption  cross  section  aa{E)  for  a  nucleus  in  a  perfect 
gas. 

ABSORPTION  OF  A  y  RAY  BY  AN  ATOM 
IN  A  PERFECT  GAS 

It  has  been  shown  by  Van  Hove6  that  for  a  perfect 
gas  the  quantum  mechanical  form  of  G,{r,t)  is  the  one 
given  by  (6)  with 

ht     kBTP 

•^-V-TT  (11) 

where  M  is  the  mass  of  the  atom  and  ks  is  the  Boltz- 
mann's  constant,  and  T  is  the  temperature  of  the  gas. 
The  term  linear  in  t  is  purely  of  quantum  mechanical 
origin  and  the  term  quadratic  in  t  survives  in  the  classi- 
cal limit.  Vineyard6  has  shown  that  for  very  small  times 
for  an  arbitrary  interacting  system  described  by  a  time- 
independent  Hamiltonian  y{t)  is  given  by 


ht       1 
M    3M2 


(12) 


where  p  is  the  momentum  operator  of  an  atom.  This 
result  easily  follows  from  (3)  if  we  expand  the  operator 
R(0  in  powers  of  t  and  define  y(t)  by  the  relation 

y(t)=-fr*G.(r,t)dT, 

and  assume  that  the  system  is  isotropic. 

Substituting  (11)  in  (6)  and  using  the  resulting  G8(r,t) 
in  (5)  and  after  performing  integration  over  r  we  have 


Va{E) 

<r0r 

where  we  have  put 

R  (the  recoil  energy) = h W/2M=E02/2Mc\ 

A  =  2(RkBT)*. 

•  G.  H.  Vineyard,  Phys.  Rev.  110,  999  (1958). 


'  /•«      r   it  r        A¥i 

-       exp  —  (E-Eo-R) 1/| k 

J_       L    h  2h         4#J 


(13) 


(14) 


197 

1096  K.     S.     SINGWI     AND    A.     SJOLANDER 

Putting  y=tT/2h  and  making  use  of  the  convolution      atomic  cubic  crystal  y(t)  is  given  by 
formula  for  the  Fourier  transform  of  a  product,  we  have  >o 

*  rwr     i  z  \(      zt\      "T/W 

!=—  I      cothl J I  1  — cos- I— i  sin-  <fe, 

34V0  L        \2kBT/\  k/  k]  z 


*.(£}<— I    & 

..         »       r  (F—E  —R)  A2n     l  where  f(z)  is  the  distribution  of  energy  levels  of  the 

X I f    exp  -iyz-iy r2—  \dy  phonons  and  such  that 

1(2t)»J_       L  r/2  Pj     I 

fir"  ]  I    f(z)dz=l. 

which  gives  /(z)  is  zer0  beyond  2=2^. 

,.        ot,     ,  Equation  (5)  with  the  help  of  (6)  can  be  written  after 


f     /«-    az  .   -1—--     ,-,-■-- 

<ra(£)=<r0 I     exp[-^(8+x)8],  (15)     integration  over  r  as 

2v^  1+z* 
where  °^   ' 

3p[-i**y(«)]J   exp(-*orf-— 1/|)<« 


E-E0-R  T  <T0rt 

x= ;    |=-.  (16) U 

T/2  A  4AI 


"'r.;        +e*p[-i«M»)]£e*p(-^|,|) 


Formula  (15)  is  the  same  as  given  by  Bethe  and 
in  the  case  of  resonance  capture  of  neutrons 
forming  a  Maxwellian  gas. 

X{exp[J««(7(co)-7(0)]-l}*l, 
RESONANCE  ABSORPTION  OF  y  RAYS  BY  ' 

ATOMS  IN  A  CRYSTAL  ,     .     .  .  ,    ,    ,  , .        m 

where  7(00)  is  the  value  of  y(t)  at  t=  ».  The  exponen- 
We  shall  here  restrict  ourselves  to  cubic  Bravais     tial  within  the  square  brackets  can  now  be  expanded 
lattices.  Again  Van  Hove6  has  shown  that  for  a  mono-     in  a  power  series,  and  we  have 

<t0t  rftr  1  -  (««/2)»  1  r»      /         r     \ 

(Ta{E)  =  2ir — exp(-2W0 +I> j     expl  -tut l/l  jDyC00)-^)]"* 

4»  l27r(£-£o)2+rV4    «=i     »!     2»J_       V  2A    '  / 

WTr  1  .  (2in»  i 

= +L gn(E-E0,  T)    exp(-2W0,     (18) 

2    L2tt  (£-£o)»+P/4    tx    n\    *  J 


since  T  can  be  neglected  in  the  integrand  in  Eq.  (18),      tive  to  compare  formula  (18)  with  that  for  the  inco- 
and  where  herent  differential  scattering  cross  section  for  neutrons 

s  (E  T)=  icothl I  — ll  /in\     m  solids.  The  first  term  inside  the  curly  brackets  gives 

2EF{T)Y        \2/&b7V       J'  a  sharp  absorption  peak  of  width  T  and  represents  the 

recoilless  absorption  of  7  rays,  and  corresponds  to 


(ET)=  f  e  (E—E'  Tie      (Ef  T)dE'      C20")  elastic  scattering  in  the  neutron  case  (where  it  is  a  delta 

/_,               >        n-       ,          ,  function).  The  other  terms  give  a  broad  peak  extending 

at  least  over  an  energy  zmax  and  corresponds  to  phonon 

F(T)=  ff—  coth(—)dz,               (21)  exchange.                      _       _ 

J0      z            \2&fl7/  In  the  Debye  approximation, 
and 

ftV  /(z)  =  3z2/(/b0)3    for    z<£B0              ,„. 

2^=|^(=o)=— F(T).                  (22)  =0                   for    z>/feBe,             (23) 

2W  is  the  usual  Debye-Waller  factor.  The  above  formu-  @  beinS  the  Debye  temperature  of  the  solid.  Using 

lation  is  the  same  as  that  used  by  Sjolander8  in  con-  (23)  in  (21)  ll  1S  easy  to  show  that 

nection  with  neutron  scattering  by  solids.  It  is  instruc- 

6  rl    T  /0\-j 

J  H.  Bethe  and  G.  Placzek,  Phys.  Rev.  51,  462  (1937).  F{T)= H 01  —  J    ,  (24a) 

8  A.  Sjolander,  Arkiv  Fysik  14,  315  (1958).  JfeB0L4     0    V  T/  J 


198 


RESONANCE    ABSORPTION    OF     NUCLEAR    GAMMA     RAYS 


1097 


where 


1  r*   ydy 

♦to— I    —  ■ 

zJ0   ev-l 


The  function  <f>(z)  has  been  tabulated  by  Zener.9  Now 


F(T)  =  3/(2kB®)      for     T«0 
=  6T/(kB@2)     for     7»0. 

We  also  notice  that 


(24b) 


/; 


UE)dE=: 


Experimentally  we  are  interested  in  the  self-absorption 
cross  section;  i.e.,  in  a(s)  given  by  (9).  Here  the  emitter 
and  the  absorber  are  assumed  to  be  of  the  same  ma- 
terial but  at  different  temperatures,  say  Te  and  Ta, 
respectively.  Let  v  be  the  relative  velocity  of  the  emitter 
and  absorber.  s=  (v/c)Eo  is  positive  f  the  two  move 
towards  each  other  and  negative  if  they  move  away 
from  each  other.  Proceeding  as  before,  it  follows  from 
(9)  that 


Us)\ 


t<tqT 

2 

rr     1         -  (2W4+2Wa)n 

X +E Sn(s)\,     (25) 

UyH-r2    —l  «! 

where 

2We=  (hW/2M)F(Te), 
2Wa=  (hW/2Af)F(Ta), 

1 

gi(s)= 

F(Te)+F(Ta) 

XZF(T.)gi(s,T.)+F(Ta)gl(s,Ta)],     (26) 


9n(s)=  I   Siis—^g^-iWdY. 


It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  energy  distribution 
of  the  phonons  changes  with  temperature  and  hence  the 
Debye  temperature  also  changes.  There  will  be  a  very 
slight  shift  of  the  resonance  absorption  peak  due  to  the 
fact  that  when  a  y  ray  is  emitted  or  absorbed  the  mass 
of  the  emitting  or  the  absorbing  nucleus  changes.  This 
second  order  Doppler  effect10  has  not  been  considered 
here. 

If  the  emitter  and  the  absorber  are  both  identical 
and  are  at  the  same  temperature,  Eq.  (25)  simplifies  to 


2 


l7T52+r2 


(4W0"  1 

— g„(*,DJ     (27) 


+r2    n=i     n! 


The  first  term  in  (27)  gives  a  sharp  resonance  peak 
having  a  full  width  2I\  For  s=0,  the  first  term  is 


er'(0)  =  §o-o<r 


(28) 


The  resonance  self-absorption  cross  section  is  thus 
diminished  by  a  factor  e~iW,  where  2W,  in  the  Debye 
approximation,  is  given  by  Eqs.  (22)  and  (24).  From 
the  expression  for  2W,  it  is  clear  that  to  have  a  large 
Mossbauer  effect  the  recoil  energy  R  of  the  nucleus 
must  be  small;  i.e.,  the  y  ray  should  have  a  low  energy 
and  the  Debye  temperature  0  of  the  solid  should  be 
large  and  the  temperature  as  low  as  possible.  Recently 
Lipkin11  has  derived  the  expression  for  2W  in  a  simple 
manner  and  has  also  come  to  the  same  conclusions.  In 
the  original  Mossbauer  experiment  in  which  Ir191  129- 
kev  gamma  rays  were  used  (R  =  0.046  ev,  &s0  =  0.025 
ev,  r=88°K),  2W  was  nearly  equal  to  3;  and  hence  the 
resonance  effect  was  very  small.  For  a  large  resonance 
effect  <r'(0)  has  to  be  greater  than  the  non-nuclear 
cross  section  such  as  the  cross  section  for  the  photo- 
electric effect.  Unfortunately  for  isotopes  so  far  in- 
vestigated, the  Mossbauer  effect  is  very  small  except  in 
the  case  of  Fe67,  where  because  of  the  low  7-ray  energy 
(£o=14.4  kev),  2W  is  nearly  0.1  at  T=0*K,  and  this 
is  the  reason  why  it  is  possible  to  observe  the  Moss- 
bauer effect  even  at  very  high  temperatures.  Because 
of  this  comparatively  large  effect  and  the  extreme  sharp- 
ness of  the  resonance  line  (r~5XlO-9  ev),  the  Moss- 
bauer effect  in  Fe57  nucleus  has  found  recently  so  many 
interesting  applications. 

The  second  term  in  (27),  corresponding  to  phonon 
exchange,  gives  the  shape  of  the  wings  of  the  sharp 
resonance  absorption  line ;  the  wings  extending  at  least 
up  to  an  energy  of  the  order  kBQ.  If  2W/«1,  all  terms 
except  the  first  in  the  sum  are  negligible.  In  that  case 
the  shape  of  the  wings  is  related  in  a  very  simple  way 
through  Eq.  (19)  to  the  energy  spectrum  f(E)  of  the 
crystal  vibrations.  It  is  thus  at  least  in  principle  possible 
to  measure  the  energy  distribution  function  of  the 
phonons  as  has  been  pointed  out  earlier  by  Visscher.12 
In  this  connection  it  is  important  to  realize  that  if  the 
nucleus  emitting  the  y  rays  constitutes  a  foreign  atom 
in  a  host  lattice,  what  one  measures  is  not  the  vibra- 
tional spectrum  of  the  host  lattice  but  a  spectrum 
which  is  characteristic  of  the  local  surroundings  of  the 
emitting  nucleus.  In  addition  to  this,  the  one-phonon 
cross  section  is  very  small  and  this  limits  the  possibility 
of  using  the  Mossbauer  effect  to  investigate  the  vibra- 
tional spectra  of  solids.  A  better  way  to  study  the  real 
vibrational  spectra  is  through  the  use  of  slow  neutron 
scattering. 

If  2H/»1,  then  we  have  what  is  called  the  weak- 
binding  case.  For  example  in  the  original  Mossbauer 
experiment  2W~3  and  it  falls  under  this  category. 


C.  Zener,  Phys.  Rev.  49,  122  (1936). 
°B.  D.  Josephson,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  341  (1960). 


H.  Lipkin,  Ann.  Phys.  9,  332  (1960V 

W.  M.  Visscher,  Ann.  Phys.  9,  194  (1960). 


199 


1098 


K.     S.     SINGWI     AND    A.     SJOLANDER 


From  (17)  it  follows  that 

«r.W-hr.<0] 

=  -i2R-+2A2—+' 
h         W 


Doppler  width  A  Eq.  (33)  for  ^  =  0  simplifies  to 


for    t« (29a) 

kB% 


■R\_F(Te)+F(Ta)~\         for    /» ,     (29b) 

kBS 


where 


A2=  (8/3)22  (£kin«+£kina).  (30) 

£kin  is  the  mean  kinetic  energy  per  atom  and  is  given  by 
3 


£kin=-f  scothf ) 

4JQ  \2kBT/ 


f(z)dz 


Forr>0,£kin«|*Br. 
Now  Eq.  (9)  can  be  written  as 


"(*)' 


'  4h 


\i«v 


Xexpl  -i- — \l\--[ye(t)+yam\,     (31) 
h     h         2 


where  T~fi/kB<d. 

In  (31)  the  exponent  ^2[7«(0+7a(0]  in  the  first 
integral  can  be  replaced  by  (29a),  and  in  the  second  and 
third  integrals  by  (29b),  without  introducing  appreci- 
able error.  It  is  then  easy  to  show  that 


*(*) 


aoTl    r00        f     it  T  2A2  1 

= I     exp (s-2R) l/l fildt 

tt    L     1    J  h         4ft2  J 


2ftr  l 

+ exp(-2We-2Wa)\.     (32) 

52+r2  I 

The  integral  in  (32)  is  the  same  as  the  one  which  occurs 
in  (13)  and  can  be  evaluated  as  before.  Hence 


*(*)■ 


<r0r2  exp-  (2We+2Wa) 

2  i2+r2 

+(ro_Lr    _l_eXp|:_ir!(a;+2)2]      (33) 

W*J-«  1+22 


where  we  have  defined 

£=2r/A,    A2=  (S/3)R(E^+Evma)  =  Ae2+Aa2, 


(34) 


*=  (s-  2R)/T,    R=  E<?/2Mc2. 
If  K<1;  i-e.,  the  linewidth  T  is  much  smaller  than  the 


«r(0)=— exp(-2W.-2W.) 
2 

ao\/ir      r 


2      (A.2+A, 


r    ^  i 

—  exp 

2)»        L     A«2+A02J 


(35) 


Equation   (35)  is  the  same  as  the  formula   (19)  of 
Mossbauer.13 

DIFFUSION  BROADENING  OF  THE 
RESONANCE  LINE 

In  this  section  we  shall  show  how  Mossbauer  tech- 
nique could  be  used  to  investigate  the  nature  of  dif- 
fusive motions  in  solids  and  probably  under  more 
favorable  circumstances  in  a  liquid  too.  In  a  solid  the 
slow  jumping  movement  of  an  atom  from  one  lattice 
site  to  another  gives  rise  to  a  broadening  of  the  reso- 
nance line.  At  ordinary  temperatures  the  broadening 
due  to  such  a  diffusive  motion  is  small  compared  to  the 
natural  linewidth  but  at  elevated  temperatures  the 
former  can  become  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as 
the  latter  and  even  greater.  In  liquids  the  diffusive 
broadening  is,  however,  many  orders  of  magnitude 
greater  than  the  linewidth  but,  unfortunately,  the 
resonance  absorption  cross  section  is  in  most  cases  small 
compared  to  non-nuclear  absorption  cross  section.  This 
makes  it  difficult  to  distinguish  the  resonance  line  from 
the  background. 

The  self -correlation  function  Gs(T,t)  as  defined  by 
Eq.  (3)  is  a  complex  quantity  and  cannot,  therefore, 
easily  be  interpreted  as  a  self-diffusion  function  except 
in  the  case  that  its  imaginary  part  is  negligible.  The 
imaginary  part,  as  we  know,  is  quantum  mechanical  in 
origin.  It  is,  however,  possible  as  Schofield14  has  done  to 
define  a  real  function  which  in  the  classical  case  goes 
over  to  the  classical  self-diffusion  function  and  which  is 
related  to  the  absorption  cross  section  in  a  similar  way 
as  is  Van  Hove's  G„(r,t)  function.  The  transformation 
suggested  by  Schofield  and  the  question  of  using  the 
real  part  of  the  Van  Hove's  G,(r,t)  function  are  dis- 
cussed in  detail  in  the  Appendix  of  this  paper.  Such  a 
discussion  besides  being  relevant  to  the  context  of  this 
paper  is  of  importance  in  connection  with  neutron 
scattering  by  liquids. 

Following  the  suggestion  of  Schofield,  if  we  replace  / 
by  t+(ih/2kBT),G,(T,t)  goes  over  to  Fs(t,t),  which  is 
given  by  (8A)  of  the  Appendix  and  y(t)  goes  over  to 
p(t),  where  pit)  is  given  by  Eqs.  (9A)  and  (10A)  of  the 
Appendix  in  the  case  of  a  gas  and  a  solid,  respectively. 
In  the  Appendix  we  have  derived  the  expression  for  the 
resonance  absorption  cross  section  aaiE)  and  for  the 
emission  probability  weiE),  which  are,  respectively, 
given  by  Eqs.  (HA)  and  (12A).  We  shall  rewrite  them 


13  R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Physik  151,  124  (1958). 
"  P.  Schofield,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  239  (1960). 


200 


RESONANCE    ABSORPTION     OF     NUCLEAR    GAMMA     RAYS 


1099 


here 


o-0r       r  fko         hV 
<ra(E)=  —  exp  — — — 


4A        l2kBT    SMkBT 


x£exp[ 


•i-"l)--\t\] 
2h     J 


XF,c(i,t)dTdt,     (36) 


.(£)  = 


ica          ftV 


2£sr  8Af*flr 


<J    exp  t(«.*-«0 — -|*| 


XFS(T,t)dTdt,     (37) 

where  F,c{x,t)  is  the  classical  self -diffusion  function 
and^=£— £0- 

We  shall  consider  two  simple  cases :  (i)  in  which  the 
diffusive  motion  of  an  atom  in  the  absorber  is  governed 
by  the  simple  diffusion  equation,  and  (ii)  in  which  the 
atom  jumps  from  one  lattice  site  to  another.  Diffusion 
in  normal  liquids  probably  comes  under  case  (i)  whereas 
in  solids  it  comes  under  case  (ii).  These  two  cases  are 
considered  here  more  as  illustrations  rather  than  to  give 
a  precise  relationship  between  the  resonance  line  shape 
and  diffusive  motions. 

Case  (i) 

In  this  case  F,c{x,t)  is  given  by 

F/(r,/)=(4xZ)|/|)-*exp(-r2/4Z)|/|)I        (38) 

where  D  is  the  diffusion  coefficient.  This  function  has 
the  right  limiting  form  for  large  t  but  not  for  /  — »  0. 
One  should  rather  use  for  F,c(T,t)  the  solution  of 
Langevin's  equation  for  the  Brownian  motion  with  p(t) 
as  given  by  (13A).  p{t)  varies  as  P  for  t  — » 0.  We  shall 
not  use  the  latter  form  of  p(t)  since  the  change  in  the 
linewidth  as  a  result  of  this  refinement  is  negligible  (see 
Singwi  and  Sjolander15  in  connection  with  neutron 
scattering). 

Let  us  suppose  that  the  absorber  is  in  the  liquid  state. 
The  cross  section  for  the  absorption  of  a  7  ray  of  energy 
E  is  obtained  by  substituting  (38)  in  (36)  and  after 
performing  the  integrations  we  have 

<r0(£)  =  (aoT/4)  exp (-2Wa) {T+2h?D)f 

[(£-£o)2+Kr+2^c2Z))2])     (39) 

where  in  deducing  (39)  we  have  replaced 

expi-(E-E0)/2kBT2 

by  unity,  since  E—Ea<^2kBT  in  the  resonance  peak 
and  where  we  have  put  h2ici/SMkBT=2Wa.   2Wa  is 


analogous  to  the  Debye- Waller  factor  in  the  case  of  a 
solid. 

From  (39)  it  is  evident  that  the  broadening  Ae  of  the 
resonance  line  due  to  diffusion  is  given  by 


Ae=2b<?D 
=  2EoiD/kc*, 


(40) 


where  £0  is  the  energy  of  the  7  ray  and  c  is  the  velocity 
of  fight.  As  an  example  let  us  take  iron  for  which 
D~W~*  cm2/sec  in  the  molten  state,  and  £0=14  kev 
(for  Fe57).  Equation  (40)  gives  Ae~6XlO~*  ev  which  is 
several  orders  of  magnitude  greater  than  the  natural 
width  T. 

Experimentally    what    one    measures    is    the    self- 
absorption  cross  section 


<r(s)= 


i 


we(E)aa(E+s)dE. 


Here  we(E)  is  the  emission  probability  in  the  case  of  a 
solid,  since  the  emitter  is  in  the  form  of  a  solid.  If  we 
neglect  the  phonon  part,  the  expression  for  we(E)  is 


r  1 

w,{E)  =—e~*w' . 

2t         (£-£0)2+r2/4 


(41) 


li  K.  S.  Singwi  and  A.  Sjolander,  Phys.  Rev.  119,  863  (1960). 


Using  (39)  and  (41)  in  the  expression  for  <r(s),  we  get 

o-oT                                    T+hJD 
r(i)« — exn(-2W.-2Wm) .     (42) 

2  52+(r-r-^Z?)J 

Recently  a  cold-neutron  scattering  method  has  been 
used  to  measure  the  diffusive  broadening  of  the  "quasi- 
elastic"  scattering  in  liquids.16-18  This  method,  un- 
fortunately, suffers  from  the  disadvantage  of  having  a 
poor  energy  resolution.  But  if  we  were  to  study  the 
diffusive  broadening  by  Mossbauer  technique,  such  a 
disadvantage  does  not  exist  since  the  natural  width  of 
the  line  is  negligible  compared  to  the  diffusive  broaden- 
ing. However,  this  method  seems  at  present  to  be  hardly 
practicable  because  of  the  smallness  of  a(s)  compared 
to  the  other  non-nuclear  cross  section  such  as  the  photo- 
electric effect.  But  under  very  favorable  circumstances 
such  that  r/Ae  is  not  too  small  this  method  could  be 
used  to  investigate  the  shape  of  the  resonance  line  and 
determine  the  diffusion  coefficient  from  the  measure- 
ment of  line  broadening. 

Case  (ii) 

Let  to  be  the  mean  time  for  which  an  atom  stays  on 
a  given  lattice  site  before  jumping  to  a  new  lattice 
position.  If  we  now  assume  that  there  is  no  correlation 
in  motion  between  one  jump  and  the  next,  it  is  possible 

11  B.  N.  Brockhouse,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  2,  287  (1959). 

17  D.  J.  Hughes,  H.  Palevsky,  W.  Kiev,  and  E.  Tunkelo,  Phys. 
Rev.  Letters  3,  91  (1959). 

18 1.  Pelah,  W.  L.  Whittemore,  and  A.  W.  McReynolds,  Phys. 
Rev.  113,  767  (1959). 


201 


1100 


K.     S.     SINGWI     AND    A.     SJOLANDER 


to  calculate  F,c(t,1)  or  rather  its  Fourier  transform  as 
has  been  done  earlier  by  Singwi  and  Sjolander18  in  con- 
nection with  diffusive  motions  in  water  and  cold- 
neutron  scattering.  The  problem  under  consideration 
is  in  fact  a  special  case  of  the  more  general  formula  of 
Singwi  and  Sjolander.  The  present  case  consists  in 
taking  ri  — >  0,  where  n  is  the  mean  time  for  which  the 
particle  diffuses  between  its  two  oscillatory  states  and 
in  taking  the  function  h(r,l)  to  be  independent  of  time. 
It  is  then  easy  to  show  by  the  use  of  formula  (36)  that 

*a(E)=—  exp(-2P*g 

r+(2A/ro)(l-a) 

X- — : — — — ,     (43) 


where 


(£-  £o)2+[r+  (2*/t0)  (1  -a)  J/i 
a*?  f  exp(tK-r)A(r)rfr,  (44) 


h{t)  gives  the  probability  of  finding  the  particle  at  the 
position  r  after  a  single  jump,  if  the  particle  was  at  the 
origin  before  the  jump.  Using  (43)  and  (41)  we  have  for 
the  self-absorption  cross  section 


<r0r 

*(*)= — txp(-2We 
2 


■2Wa) 


r+(*/ro)(l-«) 


^+Cr+(ft/ro)(l-a)? 
The  diffusion  coefficient  D  is  denned  by 


=—  [r*h(r)di 
6to«/ 


(45) 


(46) 


From  formula  (43)  it  is  clear  that  the  broadening  A« 
of  the  resonance  peak  due  to  diffusive  motions  is 

Ae=2ft/ro|  1-  fexp(«e-r)  h(t)dt\         (47) 

We  thus  see  that  the  maximum  value  of  the  broadening 
is  2h/ro  and  the  broadening  depends  on  the  angle  be- 
tween the  direction  of  motion  of  the  diffusing  atom  and 
the  direction  of  the  7-ray  quantum.  Consider  a  Fe87 
nucleus  sandwiched  between  two  layers  of  a  graphite 
lattice  (it  is  possible  to  introduce  iron  atoms  between 
the  layer  planes  of  a  graphite  single  crystal).  The  Fe87 
nucleus  finds  it  hard  to  move  in  the  direction  of  the 
c-axis  but  can  diffuse  with  ease  in  the  basal  plane.  If 
the  7  ray  from  the  emitter  falls  on  the  absorber  parallel 
to  the  c  axis  and  the  counter  is  also  pointing  along  the 
c  axis,  the  diffusive  broadening  Ae  in  this  case  will  be 
negligible  and  the  resonance  line  will  have  its  natural 
width.  If  we  now  rotate  the  absorber  relative  to  the 
direction  of  the  incident  7  ray,  the  diffusive  broadening 


should  increase.  At  the  same  time  the  magnitude  of  the 
resonance  absorption  would  decrease  due  to  the  ani- 
sotropy  of  the  Debye- Waller  factor  (our  formulas  can 
easily  be  extended  for  an  anisotropic  solid). 

Let  us  consider  self-diffusion  in  iron.  The  emitter  is 
at  low  temperature  and  the  resonance  absorption  is 
studied  as  a  function  of  the  velocity  of  the  emitter  for 
various  temperatures  of  the  absorber.  At  ordinary  tem- 
peratures, the  self-diffusion  in  iron  is  so  small  that  the 
line  broadening  due  to  diffusive  motion  is  negligible 
compared  to  the  natural  width  T.  For  example  even 
at  760°C,  the  diffusion  coefficient  is  only  1.5X10-" 
cm2/sec,  which  would  give  a  value  of  6X 10^6  sec  for  r0; 
since  r^iP/6Dt  I  being  the  interatomic  spacing.  This 
would  correspond  to  a  broadening  (A6)mAX~2X  10-11  ev, 
whereas  r=4.6Xl0~9  ev.  However,  at  higher  tempera- 
tures, say  1000°C  and  above,  it  should  be  possible  to 
detect  the  diffusive  broadening  by  a  Mossbauer-type 
experiment.  At  such  high  temperatures  the  Debye- 
Waller  factor  (T2W°  (since  2W,«2W„)  would  no  doubt 
decrease  but  it  is  still  not  too  small  (~c-a)  as  to  pre- 
clude the  possibility  of  observing  the  resonance  effect. 

It  has  been  reported19  that  the  rate  of  self-diffusion 
in  iron  at  757°C,  under  plastic  deformation,  increases 
by  as  much  as  a  factor  of  thousand.20  And  if  it  is  true, 
the  line  broadening  due  to  diffusion  would  now  be 
nearly  2X  10"~*  ev  which  is  greater  than  the  natural  line- 
width  and  it  might,  therefore,  be  possible  to  detect  it 
by  a  Mossbauer-type  experiment.  It  would  be  valuable 
to  perform  such  an  experiment  in  view  of  the  fact  that 
there  exists  a  controversy  between  different  experi- 
mental workers  regarding  the  enhancement  of  the  self 
diffusion  and  the  range  of  temperature  for  which  it  is 
significant.  Besides  a  Mossbauer-type  experiment  is 
different  from  the  usual  diffusion  experiments  using 
tracers  and  should,  therefore,  provide  an  independent 
check.  One  could  also  study  the  impurity  diffusion  of 
iron  in  other  metals  like  copper  and  silver.  Such  an 
experiment  would  give  a  direct  measure  of  the  mean 
time  to  and  its  temperature  variation. 

APPENDIX 

The  function  G,(t,t)  as  defined  by  Eq.  (3)  could  only 
in  the  classical  limit  be  interpreted  as  the  self-diffusion 
function.  For  small  times  when  the  particle  under  con- 
sideration has  moved  only  a  distance  of  the  order  of  the 
de  Broglie  wavelength,  quantum  effects  are  important 
and  G,{t,t)  is  complex.  In  fact,  according  to  Van  Hove8 
it  is  only  the  real  part  of  G,{t,t)  which  has  the  above 
physical  interpretation.  It  is,  however,  possible  to  ex- 
press the  emission  or  the  absorption  probability  in 
terms  of  the  real  part  of  G.(T,t). 


u  N.  Ujiive,  B.  Averbach,  M.  Cohen,  and  V.  Griffiths,  Acta 
Met.  6,  68  (1958). 

M  For  a  general  discussion  see  the  review  article  by  D.  Lazarus, 
Solid  State  Physics,  edited  by  F.  Seitz  and  D.  Turnbull  (Academic 
Press,  Inc.,  New  York,  1960),  Vol.  8,  p.  71. 


202 


RESONANCE  ABSORPTION  OF  NUCLEAR  GAMMA  RAYS 


1101 


Now 


1     r- 

—  I     exp(—*u/)<exp[— tie- R(0)]  expftie- R(/)])tA 

=  En.»og»oK»|exp(iK-R)|no}|2 

XS|>-(e»- €„„)/*],     (1A) 

which  follows  from  the  definition  of  ( •  •  • )?  and  gnno 
=  exp(—En0/kBT)/Y,n  exp(—En/kBT).  Further 

1    /•» 

—  I     exp(-ia>/)<exp[-iie-  R(/)]  expftie-  R(0)])r<# 
2irJ-n 

=E«!»«g»o(K»|exp(tK-R)|«0)p8[a)+(«n-€Bo)/^] 

=  L»,no^o|<«0|exp(iK-R)|»)|25[a,-(e„-6»o)A] 

=  e-**">  L».»og»o|<»|  exp(iK-  R)  |  »0>|2 

X*[«- (•»-•,*)/*] 
1    /•- 
=e-^ft<- —  I     exp(— tarf) 
2ir«L« 

X(exp[-iie-  R(0)]  expftie-  R(0]>j<ft.     (2A) 

The  last  step  in  (2A)  follows  from  (1A).  The  relation 
gn=exp[— /?(«»—  e„o)]gno  has  been  used  in  the  second 
step  in  (2A) ;  0=  l/*j,7\ 

Introducing  the  real  part  of  G,(r,t),  which  is  defined 
by 

Re[G.(r,0]=  (2tt)-3  f  exp(-«e- r) 

Xi{<exp[-«K-  R(0)]  expftie-  R(/)] 

+exp[- »k-  R(0]  expftie-  R(0)]>r}rfK,     (3A) 

and  using  (1A)  and  (2 A)  in  Eq.  (5)  of  the  text  we  get 
the  following  expression  for  the  absorption  cross  section : 


<ra{E)- 


a0T  exp(/3fto>/2) 
4ft  coshG8&o/2) 


X  J  expft (k-  T-af) -  (r/2A)  |  / 1  ] 

XRe[G,(r,fl]</r<ftf     (4A) 
considering  that  T<&kBT. 

Recently  Schofield14  has  also  suggested  in  connection 
with  neutron  scattering  that  G,(r,  t+ih/2kBT)  rather 
than  G,(x,t)  should  be  considered  as  a  self-diffusion 
function.  He  points  out  that  if,  for  instance,  G,(r,t)  is 
replaced  by  its  classical  equivalent  obtained  from  the 
simple  diffusion  equation,  as  suggested  by  Vineyard,6 
the  scattering  cross  section  will  not  satisfy  the  condition 
of  detailed  balance.  If,  however,  Gs(r,  t+ih/2kBT)  is 
replaced  by  the  classical  self-diffusion  function  the 
principle  of  detailed  balance  will  be  satisfied.  The  same 
is  also  true  if  we  replace  Re[G,(r,t)~]  in  (4A)  by  its 
classical  equivalent. 


Schofield's  result  is  easily  obtained  by  noting  that 

1   r» 

—  I     exp(-t«0(exp[-tie-  R(0)]  expftie-  R(0]>t* 
2-n-J^ 

=L».»og»o|<»|  exp(«-  R)  |nO)|2S|>-  (e»-«„o)/ft] 

=  exp(/3ftaJ/2)Ln,no(^„o)iKn|exp(iK-R)|«0>|2 

X«[>-(«»- «„„)/*],     (5A) 

and  introducing  a  function 

F.(r,0=(27r)-3Jexp(-iie-r) 

X{Z».»o(g»f»o)»<«0|exp[-iK-R(0)]|») 

X<n|exppK-R(0]|nO»rfie.     (6A) 

We  then  have  for  the  absorption  cross  section 

<roT  r 

a.(£)= — expC8&o/2)  I  expp(ieT- «fl-(r/2ft)|*|] 
4ft  J 

XF,(r,t)drdt.     (7  A) 

Fs(r,t)  is  real  and  is  an  even  function  of  t  and  thus  the 
integral  in  (7A)  is  an  even  function  of  co.  It  is  easily 
shown  by  using  the  definition  (3)  of  G,{r,t)  that  F,{x,t) 
=  G,(i,t+ih/2kBT).  If  one  uses  the  classical  self- 
diffusion  function  instead  of  F,(t,t)  in  (7A)  or  for 
Re[G„(r,0]  in  (4A),  the  two  expressions  are  identical 
to  the  first  order  in  tiw/kBT. 

If  we  make  the  transformation  as  suggested  by 
Schofield,  we  have 


F.(r,/)=[2Tp(0]-»exp[-fV2p(0], 


(8A) 


where 


P  (0 = &/4MkBT+  (kBT/M)P,  (9A) 

for  a  free  gas,  and 

P  (/)  =  (h*/M )        tanh  (z/UBT)dz 

J0       2 


+  (ft2/M)f 


/(a)  l-cos(2//ft) 
z    smh(z/2kBT) 


dz,     (10A) 


for  a  solid.  Equations  (9A)  and  (10A)  follow  from  Eqs. 
(11)  and  (17)  of  the  text,  respectively. 

We  notice  from  (9A)  that  even  at  /=0,  the  particle 
is  distributed  over  a  finite  region.  The  finite  extension 
is  given  by  the  first  term  in  (9A)  and  is  consistent  with 
Heisenberg's  uncertainty  principle  for  a  particle  with 
mean  velocity  (kBT/M)l.  The  real  part  of  G,(r,t)  on  the 
other  hand,  goes  over  to  a  S  function  around  the  origin 
at  /  =  0.  It,  therefore,  appears  that  F,(r,t)  as  given  by 
(8A)  is  more  directly  connected  with  self-diffusion. 

Schofield's  suggestion,  in  the  case  of  a  liquid,  is  to 
replace  F,(T,t)  in  the  first  approximation  by  a  classical 


203 


1102 


K.     S.     SINGWI     AND    A.     SJOLANDER 


self-diffusion  function  obtained,  for  instance,  from 
Langevin's  equation.  In  that  case  p(t)  will  go  to  zero 
as  /2  for  small  times  and  will  approach  2D\t\  for  large 
times.  If  we,  however,  add  a  constant  to  p(t)  corre- 
sponding to  a  finite  extension  of  the  probability  cloud 
at  /=0,  the  resulting  formula  for  the  cross  section  will 
be  valid  to  some  extent  also  for  large  momentum 
transfers. 

For  a  liquid  it  seems  reasonable  to  take  the  same  con- 
stant as  that  for  a  gas,  since  we  know  that  for  large 
momentum  transfers  corresponding  to  small  times  the 
scattering  cross  section  approximately  goes  over  to  a 
free  gas  formula.  Adding  of  this  constant  to  p(t)  will 
simply  amount  to  multiplying  the  right-hand  side  of 
(7A)  by  exp(-n2K2/SMkBT).  In  the  case  of  neutron 
scattering  by  liquids  this  factor  is  often  nearly  equal  to 
unity  except  for  large  incident  neutron  energy,  whereas 
in  the  case  of  7-ray  resonance  absorption  it  could  be 
quite  small  depending  on  the  recoil  energy  of  the 
nucleus. 

As  a  result  of  the  foregoing  discussion  it  seems  plau- 
sible to  write  (7A)  in  the  form 

aa(E) =—  exp(ho/2kBT-hV/BMkBT) 
4# 

X  f  expp(K-r-u0-(r/2ft)|f|] 

XF.e(r,t)drdt,    (11  A) 

and  similarly, 


w.(E)  = —  exp(-ha>/2kBT-hW/SMkBT) 

2wh 

X  J  expP(KT-«0-(r/2fc)|/|] 

XFS(t,t)didt,    (12A) 

where  for  F,e(r,t)  we  take  the  expression  (8A)  with 
p(t)  as  given  from  Langevin's  equation,  and  is21 

p(0=  (2Zy/3')D3'/-l+exp(-/3'/)].        (13A) 

The  characteristic  time  1//3'  is  given  by 

P'=kBT/DM,  (14A) 

B  See  for  instance  S.  Chandrasekhar,  Revs.  Modern  Phys.  15, 
1  (1943). 


D  being  the  diffusion  coefficient.  Of  course,  this  is 
possible  only  if  the  diffusion  can  really  be  described  by 
Langevin's  equation. 

Note  added  in  proof.  Recent  measurements  of  the 
specific  heat  of  indium  by  Bryant  and  Keesom  [Phys. 
Rev.  Letters  4,  460  (1959)]  and  of  niobium  by  Broose 
et  al.  [Phys.  Rev.  Letters  5,  246  (I960)]  both  in  the 
superconducting  and  normal  phases  seem  to  show  that 
the  lattice  part  of  the  specific  heat  is  different  in  the  two 
phases,  thus  indicating  that  perhaps  the  phonon  spec- 
trum in  the  two  phases  is  not  the  same.  Broose  etal.,  in 
an  attempt  to  explain  their  measurements  on  niobium 
have  suggested  in  the  superconducting  phase  an  altered 
value  of  the  Debye  temperature  as  243°K,  which  value 
in  the  normal  state  they  arrive  at  is  231°K.  Thus,  there 
is  a  change  of  five  percent  in  the  value  of  Bo- 

Here  we  wish  to  suggest  an  alternative  and  perhaps 
more  direct  experiment  to  decide  whether  there  is  any 
appreciable  change  in  the  value  of  6D  in  going  from  the 
normal  to  the  superconducting  phase.  The  experiment 
consists  in  studying  the  intensity  of  the  Mossbauer  line 
both  in  the  normal  and  superconducting  phases.  The 
choice  for  such  an  experiment  is  very  severely  limited  to 
only  a  few  isotopes.  The  intensity  of  the  Mossbauer  line 
is  determined  by  the  Debye- Waller  factor  e~iw,  and  in 
the  limit  T<K8D,  4w  is  equal  to  3R/kBdD,  where  R  is  the 
recoil  energy.  In  order  to  have  an  appreciable  change 
in  the  intensity  of  resonance  absorption  for  a  very  small 
change  in  the  value  of  6D,  one  would  demand  a  large 
value  of  4a> ;  i.e.,  a  large  recoil  energy  and  a  small  do- 
Re187  is  such  an  example.  It  becomes  superconducting 
and  the  values  of  R  and  dD  are,  respectively,  0.051  ev 
and  417°K.  An  almost  trivial  calculation  will  show  that 
a  ten  percent  increase  in  the  value  of  Od  will  give  a  35% 
increase  in  the  intensity  of  the  resonance  absorption, 
which  should  be  easy  to  observe.  Other  isotopes  which 
one  could  study  are  Ta181  and  Hfm. 

The  authors  have  been  informed  privately  by  Meyer- 
Schuetzmeister  and  Hanna  that  their  very  preliminary 
experiment  on  the  Mossbauer  effect  in  Sn,  both  in  the 
normal  and  superconducting  phases,  indicates  that  there 
is  an  increase  of  a  few  percent  in  the  intensity  of  reso- 
nance absorption  in  the  latter  phase.  A  five  percent 
increase  in  the  value  of  do  would,  in  this  case,  give  nearly 
three  percent  increase  in  the  intensity. 


204 


LE    JOURNAL    DE    PHYSIQUE    ET    LE    RADIUM 


TOME    22,    MAI    1961,    PAGE    303. 


DIFFUSION  DES  PHOTONS  SUB  LES  ATOMES  ET  LES  NOYAUX  DANS  LES  CRISTAUX 

Par  C.  TZARA, 

Section  de  Physique  Nucleaire  a  Moyenne  Energie,  C.  E.  N.,  Saclay. 

R6sum6.  —  On  etudie  la  diffusion  des  photons  par  les  atomes  et  les  noyaux  lies  dans  un  solide 
avec  ou  sans  cession  de  phonons.  Selon  la  largeur  de  l'etat  excite  (atomique  ou  nucleaire),  relati- 
vement  au  spectre  de  vibration  du  cristal,  la  proportion  de  diffusion  « sans  recul »  varie  entre  deux 
limites,  l'une  etant  le  facteur  de  Debye-Waller,  l'autre  le  carre  du  facteur  de  Mossbauer-Lamb. 
L'interference  entre  les  processus  atomique  et  nucleaire  est  examinee.  En  fin  remission  sans  recul 
d'un  photon  nucleaire  a  la  suite  d'une  cascade  de  transitions  est  calcnlee  sans  faire  appel  a  un 
phenomene  de  rearrangement  des  etats  cristallins. 

Abstract.  —  Photon 'scattering  by  atoms  and  nuclei  in  solids  is  investigated.  Depending  on 
the  excited  (nuclear  or  atomic)  state  width  compared  to  the  crystal  vibration  spectrum,  the  pro- 
portion of  recoilless  scattering  varies  between  two  limits  :  the  Debye-Waller  factor  on  one  side, 
the  square  of  the  M6ssbauer-Lamb  on  the  other.  Interference  between  the  two  processes  is 
examined.  Finally  the  recoilless  emission  of  a  nuclear  photon  following  a  sequence  of  transitions 
is  calculated  without  requiring  a  rearrangement  phenomenon  in  the  solid. 


L'interaction  des  photons  avec  les  atomes  ou  les 
noyaux  lies  dans  un  solide  peut  se  produire  sans 
cession  de  phonons  au  cristal.  La  diffraction  des 
rayons  X  est  un  exemple  de  ce  phenomene.  Recem- 
ment  Mossbauer  a  decouvert  remission  et  l'absorp- 
tion  sans  recul  de  photons  par  les  noyaux  dans  un 
solide  [1].  Dans  le  present  travail,  nous  examinons 
entre  autres  les  diffusions  atomique  et  nucleaire 
dans  les  solides  et  leur  interference  eventuelle  en 
utilisant  la  theorie  de  Lamb  [2]. 

Le  cristal  est  compose  d'atomes  de  masse  M, 
a  Z  electrons.  Les  etats  et  energies  propres  du  sys- 
teme  electronique  sont  <Jn  et  E{,  ceux  du  noyaux 
sont  9j  et  W\.  L'etat  du  cristal  est  defini  par  l'en- 
semble  j  a.B  )  des  nombres  d'occupation  dans  chaque 
mode  de  vibration  s.  L' energie  propre  de  l'etat  {  a, } 


est  E\  a, )  =  S  a,  hta,.  A  l'etat  d'equilibre,   a 

M 

temperature  T,  le  poids  statistique  de  chaque 
etat  |  «, }  est  g  {  a, }.  Dans  le  cas  ou  une  espece 
atomique  est  inseree  dans  un  reseau  d'un  autre 
constituant,  ce  ne  sont  pas  les  degres  de  liberte  de 
l'ensemble  qui  sont  a  considerer,  mais  ceux  des 
atomes  interesses. 

1.  Diffusion  Rayleigh  atomique.  —  La  section 
efficace  de  diffusion  d'un  photon  d'energie  kt  impul- 
sion K  et  polarisation  €  en  un  photon  d'energie  k', 
impulsion  K'  et  polarisation  e',  le  cristal  6tant 
initialement  et  finalement  dans  les  etats  purs  {  a, } 
et  {  p,  j,  l'atome  etant  laiss6  dans  l'etat  initial,  est, 
en  approximation  non  relativiste  : 


^f  ( j  «.}{  p.}  JHTm')  =  I  <  {  P.}|e^«/«  |  j  a,  |  >  <  fc|  ^,W«|fc  >  €€' 

+  1     S     <\t.]\e-iK'«l*\[n,]>  <|n.}le'*"/»l{«.j>  <  ^0\I>  e~iK'r^  p'Mn  ><  j>n\l>  e  ^f"  PiU0  > 
m  {».}•  ■  EP  —  E0  -  k  +  £|»#|  —  £|a<|  +  if 


£„  —  E0  +  k'  +  fj^j  —  ^j^j 


+  iY 


X  [*fm*)*k'lk 
ici  q  =  K  —  K'  transfert  d'impulsion 

k'  +  ei*\  =  k  +  m,\ 


(i) 


Le  premier  terme  d6crit  la  diffusion  Thomson  par 
les  Z  electrons  arranges  selon  la  configuration  tj»0. 
Le  facteur  de  forme  : 


ZF[q)  =  <  +„|Se^/*|+,> 


u  :  coordonnee  du  centre  de  gravite  de  l'atome 
consider^  dans  le  cristal  ; 

rj  :  coordonnees  des  electrons  atomiques   dans     (dans  le  cas  d'un  atome  sphenque)  suffit  genera- 
un  systeme  lie  a  l'atome.  lement  a  rendre  compte  de  la  diffusion  cohe>ente  si 


205 


JOURNAL  DE  PHYSIQUE 


N°5 


l'energie  du  photon  est  superieure  aux  energies  des 
discontinuites  d' absorption  En  —  E0  les  plus,  fortes. 
Nous  ne  nous  limiterons  pas  pour  l'instant  a  ce 
terme. 

Si  k  est  tres  different  de  En  —  E0)  E«t  —  E^ 
peut  §tre  neglige  dans  les  denominateurs  des  termes 
dispersifs  du  premier  type  ;  si  k  ~  E%  ■ —  E0,  cette 
approximation  reste  valable  car  la  partie  imaginaire 

Y  c±  k  r„,  la  largeur  de  l'etat  tyn  est,  pour  les 
transitions  les  plus  fortes,  tres  superieure  a 
Ei   i  —  Eia  i  cz  kQ,  0  etant  la  temperature  de 

Debye  du  solide. 

Dans  les  termes  dispersifs  du  deuxieme  type, 
l'approximation  est  evidemment  meilleure.  La  som- 
mation  2  s'effectue  alors  aisement  puisque  : 


S  ||B,}><  I  ».)|-1 


et  il  vient  : 

dQ 


£f{|a.}{M)KK'ec') 


=  |<|p.||eW|j«.}>| 


\ZF[q)  €.€'  +  M+   +  ilf-|2  (e*lmcy^.     (2) 

Dans  ce  cas,  le  plus  repandu,  la  section  efficace 
dans  un  cristal  est  simplement  le  produit  d'un  fac- 
teur  o  cristallin  »  par  la  section  efficace  atomique. 
Si  la  section  efficace  varie  rapidement  dans  des 
intervalles  d'energie  de  l'ordre  de  kQ,  cette  factori- 
sation n'a  plus  lieu.  C'est  le  cas  des  resonances  de 
reaction  (rey)  [2],  avec,  ici,  la  complication  supple- 
mentaire  des  termes  dispersifs. 

Deux  quantites  facilement  observables  sont  de- 
duites  de  (1)  :  la  section  efficace  de  diffusion  totale, 
integree  sur  tous  les  etats  finals  possibles  du  cris- 
tal, -r^  (KK'ee')  et  la  section  efficace  de  diffusion 

sans  recul,  -tt?  (KK'et'). 

En  nous  placant  dans  les  conditions  de  validite 
de  (2)  : 

do!  =  JS  1*l*li<IMi«w«i|«.|>i'*?. 


dQ 


WN 


d^B 


Si  nous  negligeons  la  variation  de  —?  en  fonc- 

d  12 

tion  de  k\ '  =  k  +  E>   \  —  Ei&  i  en  utilisant  : 
2||f.!><|P.)l  =  l   et    2  f|«}-l 


nous  obtenons  evidemment  : 

dok/dO  =  daE/dO 
et  : 

do?/dfl=  S  g(«tj|<{|a.}|ei«tt/'l|{a.)>|2daE/dn. 
M 
Pour  un  cristal  isotrope,  on  trouve  le  facteur  de 
Debye-Waller  par  un  calcul  immediat  calqu6  sur 
celui  de  Lamb  : 


d_aE 
d 


fb  j      3   q-    l    r         fi    kv  du  1 ) 


d«E 
dl2 


(3) 


X  =  0  IT. 


2.  Diffusion  nucleaire  resonnante.  —  La  diffu- 
sion resonnante  est  un  phenomene  a  un  seul  quan- 
tum ou  encore  coherent,  lorsque  l'etat  du  diffuseur 
pendant  le  processus  n'est  pas  observe  [4].  C'est  le 
cas  de  toutes  les  diffusions  et  reactions,  ou  le  temps 
de  vie  de  l'etat  excite  etant  tres  court,  le  faisceau 
incident  (la  perturbation)  et  le  faisceau  diffuse 
sont  pratiquement  etablis  en  permanence.  Gepen- 
dant  les  experiences  ou  un  delai  est  introduit  entre 
l'onde  incidente  et  l'observation  d'une  particule 
reemise  [5]  detruisent  cette  coherence.  Notons  aussi 
que  les  transformations  a  ou  (3  et  les  cascades  de  y 
des  noyaux  peuvent  etre  envisagees  sous  cet  aspect ; 
la  coherence  peut  etre  detruite  simplement  en 
isolant  l'etat  intermediaire  s'il  a  une  vie  assez 
longue  ou  bien  par  une  interaction  exterieure  telle 
que  le  couplaga  entre  le  moment  quadrupolaire  de 
l'etat  intermediaire  et  le  champ  cristallin. 

Puisque  la  coherence  et  l'absence  d'information 
sur  l'etat  du  diffuseur  pendant  la  diffusion  sont 
liees,  on  s'attendrait  a  ce  que  la  proportion  de 
diffusion  sans  recul  soit  donnee  par 


exp 


2  2MKG 


W* 


ou  figure  le  transfert  global  d'impulsion  q  et  non 
par 

K*  1 


exp  { —  3 


2Mk& 


F[x)     =  /» 


ou  figure  le  transfert  d'impulsion  lors  de  i'absorp- 
tion  ou  de  remission.  En  realite  le  r6sultat  varie 
entre  ces  deux  extremes  selon  la  largeur  de  l'etat 
excite.  En  effet,  en  appelant 

MIKK'et') 
Wl—W0—k  +  tT/2 

l'amplitude  de  diffusion  resonnante,  la  section  effi- 
cace de  diffusion  sans  recul  est : 

|2  <{«||e«'«/»|{»,}>  <j 


^Ka/*l{«.|>|2 


|M(KK'€€')|»,     (4) 


206 

No  5                                                                    DIFFUSION  DES  PHOTONS  305 

Les  deux  cas  limites  sont  :  1°  Largeur  de  l'etat  type  de  Bragg  ne  peut  avoir  lieu  que  si  le  cristal 

excite  <px  grande  devant  A;0  ;  deja  examine  plus  est  laisse  dans  l'etat  initial).  Dans  le  premier  cas  : 

haut  :  0      y. 

i«(..j  -  B|..|i « \w,  -  w.-  *  +  i-A  ra  =  N s !  - !  ^ l(  - l '  - !  **'"'' 

d<JB  j2  dar 

et  on  obtient  :  =  ?  ^q  +  /  ^ 

da?/dO  =  9dar/da  +  S    g{  a,  j|<  |  «.  )|.W»|j  a. )  ><  j  a,  }| 

2°  Largeur  T  <  k&.  Alors  |Wi —  W0  -  k\  ~  V. 

Les  transitions  par  des  etats  intermediaires  du  elK'u^\\  «,}><{  a,  ]|  e— lKulh\ 
cristal   {  ns  }    ^    {  as  )    ne    contribueroht    pas    si 

Ein  i  -  £|a  i  »  T.  11  ne  pourrait  y  avoir  de  con-  j  «,  j  >  —  _  £*S_^*_  -r/2  +  C.Cj  x  e*//«c-a 

tribution  que  de  la  part  de  transitions  aunou  ,     .      ...         ,     , 

quelques  phonons  tres  mous  :  *«..  -*  0.  Mais  leur  au  Premier  ordre  les  elements  de  matrice  : 

densite  diV(o))/ato  varie  en  to2/©3  ;  on  peut  done  <  <      ueipu/h,i  aj >  > 

les  negliger,  d'autant  mieux  que  la  temperature  de  '    * '             '    * ' 

Debye  est  elevee.  La  somme  dans  (5)  se  reduit  au  ^  if  <     li  +  1      pf        ,„N       ,  J     > 

terme  {  n3  j   =  {  a3  ),  la  partie  imaginaire  y  est  ~s-i        l        2  2M7Vsg>»       *        '\a' 

egale  a  172.  On  a  done  :  x    ,  ,      , 

sont  reels,  done  : 

da?/dQ  =   S   g{  «,}|<{  a.  ||e-iKM/fl|{  «s  j  >  |2  da  _      doR           da_r 

[a*j  dft~   9  dft  +  '    dQ 

|<|«.}|e**/«||«.}>|»d«r/dn  +  9^L_^_,T,a  +  C.C.l 


wx  _  w0  —  k  —  ir/2 


Kl    1     „,  Vl  >  dar        „  da 


exn   3  —  —  FIX)    —  =  /2  —  -^k  ^*  est  reel.  Le  terme  d'interference  varie  done 


2M/r0     v    '    dQ 


Dans  le  cas  intermediate  d'une  largeur  nucleaire 


avec  l'energie  comme 

W,  —  W,  —  k 


assez  importante,  le  resultat  est  plus  complique,  l-Wl      w°      k^  +  r2/* 

car  la  factorisation  en  termes  dependant  du  cristal  c. ,  „  „t,„x„„b  ■     ■  j  „+„„„„„• +  .,  „„„„.. 

Pt  du  novan  nP  sp  fait  nlns  Sl  les  Photons  incidents  proviennent  d  une  source 

et  au  noyau  ne  se  iait  pms.  dg  mgme  nature  6mettant  sans  recul?  integration 

1 
3.  Interference entre diffusion atomique  et  diffu-  sur  le  sPeGtre  ^y^—Wo  —  k)2  +  r/4  fait  dispa" 
sion  nucleaire  r&onnante.  —  Dans  le  cas  le  plus  raitre  le  terme  d'interference.  Celui-ci  ne  subsiste 
frequent,  la  diffusion  Rayleigh  est  monotone,  et  la  que  si  la  raie  incidente  est  dissymetrique  par  rap- 
diffusion  nucleaire  a  lieu  sur  un  niveau  tres  etroit.  port  a  Wx  • —  W0,  par  exemple  si  la  source  est  ani- 
Nous  avons  dans  ces  conditions  :  mee  d'une  vitesse  qui  decale  l'energie  de  (v/c)k. 

La  diffusion  totale  a  pour  section  efficace,  en 

—  (i  a, }  I  $, }  KK'ce')  admettant  1' approximation  k'  =  k  : 

=  |<|P.!|e^|(as|>^(^)1%B(KK'ec')  SrNWfl*iS^)l-> 

+  <  {  P.  ||e-*'«/*|[  «,)><[«.  )le^«/«,j  „ )  >  -  |£  +  /  Jg 

M(KK'zt')            |«  2(Wl  —  W0-k) ^ 


a  quoi  s'applique  la  meme  discussion  que   pour 
da2 /dO. 


Wx—  w0—k  +  iF/2 

ou  : 

AR(HK'ee')  =  ZF(q)  e.e'+  ••• 

Conclusion.  ■ —  La  diffusion  atomique  et  la  diffu- 

L'interference  entre  les  deux  amplitudes  a  lieu      sion  r&sonnante  nucleaire  sont  des  processus  cohe- 

quel  que  soit  l'etat  final  du  cristal  (l'interference  du     rents.  Les  facteurs  de  Debye-Waller  pour  ces  deux 


207 


JOURNAL  DE  PHYSIQUE 


N°5 


processus  dependent  essentiellement  de  la  largeur 
des  niveaux  vis-a-vis  du  spectre  de  vibration  dti 
cristal.  Pour  des  raies  tres  etroites,  la  diffusion  pro- 
cede  par  un  etat  intermediate  du  cristal  bien  defini 
identique  a  l'etat  initial.  Pour  des  raies  tres  larges, 
ou  une  section  efficace  monotone,  l'etat  inter me- 
diaire  du  cristal  n'est  pas  defini  :  le  processus  passe 
par  tous  les  etats  intermediaires  possibles  du  cristal. 
En  d'autres  termes,  dans  le  cas  de  raies  tres 
etroites,  le  temps  caracteristique  de  diffusion  est 
long,  la  configuration  des  positions  de  l'atome  dans 


le  cristal  pendant  la  diffusion  est  moyennee,  ce  qui 
correspond  au  melange  statistique  d' etats  a  l'6qui- 
libre.  Pour  des  raies  larges,  ou  des  temps  caracte- 
ristiques  tres  courts,  la  moyenne  n'a  pas  le  temps 
de  se  faire,  la  diffusion  a  lieu  sur  une  configuration 
instantanee.  Notons  que  le  premier  terme  dans  la 
diffusion  Rayleigh  decrivant  la  diffusion  Thomson, 
comporte  une  sommation  implicite  sur  des  6tats 
intermediaires.  En  effet  l'expression  rigoureuse  de 
la  diffusion  Thomson  fait  apparaitre  des  termes  dis- 
persifs  de  la  forme  : 


S    <  I  P.  ||  e-l'K'"/«|  {  n,  J  ><  \  n,  j|  eiKM/*|{  a  ]><  pj.il>,  >  <  Vi\aA\v0  > 

lim.  <    )    — — 

fc-o  \ns\vi  ±  Vm2  c4  +  c2  p'2  —  mc2  ±  k  +  EisJ  —  £(»  j 


les  etats  intermediaires  s'ont  a  energie  positive  ou 
negative  et  l'ordre  d'absorption  et  d'emission  est 
inverse.  Lorsque  k  =  0,  les  termes  relatifs  aux  etats 
d' energie  positive  s'annulent.Seuls  les  etats  d'6ner- 
gie  negative  contribuent,  et  leurs  denominateurs 
sont  de  la  forme 


—  Vm*  c2  +  c2  p'2—  mc2  +  EU\  —  Ei*A 

-+  —  2mc2  +  £UI  —  £(«! 

Ein  >  ■ —  Ei^  j  peut  etre  neglige,  d'ou  la  possibilite 

de  sommer  sur  les  etats  intermediaires  {  n3  ]. 

L'interference  entre  la  diffusion  resonnante  et  la 
diffusion  atomique  est  a  rapprocher  de  Tinterfe- 
rence  entre  photoelectrons  et  electrons  de  conver- 
sion [6]. 


L'auteur  tient  a  remercier  MM.  Abragam,  Bar- 
loutaud,  Cotton,  Picou  pour  les  discussions  qu'il  a 
eues  avec  eux. 


APPENDICE 

Emission  d'une  cascade  de  deux  photons.  —  Le 

noyau  est  initialement  dans  l'etat  excite  d'ener- 
gie  W2,  de  largeur  infiniment  fine,  et  en  equilibre 
thermique  dans  le  reseau.  II  emet  un  photon  k2, 
K2  (ou  un  electron  de  conversion  Ez,  p2)  par  tran- 
sition a  l'etat  yx  d'energie  W  de  largeur  T  puis  un 
photon  au  fondamental.  Le  probleme  est  de  cal- 
culer  la  probability  d'emission  sans  recul  du  pho- 
ton kv  Elle  est  proportionnelle  a  : 


g\   *s 


Z<\V,\\eiKLuIh\\ns]>  < 


JK,«/*\\  a,  I  > 


W1  —  W2  +  k2  +  £j»s|  -  £ja,}  +  iy 

h  +  k1  +  2?|f»  i  =  W ,  +  Elai. 


(1) 


(2) 


L'emission  du  photon  kx  sans  recul  signifie  que 
l'etat  du  cristal  ne  change  pas  au  cours  de  la  deu- 
xieme  transition  :  {  rig  \  =  {  (S„ }.  En  meme  temps 
nous  nous  placons  dans  l'hypothese  que  l'etat  cris- 


tallin  intermediaire  subsiste  plus  longtemps  que 
%/F  autrement  dit  qu'il  n'y  a  pas  de  rearrangement 
spontane  pendant  le  temps  de  vie  de  l'etat  inter- 
mediaire. Alors  (1)  devient,  avec  l'aide  de  (2) 


«l*l 


<  |  P.  ]\eiK^\\  p.  |  ><  j  Ps  }|e«««/*|{  a,  \  >  |2 


[Wx  —  ki)2  +  T2/4 


208 


N°5 


DIFFUSION  DES  PHOTONS 


307 


La  raie  kx  est  done  emise  avec  sa  largeur  natu- 
relle.  Le  terme  cristallin  s'evalue  comme  suit  : 


n  i< 


M?.)H-*5.(2iV,  +  l)||p.}>| 

rll  •)  *-x 

|<  |  P«  jll  — ^  (2^*  +  1)  +  **{«.  +  «.+  )l|  *. 

en  posant 


g{  *. 


3tf 

n 


Kl  c(2MiV*w,)-'/s 
-Ar|,[2(a,  +  1)  +  1]  }  a,  A«, 


+  {  1  —  *«,(2a,  +  1)  }  |  1  —  A|s(2a,  +  1)  } 

+  j  1  —  *f.[2(a,  +  1)  +  1]  |  («,  +  1)  *t,] 

au  premier  ordre  en  Af,  il  ne  reste  que 

S{k|n[l  —  Wa,  +  1)] 

N 


(3) 


(3) 


qui  est  Pexpression  du  facteur  d'emission  sans 
recul  d'un  photon  kx  egal,  pour  un  cristal  de  Debye 
a  : 


exP    —  o51S 


2  2Mk@ 


F(X) 


Geci  demontre  le  fait  experimental  reconnu  que 
remission  d'un  photon  Mbssbauer  a  lieu  indepen- 
damment  de  1'histoire  anterieure  du  systeme,  sans 
qu'il  soit  utile  pour  l'expliquer  de  faire  appel  a  un 
rearrangement  du  cristal  apres  les  emissions  prece- 
dentes.  Les  etats  intermediates  du  cristal  se  corn- 
portent  comme  un  etat  d'equilibre  pratiquement 
identique  a  l'etat  d'equilibre  initial  g  j  oc,  {. 

L'expUcation  par  le  rearrangement  cristallin  se 
revele  necessaire  si  le  recul  X|/23f  est  considerable 
et  d6truit  localement  le  reseau. 


Manuscrit  recu  le  5  Janvier  1961. 


REFERENCES 


[1]  Mossbauer  (R.  L.),  Z.  Physik,  1958,  151,  124. 
[2]  Lamb  (W.  E.),  Phys.  Rev.,  1939,  55,  190. 
[4]  Heitler  (W.),  Quantum  Theory  of  radiation,  Oxford, 
University  Press. 


[5]  Holland  (R.  E.),  Lynch  (F.  J.),  Perlow  (G.  J.)  et 
Hanna  (S.  S.),  Phys.  Rev.,  Letters,  1960,  4, 181. 

[6]  Cf.  LiPKiN.dans  "Mossbauer  Effect ■>,  ed.  de  1'Univer- 
site  d'Dlinois,  TN,  60.698. 


209 


SEANCE   DU    11   AVRIL    1960.  i^o5 

PHYSIQUE  NUGLEAIRE.  —  Diffusion  resonnante  du  rayonnement  v  de 
23,8  keV  de  il9Sn*  emis  sans  recul.  Note  (*)  de  MM.  Roland  Barloutaud, 
Jean-Loup  Picou  et  Ciiristopue  Tzara,  presentee  par  M.  Francis  Perrin. 

Nousavons  observe  les  photons  reemis  par  119Sn  apres  absorption  resonnante  de 
photons  6mis  sans  recul  par  l1"Sn*.  La  valeur  du  facteur  de  Debye-Waller,  a 
environ  900  K,  mesur^e  par  cette  m£thode,  est  en  bon  accord  avec  celle  mesur^e 
par  transmission. 

De  recentes  experiences  ont  mis  en  evidence  l'emission  et  l'absorption 
sans  recul  de  photons  par  des  noyaux  lies  dans  un  cristal.  Cet  effet  decouvert 
par  Mossbauer  (*)  a  ete  jusqu'a  maintenant  observe  au  moyen  d'experiences 
de  transmission  a  differentes  temperatures.  Nous  avons  etudie  les  rayon- 
nements  y  reemis  apres  une  absorption  resonnante  sans  recul.  Une  telle 
experience  est  en  principe  plus  sensible  qu'une  experience  de  transmission; 
en  effet,  les  photons  emis  sans  recul  ne  sont  diffuses  notablement  que  par 
interaction  avec  les  electrons  atomiques,  les  sections  efhcaces  correspon- 
dantes  etant  generalement  beaucoup  plus  petites  que  celles  de  la  diffusion 
par  resonance  nucleaire. 

Les  meilleures  conditions  d'observation  de  ce  processus  sont  obtenues 
lorsque  : 

i°  La  diffusion  non  resonnante  est  peu  intense,  c'est-a-dire  aux  grands 
angles  ou  les  divers  facteurs  de  forme  de  la  diffusion  atomique  sont  petits. 

20  La  section  efficace  de  diffusion  resonnante,  proportionnelle a  i/E2(i+a) 
est  elevee  (E  etant  l'energie  de  la  transition  et  a  le  coefficient  de  conver- 
sion). 

3°  Les  facteurs  de  Debye-Waller,  donnant  la  proportion  des  processus 
sans  recul,  sont  grands. 

Cette  experience  a  ete  faite  avec  le  rayonnement  y  de  23,8  keV  de 
iiogn*  pj  dont  le  schema  de  disintegration  est  represente  sur  la  figure  1. 
Ce  noyau  remplit  assez  bien  les  conditions  ci-dessus  et  presente  en  outre 
l'avantage  den'emettre,  a  part  le  rayonnement  y  interessant,  que  les  raies  X 
de  l'etain.  Un  ecran  de  palladium  dont  la  discontinuity  K  est  situee 
a  24,36  keV,  absorbe  selectivement  les  XK  de  l'etain  sans  attenuer  for- 
tement  le  rayonnement  y. 

Le  dispositif  experimental  est  schematise  sur  la  figure  2.  Les  photons 
sont  diffuses  a  70  ±  5°  par  un  cylindre  d'etain  enrichi  en  ii9Sn  (71,5  %) 
maintenu  a  l'interieur  d'un  cylindre  en  mylar  de  0,07  mm  d'epaisseur. 
Un  ecran  de  plomb  masque  completement  la  source  vue  du  cristal.  L' en- 
semble source  diffuseur  se  trouve  a  l'interieur  d'une  boite  en  polyethylene 
expanse  et  peut  etre  porte  a  une  temperature  voisine  de  celle  de  l'azote 
liquide. 

Les  mesures  d'intensite  des  photons  diffuses  ont  ete  effectuees  a  la 
temperature  ambiante  et  a  environ  900  K.   La  diffusion  due  a  la  matiere 


210 

2706  ACADEMIE   DES   SCIENCES. 

environnante  a  ete  determinee  par  une  experience  temoin  faite  sans  diffu- 
seur  de  119Sn.  Les  taux  de  comptage  obtenus,  corriges  de  l'effet  d'emission 
des  XK  du  palladium,  sont  respectivement  : 


N90»r  =  i3,9    ±  1       par  minute, 
N:Joo<>r=    4,65  ±0,7  par  minute; 


d'ou 


N3no 


o,5. 


Ces   intensites    peuvent    s'exprimer    en   fonction    des    sections    efficaces 
differentielles    de    diffusion    resonnante    et    non    resonnante    (da/dco)r    et 


11 

T.  270  j 

89  UaV 

■  I 

£      grand 

♦  3 

T.  1,85  10*  3 

i 

-      2J8  WoV 

I 

M.    «.f. 

6,3 10> 

1 

' 

1 

0 

Fig.   1. 


1.  Soure*       W5n     (SO  ma/em') 

2.  Dlffu»aur    w5n     (5mg/em«) 
2>.  Ecran     da     plamb 

k.  Ccron      de      R*      (120  mg/o^1) 

5.  5clnrllloraur     da     Nat  (Tt) 

Fig.    2. 


(da/d(i))n.T  et  de  la  proportion  fL  du  rayonnement  y  emis  ou  absorbe  sans 
recul  a  la  temperature  t  en  supposant  que  /300  est  negligeable  : 

N90  ~(i  —  f90)nl  -^  J      an.r.+  (/«« —  £90)  S, 

m  est  le  nombre  d'atomes  d'etain  par  centimetre  carre  du  diffuseur  a 
l'incidence  35°,  £9o  est  l'autoabsorption  resonnante  de  la  source  a  900  K. 
S  est  la  probability  pour  qu'un  photon  sans  recul  soit  diffuse  par  reso- 
nance dans  la  direction  du  cristal  : 


s=M^-*  >+(-^)<-->]( 


ctto  J,. 


t  etant  la  transmission  des  photons  sans  recul  a  travers  l'ecran  a  l'inci- 
dence de  35°;  ar  et  anr  sont  les  absorptions  electroniques  moyennes  des 
photons  diffuses  dans  les  processus  resonnants  et  non  resonnants. 

La  section  efficace  des  processus  non  resonnants   (do/dw)B.r.  a  ete  deter- 
minee a  l'aide  des  facteurs  de  formes  donnes  dans   (');   elle  est  egale  a 


211 


SEANCE   DU    11    AVRIL    1960.  2707 

19  barns/srad.  La  section  eflicace  resonnante  {dajd<si)t  a  ete  calculee  en 
supposant  que  la  distribution  angulaire  des  photons  correspondait  a  une 
transition  dipolaire  magnetique  pure  et  n'etait  pas  attenuee  par  inter- 
action quadrupolaire,  une  recente  mesure  (*)  donnant  une  limite  supe- 
rieure  de  io~8  eV  a  Q  d2Y/dz2.  Elle  est  egale  a  6  000  barns/srad.  On  deduit 
des  resultats  experimentaux  : 

/00=o,3o±  0,07. 

Cette  valeur  est  en  bon  accord  avec  celle  obtenue  par  des  mesures  de 
transmission  (/90  =  o,32  ±  0,01 5)   (*). 

II  est  possible  d'augmenter  le  rapport  N9o/N3oo  et  d'ameliorer  ainsi  la 
precision  en  operant  avec  un  diffuseur  plus  mince  (/^  1  mg)  et  un  angle 
de  diffusion  plus  grand  de  facon  a  rendre  pratiquement  negligeable  la 
diffusion  non  resonnante. 

Cette  methode  presente  d'autres  aspects  interessants.  La  distribution 
angulaire  des  photons  diffuses  est  une  source  d'information  sur  le  carac- 
tere  de  la  transition  et  l'importance  de  l'interaction  quadrupolaire;  de 
plus  F  etude  des  interferences  entre  les  processus  sans  recul  resonnants  et 
non  resonnants  (5),  (6)  peut  apporter  une  verification  de  la  coherence  dans 
la  diffusion  resonnante.  Enfin,  la  raie  de  photons  sans  recul  absorbes 
et  reemis  sans  perte  d'energie  est  sensiblement  plus  etroite  que  la  raie 
emise  initialement  par  la  source,  la  distribution  en  energie  est  par  exemple, 
pour  une  source  et  un  diffuseur  minces,  de  la  forme  i/[(E  —  E0)2+  F2/4]2> 
conduisant  a  une  raie  de  largeur  a  mi-hauteur  0,64  fois  celle  de  la  raie  des 
photons  avant  diffusion. 

(*)  Seance  du  4  avril   i960. 

(0  R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Physik,  151,  1958,  p.  124. 

(2)  R.  Barloutaud,  E.  Cotton,  J.-L.  Picou  et  J.  Quidort,  Comptes  rendus,  250, 
i960,  p.  319. 

(')  A.  K.  Compton  et  S.  K.  Allison,  X-rays  and  experiment,  Van  Nostrand,  ie  €d. 
p.  781. 

(*)  Sous  presse. 

(8)  A.  Kastler,  Comptes  rendus,  250,   i960,  p.  509. 

(°)  G.  Tzara  et  R.  Barloutaud  (sous  presse). 

(Centre  d'Etudes  nucliaires  de  Saclay.) 


212 


Volume  4,  Number  11 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


June  1,  I960 


ZEEMAN  EFFECT  IN  THE  RECOILLESS  y-RAY  RESONANCE  OF  ZnOTt 

P.  P.  Craig,  D.  E.  Nagle,  and  D.  R.  F.  Cochran 

Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory,  University  of  California,  Los  Alamos,  New  Mexico 
(Received  May  4,  1960) 


Recoil-free  resonance  emission  and  absorption 
(Mossbauer  effect)1  of  the  93-kev  y  ray  in  Zn67 
gives  rise  to  the  most  precise  energy  definition 
thus  far  reported.2   Despite  the  numerous  diffi- 
culties which  beset  the  experimenter  searching 
for  the  resonance,3  a  small  but  definite  Moss- 
bauer effect  has  been  found.2   This  Letter  reports 
measurements  on  the  influence  of  the  nuclear 
Zeeman  effect  and  other  perturbing  factors  upon 
the  Mossbauer  effect  in  Zn87  embedded  in  an  en- 
riched ZnO  absorber  lattice. 

The  relatively  high  energy  of  this  y  ray  makes 
it  necessary  to  embed  the  source  and  the  ab- 
sorber atoms  in  rigid  crystalline  lattices,  and 
to  perform  the  experiments  at  low  temperatures. 
The  first  of  these  requirements  was  met  by  using 
ZnO  for  both  the  source  and  the  absorber  lattices. 
The  second  requirement  was  more  than  satisfied 
by  using  temperatures  below  the  helium  lambda 
transition  (2.175°K).    In  addition  to  these  basic 
requirements,  several  experimental  difficulties 


are  consequences  of  the  extreme  narrowness  of 
the  line  (4.84 xl0~u  ev).    It  is  accordingly  neces- 
sary to  take  into  account  the  effect  of  various 
perturbing  influences.    Here  we  list  the  more 
important  of  these  perturbations,  and  in  the  fol- 
lowing paragraphs  indicate  how  they  enter  into 
the  design  of  the  experiment. 

One  class  of  shifts  arises  from  the  change  of 
nuclear  mass  upon  y-ray  emission  or  absorption, 
with  a  resultant  change  in  the  phonon  spectrum 
of  the  lattice.    The  change  in  energy  of  the  emit- 
ted y  ray  is  given  by4 


AE  =  -(E/Mc2)<T>, 


(1) 


where  E  is  the  y-ray  energy,  M  is  the  mass  of 
the  emitting  nucleus,  and  <  T)  is  the  expectation 
value  for  the  kinetic  energy  per  atom  of  the  lat- 
tice.   If  any  parameter  x  should  differ  between 
source  and  absorber  lattice,  the  recoil -free 
peaks  will  occur  at  different  energies  in  the 
emission  spectrum  and  in  the  absorption  spec- 


561 


213 


Volume  4,  Number  11 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


June   1,   I960 


tram.   The  shift  is  given  by 


5(A£)  =  —  (AE)6x. 


(2) 


This  expression  predicts  that  a  difference  in 
Debye  temperature  between  source  and  absorber 
of  only  about  1.3°K  would  cause  a  shift  of  one 
linewidth.    Thus  a  change  in  the  average  iso- 
topic  mass  number  of  2%  would,  through  the 
mechanism  of  the  Debye  temperature  (taking  0 
=  300°K),  result  in  a  shift  of  about  four  linewidths. 
Similarly,  differences  in  chemical  constitution5 
or  lattice  defects  may  be  expected  to  produce 
significant  shifts.   We  shall  refer  to  a  shift  due 
to  difference  in  isotopic  mass  between  source 
and  absorber  as  the  isotopic  mass  effect. 

In  order  for  the  emitted  gamma  radiation  to 
remain  unshifted  by  the  recoil  of  the  emitting 
nuclei,  it  is  essential  that  the  recoil  momentum 
be  absorbed  by  entire  crystallites.    For  all  pre- 
viously observed  resonances  the  minimum  size 
of  the  crystallites  was  quite  small.    In  the  pre- 
sent situation  this  is  no  longer  true.    The  recoil 
momentum  must  be  taken  up  by  at  least  2  x  109 
nuclei,  so  that  the  ZnO  crystallites  must  be 
larger  than  0.4  micron.    Since  commercial  ZnO 
would  normally  possess  average  grain  sizes 
smaller  than  one  micron,8  care  must  be  exer- 
cised to  ensure  a  grain  size  much  larger  than 
the  above  nominal  requirement.    A  sintering  pro- 
cess assured  that  this  requirement  was  met  for 
the  source.    A  sample  of  the  enriched  absorber 
was  studied  under  an  oil  immersion  microscope. 
No  grains  smaller  than  0.5  micron  were  ob- 
served, and  the  majority  of  the  grains  were  in 
the  range  of  1  to  2  microns. 

Mechanical  vibrations  of  only  10 "5  cm/sec 
would  produce  a  Doppler  broadening  of  about  one 
linewidth.    Since  the  vibration  level  in  our  build- 
ing was  nearly  5x10"*  cm/sec,  the  helium  cryo- 
stat  was  shock- mounted  and  the  pumping  lines 
carefully  decoupled.   The  source  and  the  ab- 
sorber were  clamped  rigidly  in  a  single  package, 
which  was  suspended  by  threads  in  the  helium 
bath.   The  helium  bath  was  pumped  below  the 
lambda  transition  and  the  nitrogen  radiation 
shield  was  frozen  to  prevent  vibrations  from 
boiling  liquids  and  also  to  place  source  and  ab- 
sorber in  an  isothermal  bath. 

In  place  of  the  velocity  drive  usually  used  in 
this  type  of  experiment,  the  resonance  was 
shifted  by  means  of  the  nuclear  Zeeman  effect. 
The  magnetic  moment  of  the  Zn67  nucleus  inter- 
acting with  an  applied  magnetic  field  splits  the 


ground  state  into  six  components  and  the  excited 
state  into  four  components.    Selection  rules  per- 
mit twelve  component  gamma  transitions,  as  is 
shown  in  Fig.  1(a).    Here/   =5/2,  /g  =  3/2,  and 
the  ground-state  gyromagnetic  ratio  #=0.35.7 
For  the  excited  state  no  g  value  has  been  meas- 
ured; we  adopt  arbitrarily  the  value  -1.    (The 
negative  sign  is  predicted  by  the  shell  model.) 
The  source  is  shielded  from  the  magnetic  field 
and  hence  the  emission  spectrum  is  not  split. 
For  simplicity,  the  effect  of  quadrupole  interac- 
tions has  been  omitted.    Assuming  a  shift  bE  be- 
tween source  and  absorber,  resonance  can  occur 
for  six  values  of  magnetic  field.    Each  component 
has  a  width  which  is  compounded  of  the  natural 
linewidth  and  the  widths  due  to  residual  mechan- 
ical vibrations,  quadrupole  broadening,  etc. 
Even  if  this  width  is  the  same  for  all  components, 
the  present  method  of  studying  the  resonances  as 
a  function  of  an  external  magnetic  field  will 
cause  the  apparent  or  magnetic  width  of  each  re- 
sonance peak  to  be  proportional  to  the  field  re  - 
quired  to  establish  the  resonance.    Thus  reso- 
nances occurring  at  low  values  of  the  applied 
field  will  appear  narrower  than  those  established 
at  high  fields,  and  the  observed  spectrum  will 
appear  distorted. 
The  magnetic  field  was  produced  by  a  small 


(a) 


SE 

--'———-= = 

\»o> 

z 
o 

a. 
ac 
o 
<r> 
a> 

1 

(b) 


FIG.  1.    (a)  Zeeman  splittings  of  the  gamma  ray  vs 
an  applied  magnetic  field.    The  gyromagnetic  ratio  of 
the  ground  state  is  0. 35,  and  a  value  of  -1.0  has  been 
arbitrarily  chosen  for  the  excited  state,    (b)  Resonance 
pattern  expected  from  the  splittings  in  (a)  in  the  pre- 
sence of  an  energy  shift  6E  between  source  and  ab- 
sorber.   In  actuality,  line  broadening  would  be  ex- 
pected to  merge  closely  spaced  lines  into  single  peaks. 


562 


214 


Volume  4,  Number  11 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


June  1,  I960 


solenoid  surrounding  the  absorber.    Fields  of  up 
to  700  gauss  could  be  applied  to  the  absorber, 
while  the  source  was  entirely  shielded  (at  oper- 
ating temperatures)  by  superconducting  lead 
foil.    Stray  fields  at  the  absorber  were  measured 
to  be  less  than  2  gauss.    Fields  from  the  sole- 
noid were  prevented  from  reaching  the  photo  - 
multiplier  by  a  superconducting  ring  placed  in 
the  cryostat  bottom  through  which  the  gamma 
rays  emerged.    Changes  in  counting  rate  due  to 
changing  fields  at  the  photo  multiplier  were  found, 
even  without  the  superconducting  shield,  to  be 
less  than  ±0.02%. 

The  absorber  used  in  all  experiments  was 
1.231  g  of  enriched  ZnO  (92.4%  Zn87  enrichment) 
pressed  with  0.036  g  of  polyethylene  glycol  bind- 
er into  a  button  1.11  cm  in  diameter.    Sources 
were  prepared  in  the  Los  Alamos  cyclotron  by 
the  reaction  Zn^d.njGa87  on  normal  sintered 
ZnO.    Other  reaction  products  were  accounted 
for  by  a  background  correction.    After  bombard- 
ment, the  sources  were  annealed  for  about  one 
hour  in  air  at  about  1000°C  in  order  to  anneal 
radiation  damage  and  to  assure  that  the  Ga67 
atoms  were  correctly  placed  in  the  ZnO  lattice. 
Such  a  procedure  is  essential,  and  lower  tem- 
peratures or  shorter  times  yielded  erratic  re- 
sults, or  no  resonance  whatever. 

Measurements  were  made  of  the  transmission 
of  the  absorber  vs  the  applied  magnetic  field. 
Because  of  the  extremely  small  change  in  count- 
ing rate  and  the  large  number  of  counts  required 
(typically  108  per  point),  automation  of  the  count- 
ing system  and  extreme  system  stability  were 
imperative.    The  93-kev  gamma  rays  passed 
through  thin  windows  in  the  cryostat  bottom,  and 
were  detected  by  a  Nal(Tl)  scintillation  crystal. 
The  pulses  were  amplified  and  analyzed  by  a 
single -channel  analyzer  followed  by  a  scaler 
equipped  with  a  digital  recorder.    In  order  to 
eliminate  the  effect  of  source  decay,  all  meas- 
urements were  taken  relative  to  the  counting 
rate  when  one  applied  a  magnetic  field  sufficient 
to  destroy  the  resonance  entirely.    The  magnetic 
field  sequencing  and  the  scaler  were  controlled 
by  an  automatic  programmer.    Timing  was  con- 
trolled by  a  thermostatted  quartz  crystal  fre- 
quency standard  with  a  stated  accuracy  of  3  parts 
in  107  per  week.    The  programming  was  such  as 
to  make  the  measurements  insensitive  to  linear 
drifts. 

Instrument  checks  were  performed  by  cycling 
the  magnetic  field  (a)  at  room  temperature,  (b) 
at  low  temperature  using  a  nonresonant  gamma 


ray,  and  (c)  at  low  temperature  using  as  an  ab- 
sorber a  zinc -containing  material  (gahnite)  in 
which  no  resonance  exists.2   In  each  case  the 
change  in  counting  rate  upon  application  of  the 
magnetic  field  was  found  to  be  zero  to  within 
±0.02%. 

Figure  2  shows  the  resonance  curve  obtained. 
The  points  include  corrections  for  background 
and  unresolved  nonresonant  gamma  rays  of 
typically  30%.    The  central  features  of  the  data 
are  the  remarkably  large  total  area  under  the 
resonance,  and  the  structure  and  total  breadth 
present.    The  total  area  is  sufficiently  large  that, 
were  there  no  line  broadening,  one  would  esti- 
mate the  resonance  absorption  to  be  several  per- 
cent.   Such  a  value  implies  a  Debye  temperature 
for  ZnO  of  about  300°K,  which  is  consistent  with 
the  results  obtained  from  specific  heats.    The 
major  structural  feature  of  the  curve  lies  in  the 
fact  that  the  maximum  resonance  does  not  occur 
at  zero  field,  but  is  shifted  to  about  10  gauss. 
This  result  indicates  the  presence  of  shifts  such 
as  the  isotopic  mass  effect  mentioned  above. 
However,  the  displacement  of  the  maximum  (to 
10  gauss)  is  smaller  than  one  would  predict  from 
this  effect  alone  unless  an  unreasonably  large 
value  is  assumed  for  the  excited  state  g  value.  A 
plausible  explanation  is  that  chemical  shifts5  are 
superimposed  upon  the  isotopic  effect.    The  pre- 
sence of  such  shifts  is  implied  by  the  small  re- 
sonance found  at  zero  field  using  an  unenriched 
absorber.2   Since  in  tbat  case  no  isotope  effects 
were  present,  only  chemical  shifts  or  quadrupole 
broadening  can  explain  the  small  resonance  ob- 


T 

¥ 

1         r/Mn  __,  l_ 

0  SO  100         150         200        250        300        350        400 

FIELD  AT  ABSORBER  (GAUSS) 

FIG.  2.     Experimental  resonance  absorption  pattern 
for  the  93-kev  line  of  Zn6T  vs  the  magnetic  field  applied 
to  an  enriched  ZnO  absorber.    The  source  is  in  zero 
magnetic  field.    T/pn  is  the  natural  level  width  (in 
ergs)  divided  by  a  nuclear  magneton  (in  ergs  per 
gauss). 


563 


215 


Volume  4,  Number  11 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


June  1,  I960 


served.    In  the  present  experiments  two  peaks 
are  found  separated  by  only  about  40  gauss  so 
that  it  seems  unlikely  that  the  broadening  is  ex- 
treme.   The  tail  of  the  resonance  extends  to 
about  400  gauss  with  no  additional  structure. 
This  may  be  related  to  the  characteristic  of  the 
magnetic  method  that  even  unbroadened  lines 
possess  apparent  magnetic  widths  which  are  pro- 
portional to  the  applied  magnetic  field. 

Although  the  interpretation  is  admittedly  in- 
complete, the  extreme  sharpness  of  the  reso- 
nance is  apparent.  In  further  study,  involving 
the  development  of  a  Doppler  shift  drive,  we 
hope  to  measure  a  number  of  the  energy  shifts 
and  level  splittings  mentioned  in  previous  para- 
graphs. 

We  wish  to  thank  S,  D.  Stoddard  and  R.  E. 
Cowan  for  preparation  of  the  ZnO  source  buttons 
and  for  compacting  the  enriched  ZnO  absorber. 
The  generous  cooperation  of  the  cyclotron  group 
is  gratefully  acknowledged.   W.  E.  Keller  and 


J.  G.  Dash  each  contributed  a  number  of  ideas  to 
the  experiment. 


'Work  done  under  the  auspices  of  the  U.  S.  Atomic 
Energy  Commission. 

lR.  L.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Physik  151,  124(1958); 
Naturwissenschaften  45,  538(1958);  Z.  Naturforsch. 
14a,  211  (1959). 

~~*D.  E.  Nagle,  P.  P.  Craig,  and  W.  E.  Keller,  Na- 
ture (to  be  published) . 

3R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters 
4,  397  (1960). 

4R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters 
4,  337  (1960);  B.  D.  Josephson,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters 
4,  341  (1960). 

sO.  C.  Kistner  and  A.  W.  Sunyar,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  4,  412  (1960). 

8G.  Heiland,  E.  Mollwo,  and  F.  Stockmann,  Solid - 
State  Physics,  edited  by  F.  Seitz  and  D.  Turnbull 
(Academic  Press,  New  York,  1959),  Vol.  8,  p.  191. 

TH.  Kopfermann,  Kernmomente  (Akademische  Ver- 
lagsgesellschaft,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  1956). 


564 


216 


Mdssbauer  Effect  in  Ferrocyanide 

S.  L.  Ruby,  L.  M.  Epstein,  and  K.  H.  Sun 

Radiation  and  Nucleonics  Laboratory  of  the  Materials  Laboratories, 

Westinghouse  Electric  Corporation,  East  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania 

(Received  Match  18,  1960) 


IN  order  to  utilize  the  Mossbauer  effect  more  conven- 
iently, it  would  be  desirable  to  have  either  a  source  or 
an  absorber  which  is  monoenergetic.  To  date,  the  detailed 
work1,2  using  Fe87  has  employed  soft  iron  sources  and  ab- 
sorbers ;  here,  the  inner  magnetic  field  creates  a  hyperfine 
splitting  which  is  disadvantageous  for  some  work. 

During  a  discussion  with  the  group  at  the  Argonne 
National  Laboratories,  ferrocyanide  was  pointed  out  as  a 
possible  material  with  no  hyperfine  splitting.  This  follows 
from  the  fact  that  potassium  ferrocyanide  has  no  magnetic 
moment.3  Roughly  speaking,  the  electrons  from  the  cyano- 
gen groups  completely  fill  the  d-shell  of  the  iron  atom  and 
eliminate  the  magnetic  behavior. 

The  apparatus  employs  a  loud  speaker  to  vibrate  the 
Co"  source  at  25  cps,  and  a  coil  in  an  auxiliary  magnetic 
field  rigidly  attached  to  the  source  is  used  to  measure  its 
instantaneous  velocity.  The  14.4-kev  y  ray  is  detected  con- 
ventionally using  a  thin  Nal(Tl)  crystal  and  a  single 
channel  analyzer.  Its  output  is  used  to  initiate  a  multi- 
channel analyzer  which  has  been  modified  to  accept  the 
output  of  the  velocity  transducer.  Thus  the  complete 
velocity  spectrum  is  scanned  every  20  msec,  while  each 
y  ray  detected  is  stored  in  the  appropriate  velocity  channel. 
The  source  was  made  by  plating  about  300  i*c  of  Co57  onto 
soft  iron  and  annealing  as  suggested  by  Pound.4 
Na<Fe(CN)6-10H2O  at  80°K  was  used  as  an  absorber 
during  the  measurements  reported  here.  The  thickness  of 
the  absorber  is  about  100  mg/cm2  which  corresponds  to 
0.25  mg/cm2  of  Fe57. 

The  result  of  the  experiment  is  given  in  Fig.  1.  For  com- 
parison purposes,  a  spectrum  obtained  in  this  apparatus 
using  a  soft  iron  absorber  at  room  temperature  is  also 
shown.  Also  plotted  in'the  figure  are  bars  showing  the  posi- 
tion and  relative  size  of  the  absorption  peaks  to  be  expected 


utilizing  the  results  of  Hanna  et  al.,1  if  there  is  no  inner 
field  in  ferrocyanide.  Our  present  knowledge  of  instru- 
mental line  shape  is  incomplete,  and  consequently,-  the 
problem  of  assigning  an  upper  bound  to  the  inner  magnetic 
field  in  ferrocyanide  will  not  be  considered  here.  However, 
if  not  zero,  it  is  less  than  10%  of  the  field  in  soft  iron. 

The  foregoing  results  indicate  that  in  a  ferrocyanide 
source  the  emission  from  excited  Fe67  would  be  mono- 
energetic.  It  would  be  convenient  to  have  such  a  source, 
and  particularly  so  if  it  were  effective  at  room  temperature. 
Accordingly,  a  run  using  the  ferrocyanide  absorber  was 
made  at  room  temperature.  The  same  peaks  are  observed 
but  with  their  amplitudes  reduced  to  60  (±10)%  of  their 
value  at  80°K.  An  effect  of  this  magnitude  can  be  calcu- 
lated from  the  formula  for  the  resonant  fraction  given  by 
Pound,5 


/=exp- 


3     £, 


2  2Mc2kd\ 


1    3\ e  /  J I 


with  a  Debye  6  of  340  (±40)  °K.  This  suggests  that  a 
ferrocyanide  source  will  emit  about  40%  of  the  14.4-kev 
y  rays  without  energy  change  as  compared  to  60%  for 
soft  iron. 

However,  there  is  the  question  of  whether  the  excited 
Fe67  (produced  from  Co57  present  as  a  substitutional  im- 
purity) would  be  present  in  the  proper  chemical  state.  One 
possibility  is  that  cobalt  in  cyanide  complexes  tends  to  go 
to  the  trivalent  oxidation  state,  whereas  the  divalent  state 
is  required  for  transmutation  to  ferrocyanide.  In  addition, 
there  is  evidence6  that  the  cobalto-cyanide  complex  con- 
tains only  five  cyanide  groups  instead  of  six. 

We  would  like  to  thank  the  members  of  the  Argonne 


217 


LETTERS    TO    THE    EDITOR 


1       ■ 

•     i 

1  i ' 

1              1              1              1              1 

0 

-    #fA 

Wv  } 

A* 

Fe  at  300°K  vs  Na4Fe(CN)6-  10  H20  at  80°K 

2 

V 

u 

I1 

4 

i1 

V 

1               1 

i                 i                 i                 i                 i 

4  6  8  10  12 

VELOCITY,     MILLIMETERS/ SECOND 


16 


Fig.  1.  Percent  change  in  transmission  of  a  Co"  (Fe67*)  source  vs  velocity  of  an  iron  absorber  at  room  temperature  and  a 
sodium  ferrocyanide  absorber  at  80°K. 


group  for  their  helpful  advice,  and  also  Dr.  Sergio  De 
Benedetti  who  first  suggested  the  use  of  a  multichannel 
analyzer  as  a  velocity  measuring  device. 

1  S.  S.  Hanna  et  al.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  177  (1960). 
1  G.  DePasquali  et  al.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  71  (1960). 


8  L.  Pauling,  Nature  of  the  Chemical  Bond  (Cornell  University  Press, 
Ithaca,  New  York,  1960),  third  ed.,  p.  166. 

*  R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3,  554 
(1959). 

5  R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3,  440 
(1959). 

•  A.  W.  Adamson,  J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  73,  5710  (1951). 


218 

NUCLEAR    INSTRUMENTS    AND    M  E  TH  O  D  S  12   (1961)     131-137;    NORTH-HOLLAND    PUBLISHING    CO. 


TRANSMISSION  AND  LINE  BROADENING  OF  RESONANCE  RADIATION  INCIDENT 
ON  A  RESONANCE  ABSORBER  t 

S.  MARGULIES  and  J.  R.  EHRMAN 

University  of  Illinois,  Urbana,  Illinois 

Received  13  February  1961 

The  transmission  of  resonance  radiation  emitted  from  a  source  range  of  values  considered,  the  transmitted  line  shape  closely 

of  finite  thickness  and  passing  through  an  external  resonance  approximates  a  Breit-Wigner  curve  whose  width  is  greater  than 

absorber  is  discussed.  The  transmission  integral  is  examined  for  the  natural  width  of  the  transition.  This  line  broadening, 

both  a  linear  and  a  Gaussian  distribution  of  radioactive  atoms  caused  by  resonance  absorption  in  the  source  and  in  the  external 

in  the  source.  Several  special  cases  axe  presented,  and  the  absorber,  is  presented  graphically  as  a  function  of  source  and 

general  case  is  evaluated  by  numerical  integration.  Over  the  absorber  thickness. 

1.  Introduction 

R.  L.  Mossbauer's  discovery  that  recoilless  emission  and  absorption  of  nuclear  gamma  radiation  can 
occur1)  has  stimulated  a  host  of  recent  investigations2).  Interest  in  this  process  has  grown  rapidly  because 
the  Mossbauer  effect  allows  the  direct  observation  of  many  phenomena  formerly  thought  unmeasurable. 
A  terrestial  measurement  of  the  gravitational  red-shift3),  a  test  of  the  equivalence  principle  for  rotating 
systems4),  and  the  observation  of  the  Zeeman  splitting  of  excited  nuclear  levels5),  are  but  a  few  of  the 
experiments  made  possible  by  the  Mossbauer  effect.  In  addition,  the  effect  is  finding  many  applications  in 
the  measurement  of  the  internal  fields  in  solids. 

When  recoilless  emission  and  absorption  of  gamma  radiation  occurs,  the  conditions  for  nuclear  resonan- 
ce fluorescence  are  inherently  satisfied.  The  numerous  applications  of  the  Mossbauer  effect  follow  from 
the  fact  that,  in  such  cases,  the  very  narrow  lines  resulting  from  transitions  from  metastable  nuclear  levels 
can  actually  be  observed:  resonance  lines  with  widths  in  the  range  10-10  to  10-5  eV,  which  correspond 
respectively  to  gamma  transitions  from  levels  whose  half -lives  vary  between  10-5  and  10~10  sec,  have  been 
measured. 

Although  experiments  involving  the  Mossbauer  effect  can  be  performed  with  either  a  transmission  or  a 
scattering  geometry,  most  of  the  work  done  so  far  has  employed  the  former  approach6).  A  typical  trans- 
mission experiment  consists  of  measuring  the  resonance  radiation  passing  through  a  resonance  absorber, 
as  a  function  of  the  relative  velocity  between  source  and  absorber.  In  this  manner,  a  resonance  line  shape 
is  traced  out.  Since  the  great  utility  of  the  Mossbauer  effect  depends  upon  the  measurement  of  such  lines, 
a  consideration  of  the  line  shape  is  of  interest.  In  what  follows,  we  will  be  concerned  with  the  transmission 

■f  This  work  has  been  supported  in  part  by  the  joint  program  4)  H.  J.  Hay,  J'.  P.  Schiffer,  T.  E.  Cranshaw  and  P.  A.  Egel- 

of  the  U.S.  Office  of  Naval  Research  and  the  U.S.  Atomic  staff,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4  (1960)  165. 

Energy  Commission.  s)  R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3 

(1959)  554; 

x)  R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Physik  151  (1958)  124.  G.  DePasquali,  H.  Frauenfelder,  S.  Margulies  and  R.  N. 

8)  For  a  listing  of  recent  experiments,  see  the  bibliography  Peacock,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4  (1960)  71 ; 

contained  in  Proceedings  of  the  Allerton  Park  Conference  on  S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J.  Perlow,  R.  S. 

Mdssbauer  Effect,  University  of  Illinois,  Urbana,  Illinois,  June  Preston  and   D.   H.   Vincent,    Phys.   Rev.   Letters   4  (1960) 

5-7,  1960  (unpublished).  177. 

3)  R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4  *)  H.  Frauenfelder,  D.  R.  F.  Cochran,  D.  E.  Nagle  and  R.  D. 

(1960)  337.  Taylor,  Nuovo  Cim.  19  (1961)  183. 

131 


219 


132 


S.   MARGULIES   AND   J.    R.    EHRMAN 


of  resonant  gamma  radiation  emitted  from  a  source  of  finite  thicknessf,  and  passing  through  a  finite 
resonance  absorber.  In  particular,  we  will  consider  two  types  of  sources;  one  in  which  the  radioactive 
atoms  are  distributed  uniformly  and  one  which  has  a  Gaussian  distribution  of  emitting  nuclei. 


RESONANCE 
ABSORBER 


l«-jr-JdJ«- 


2.  General  Formulation 

In  our  calculation  of  the  transmitted  intensity, 
we  will  assume  that  a  fraction  /  of  all  decays 
occur  without  recoil  energy  loss7).  The  resonance 
radiation  resulting  from  these  decays  will  be  taken 
to  have  an  emission  and  absorption  spectrum  of 
Breit-Wigner  shape.  The  remaining  fraction  of  the 
radiation  is  non-resonant,  and  is  subject  only  to  or- 
dinary electronic  absorption.  We  will  consider  a 
source  having  arbitrary  area,  and  extending  in 
depth  from  x  =  0  to  x  —  oo.  The  distribution  of 
emitting  atoms  along  the  #-axis  will  be  denoted  by 
p(x).  We  will  deal  only  with  the  radiation  emitted  normal  to  the  area  of  the  source,  as  shown  in  fig.  1. 
The  distribution  of  the  absorbing  atoms  in  both  the  source  and  absorber  will  be  taken  to  be  uniform. 

Under  these  circumstances,  the  transmission  through  a  resonance  absorber  of  thickness  tA,  moving 
with  a  velocity  v  relative  to  the  source,  is  given  by 


Fig.  1 .  Geometry  used  to  calculate  the  transmission  of  y-radia- 

tion  through  a  resonance  absorber  moving  with  a  velocity  v 

relative  to  the  source. 


P(y)  =  e 


(1 


/)  J" 'dx  p{x)e"sX +  / 


x/; 


—  f     d£  exp  [  —  /'a«a«a<7o*a 
dxp(x) 


T2/4 


(E  —  EQ  +  Sf)*  +  T2/4 


exp 


(E—  £0)2  +ra/4J 
T2/4 


(E—Eo  +  f)2  +  T2/4 


+  (*s 


M) 


(i) 


In  this  equation,  r  is  the  full  width  at  half-height  of  both  the  emission  and  absorption  lines  which  are 
centered  about  E0,  and  oq  is  the  absorption  cross-section  at  resonancett.  The  subscripts  S  and  A  identify 
the  following  source  and  absorber  quantities: 

/'  —  probability  of  resonance  absorption  without  recoil, 

n  =  number  of  atoms  per  cubic  centimeter  of  volume, 

a  =  fractional  abundance  of  the  atoms  which  can  absorb  resonantly, 

fi  =  ordinary  mass  attenuation  coefficient,  evaluated  at  Eq. 
The  quantity^  =  {vjc)Eq  characterizes  the  Doppler  shift  between  the  source  and  absorber. 

The  first  term  in  (1)  represents  the  transmission  of  the  non-resonant  fraction  of  the  radiation,  and  is 
independent  of  the  Doppler  shift  Sf.  In  the  second  term,  which  is  the  resonant  contribution,  the  x-integral 
represents  the  emission  and  self-absorption  in  the  source.  We  will  neglect  the  fi%  appearing  in  the  ex- 
ponential of  this  integral,  since  the  mass  absorption  is  usually  much  smaller  than  the  resonance  absorp- 
tion. The  remaining  factors  in  the  second  term  represent  the  absorption  in  the  external  resonance  ab- 
sorber. The  lower  limit  on  the  energy  integral  has  been  taken  as  —  oo  instead  of  zero  for  convenience. 

tf  The  absorption  cross-section  at  resonance  is  given  by 


7)  W.  Marshall  and  J.  P.  Schiffer,  The  Debye-Waller  Factor  in 
the  Mossbauer  Effect,  A.E.R.E.,  Harwell  (1960),  (unpublished). 

t  The  case  of  a  beam  of  y-radiation,  having  a  Breit-Wigner 
energy  spectrum,  passing  through  a  resonance  absorber,  has 
been  considered  by  W.  M.  Visscher  in  The  Evaluation  of  the 
Transmission  Integral,  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory  (1959) 
(unpublished) .  This  corresponds,  in  effect,  to  the  non-resonant 
absorbing  source  described  in  Section  5. 


2»*a 


21*  +  1 


2/  +  1     1  +  a 


where  %  is  the  wavelength  of  the  y-ray,  7*  and  /  are  the  nuclear 
spins  of  the  initial  and  final  states,  respectively,  and  a  is  the 
conversion  coefficient  for  the  transition. 


220 


TRANSMISSION   AND   LINE  BROADENING  133 

Equation  (1)  can  be  seen  to  be  independent  of  the  sign  of  theDoppler  shifts.  Since  only  relative  motion 
between  source  and  absorber  is  pertinent,  £f  can  be  included  in  the  absorber  part  of  the  transmission 
integral  instead  of  the  source  part,  if  desired. 

Equation  (1)  can  easily  be  generalized  for  the  case  when  the  emission  and  absorption  lines  consist  of 
more  than  one  component  (as  when  electric  or  magnetic  splitting  exists)  by  forming  appropriate  sums. 
In  this  paper  we  will  limit  ourselves  to  the  overlap  of  a  single  emission  line  with  a  single  absorption  line, 
each  centered  about  Eq.  For  convenience,  we  will  translate  the  energy  axis  so  that  both  lines  are  centered 
about  E  ==  0  in  the  absence  of  any  Doppler  shift ;  that  is,  (E  —  Eq)  will  be  replaced  by  E. 

Sources  for  Mossbauer  experiments  are  generally  prepared  in  either  of  two  wayst : 

1.  The  activity  is  electroplated  or  otherwise  deposited  on  a  source  backing.  The  activity  is  then  diffused 
into  the  host  lattice  by  heating8). 

2.  The  activity  and  the  host  atoms  are  co-plated  on  a  backing,  thereby  building  up  a  lattice  containing 
the  radioactive  atoms  as  integral  parts9). 

The  second  method  produces  a  source  in  which  the  emitting  atoms  are  uniformly  distributed  in  depth. 
The  same  type  of  distribution  results  from  the  first  method  if  the  backing  is  very  thin  and  the  diffusion 
time  is  very  long.  On  the  other  hand,  if  either  the  backing  is  thick  or  the  diffusion  time  is  short,  then  the 
first  method  produces  an  activity  distribution  which  is  approximately  Gaussian.  Both  types  of  distribu- 
tion will  be  discussed  below. 

3.  Uniform  Source  Distribution 

We  first  consider  a  source  of  thickness  fe,  having  N  radioactive  atoms  per  unit  length : 

i  N  atoms/cm,     /s  ^  x  2:  0 
10  x  >  t3  . 

Since  Nts  is  the  total  number  of  radioactive  atoms  and  e-'1*'*  represents  the  non-resonant  electronic 
absorption  in  the  external  absorber,  we  will  deal  with  a  normalized  transmission  ~P{Sf)  defined  by 

P(^)=£(^)/(e~"A'AMs).  (3) 

For  the  distribution  given  in  (2)  the  x  part  of  the  transmission  integral  can  easily  be  evaluated,  and 
we  find 


(4) 


Here,  Ts  —  /'s^s^s^s  and  TA  =/'aWa«a^a  are  effective  source  and  absorber  thicknesses,  respective- 
ly. The  first  term  in  this  equation  is  the  non-resonant  transmission,  and  will  henceforth  be  denoted  by 
(1  —f)P (uniform).  As  /isfs  approaches  zero,  this  quantity  approaches  (1  —  f).  The  second  term  in  (4), 

non-res. 

containing  an  integral  over  energy,  represents  the  resonant  contribution.  Before  discussing  the  general 
evaluation  of  the  integral,  we  will  first  consider  two  special  cases. 

3.1.  THIN  SOURCE  AND  ABSORBER 

When  both  source  and  absorber  are  thin  in  the  sense  that  Ts  «  1,  TA«  1,  we  can  expand  both  ex- 
ponentials in  the  second  term  of  (4)  and  keep  only  lowest -order  terms  in  effective  thickness.  Integrating 
over  energy,  we  obtain 

t  Occasionally  the  target  foil,  which  has  been  irradiated  in  a  8)  R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3 

pile  or  in  an  accelerator  beam  to  produce  the  desired  radio-  (1959)  554. 

isotope,  may  serve  directly  as  a  source.  In  such  a  case,  the  9)  S.  S.  Hanna,    J.   Heberle,    C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J.  Perlow, 

distribution  of  emitting  atoms  can  be  quite  complex,  and  will  R.   S.    Preston    and    D.   H.  Vincent,   Phys.    Rev.  Letters  4 

not  be  treated  here.  (1960)  28. 


134 


S.   MARGULIES   AND   J.    R.   EHRMAN 


P(r)  =  f  (1  -/)P(uniform)  +  /  (l  -~)  ] 
I  non-res.  \  4  /  J 


TA 


(yin2 


221 


(5) 


The  bracketed  term  in  this  equation  represents  the  transmission  when  y ,  the  relative  Doppler  shift 
between  source  and  absorber,  is  large.  This  asymptotic  value  is  less  than  unity  because  of  the  self-absorp- 
tion in  the  source.  The  second  term  represents  the  dip  in  the  transmission  due  to  resonance  absorption  in 
the  external  absorber.  It  is  seen  that  the  transmitted  line,  in  the  case  of  thin  source  and  absorber,  has  a 
Breit-Wigner  shape,  but  has  an  apparent  width  ra  which  is  twice  that  of  either  the  emission  or  absorption 
spectrum.  This  broadening  results  from  the  overlap  of  the  emission  and  absorption  lines. 

3.2.  THIN  SOURCE  -  TRANSMISSION  AT  ZERO  DOPPLER  SHIFT 

When  the  effective  source  thickness  Ts  approaches  zero  (as,  for  example,  in  a  source  which  has  little 
resonance  absorption  because  as  ->  0),  the  transmission  at  zero  Doppler  shift  can  be  found  in  terms  of  Ta, 
the  effective  absorber  thickness.  Expanding  the  term  containing  Ts  in  (4)  and  keeping  only  the  lowest- 
order  term  leads  to 

P(0)  «  (1  -/)P(uniform)  +  /  e"^*  Jo(iiTA)  Ts  -*  0  ,  (6) 

non-res. 

where  Jo  is  the  Bessel  function  of  zero  order.  Because  of  the  nature  of  resonance  absorption,  the  resonant 
contribution  to  the  transmission  does  not  decrease  exponentially  with  absorber  thickness,  but  instead, 
shows  a  saturation  behavior. 


3.3.  UNIFORM  SOURCE  -  GENERAL  CASE 

Attempts  to  evaluate  (4)  analytically  for  arbitrary  source  and  absorber  thicknesses  have  been  un- 
successful. Consequently,  we  have  performed  a  numerical  integration  on  the  University  of  Illinois  digital 
computer  ILLIAC  for  values  of  Ts  and  7"  a  between  zero  and  ten.  It  has  been  found  empirically  that  over 
this  range  the  transmitted  line  is,  to  a  very  good  degree  of  approximation,  a  Breit-Wigner  curve  whose  full 
width  at  half-height  fa,  depends  upon  the  value  of  Ts  and  Ta.  The  general  variation  of  transmission  with 
Doppler  shift  &  is  shown  in  fig.  2.  The  results  of  our  numerical  integration,  in  the  form  of  the  variation  of 
fa/fas  a  function  of  Ta  with  Ts  as  parameter,  are  shown  in  fig.  3.  Note  that  as  Ts  and  Ta  both  approach 
zero,  /"a/f  approaches  the  value  two,  since  the  conditions  described  in  section  3.1  are  applicable. 

4.  Gaussian  Source  Distribution 

For  the  case  of  a  Gaussian  distribution  of  radioactive  atoms,  we  will  use 

p(x)  =  (2N/Vn)  e'*'"*'  atoms/cm,  x  >  0 .  (7) 

Here  ts  represents  a  characteristic  diffusion  depth  whose  value  depends  upon  the  details  of  the  source 
preparation.  The  above  distribution  is  normalized  so  that  Nts  once  again  represents  the  total  number  of 
radioactive  atoms. 

Substitution  of  this  Gaussian  distribution  into  (1 )  leads  to  the  following  expression,  which  is  normalized 
in  the  sense  defined  by  (3) : 

r  r°°  d£  /  -  rAp2/4  \ 


P(r)  =  (1  -/)  e*** [  1  -<*Ws/2)  ]  +  t^j 


(E  +  srf  +  P2/4 


exp 


(  — 

\£2   + 


P2/4/ 


r  /  T3T2/4  n  /  Tsn/4  \* 

L  \2[(E  +  ^)2  +  P2/4],/  J  exp\2[(E  +  #>)*  +  n/4]J 


(8) 


where  0  represents  the  error  function, 


*(y)  =  (2/v^)  fV'dw 


222 


TRANSMISSION   AND   LINE   BROADENING 


IN    SOURCE 


—         NON- 

~  RESONANT      |    RADIATION    LOST 

a"  —    ~k I  BY    SELF 

§  RESONANT      '   ™°*™» 


—  RELATIVE    DOPPLER     SHIFT  ?  '-j-f,  + 

Fig.   2.    Normalized   transmission   of  y-radiation   through   a 
resonance  absorber  as  a  function  of  the  relative  Doppler  shift 
between  source  and  absorber.  The  apparent  full  width  at  half- 
height  of  the  transmitted  line  is  denoted  by  .Ta. 


6.0 
5.0 
4.0 

f.£ 

r^ 

s^jZ* — 

<^< 

P 

l 

$ 

P 

^ 

/^\ 

SOURCE    DISTRIBUTION: 

\N    ATOMS /CM 

""'jo 

1         1         1 

1 

Fig.  3.  Broadening  of  the  transmitted  line  for  a  source  having  a 
uniform  distribution  of  emitting  atoms. 


EFFECTIVE  ABSORBER  THICKNESS  7". 


Fig.  3. 


The  first  term  in  (8)  corresponds  to  the  transmission  of  the  non-resonant  fraction  of  the  radiation,  and 
will  be  denoted  by  (1  —f)P (Gaussian).  Again,  as  fi^s  approaches  zero,  the  non-resonant  contribution 

approaches  (1  — /).  The  resonant  contribution  to  the  transmission  is  contained  in  the  second  term  of  (8). 
Before  discussing  the  general  evaluation  of  this  equation,  we  will  consider  two  special  cases. 

4.1.  THIN  SOURCE  AND  ABSORBER 

If  both  source  and  absorber  effective  thicknesses  satisfy  the  conditions  T$  «  1 ,  TA  «  1 ,  we  can  expand 
the  exponentials  and  the  error  function  in  the  second  term  of  (8),  and  keep  only  first-order  terms  in 
thickness.  After  integrating  over  energy,  one  obtains 

■l±-)]-fI± ! . 

2vVJ        21+  (5»/r)« 


P(s>) 


(1  — /)P(Gaussian)  +/(1 


(9) 


In  this  equation  the  bracketed  term  represents  the  asymptotic  transmission  as  &*->  oo,  and  differs  from 
unity  because  of  self-absorption  in  the  source.  The  second  term  results  from  resonance  absorption  in  the 
external  absorber.  The  transmitted  line  shape  has  the  Breit-Wigner  form,  but  is  twice  as  wide  as  either 
the  emission  or  the  absorption  line.  Note  that  (9)  differs  from  (5)  only  in  that  the  Gaussian  source  results 
in  more  self-absorption  than  the  uniform  source.  This  conclusion  follows  from  the  choice  of  normalization 
for  the  Gaussian  distribution  and  is  subject  to  the  thin  source  approximation  used  to  derive  both  equations. 

4.2.  THIN  SOURCE  -  TRANSMISSION  AT  ZERO  DOPPLER  SHIFT 

Expansion  of  the  appropriate  terms  to  lowest  order  when  Ts  ->  0  allows  (8)  to  be  evaluated  at  the  point 
!?  =  0.  Since  both  the  Gaussian  distribution  of  (7)  and  the  uniform  distribution  described  by  (2)  are 
normalized  in  the  same  way,  it  is  not  surprising  that  (6)  once  again  follows  for  this  special  case,  but  with 
P (uniform)  replaced  by  P (Gaussian). 


223 


136 


S.    MARGULIES   AND    J.    R.    EHRMAN 


4.3.  GAUSSIAN  SOURCE  -  GENERAL  CASE 

Equation  (8),  representing  the  transmission  from 
a  source  which  has  a  Gaussian  distribution  of  radio- 
active atoms,  couJd  not  be  evaluated  analytically 
for  arbitrary  values  of  T$  and  Ta-  Again,  we  have 
performed  a  numerical  integration  on  ILLIAC  for 
the  range  10  ^  (Ts,  Ta)  ^  0.  As  in  the  uniform  case, 
it  has  been  found  empirically  that  the  resulting 
transmitted  lines  differ  but  little  from  Breit-Wigner 
curves  whose  full  widths  at  half-height  vary  with 
source  and  absorber  thicknesses  (see  fig.  2).  The 
calculated  broadening  of  the  transmitted  line  as  a 
function  of  Ts  and  TA  is  shown  in  fig.  4.  As  7  s  and 
Ta  approach  zero,  the  conditions  of  section  4.1 
apply,  and  T^T  approaches  the  value  two. 

5.  Non-Resonant  Absorbing  Sources 

As  has  been  shown,  the  width  of  the  transmission 

curve  obtained  from  a  resonantly  absorbing  source 

of  finite  thickness  is  always  greater  than  twice  the 

natural  width  of  the  transition.  The  way  to  obtain 

the  narrowest  lines  with  any  given  radioisotope  is 

to  use  a  source  backing  which  has  zero  abundance 

of  atoms  that  can  absorb  resonantly.  In  this  way, 

only  the  external  resonance  absorber  contributes 

to  the  line  broadening.  When  this  is  the  case,  the  ordinary  electronic  absorption,  neglected  so  far  for 

the  resonant  fraction  of  the  radiation,  must  be  considered.  The  transmission  under  these  circumstances 

is  given  by 

W=e-M(1-4>We-+^jr    ^(-jgg^xj;,.    yir„,;-)    .       00) 


^ 

fl 

s\/\/ 

# 

//' 

SOURCE 

DISTRIBUTE 

1 

: 

cm  ;   reo 
1 

EFFECTIVE     ABSORBER    THICKNESS 


''a"*'*^'* 


Fig.  4. 


Broadening  of  the  transmitted  line  for  a  source  having 
a  Gaussian  distribution  of  emitting  atoms. 


-£„)2+  r*/4/       Jo     (E-E0)  +  !?f  +  T2/4 

The  ^-integral  is  the  same  in  both  the  non-resonant  and  the  resonant  terms  of  this  equation,  and  can  be 
evaluated  for  the  uniform  distribution  of  (2)  and  the  Gaussian  distribution  of  (7).  The  transmission, 
normalized  according  to  (3),  is  found  to  be 


P{s?)  =  [{\-i)  +//(y)] — 

L        fists 
=  [(1  —  /)  +  //(*)  ]P(uniform) 

non-res. 


uniform  source 


and 


where 


P(- 


[  (1  -  /)  +  fl(y)  ]  [  ei"S's)'  (1  -  0(ustS/2))  ] 
[(1  -/)  +  fl(sr)  ]  P(Gaussian) 


Gaussian  source 


HD 


2nJ- 


d£ 


(E  +  sef  +  T2/4 


exp 


'  -  TAn/i  \ 

>£2  +  r2/4j 


(11) 


(12) 


(13) 


In  either  case,  the  shape  of  the  transmitted  line  is  the  same,  only  the  amplitude  being  affected  by  the 
electronic  absorption.  This  behavior  follows  from  the  fact  that  the  ordinary  mass  attenuation  coefficients 


224 


TRANSMISSION    AND   LINE  BROADENING 


137 


are  energy  independent  over  the  width  of  the  emission  and  absorption  lines.  The  shape  of  the  transmitted 
line  is  determined  by  the  energy  integral  of  (13).  Since  this  integral  corresponds  to  the  Ts  —  0  case  for 
either  a  uniform  or  a  Gaussian  source  it  has,  in  effect,  already  been  considered.  In  the  results  presented 
below,  it  should  be  remembered  that  I{£f)  must  be  substituted  into  either  (1 1 )  or  (12)  to  obtain  the  trans- 
mission, P(ST). 
When  the  resonance  absorber  satisfies  the  condition  T&«  1,  the  integral  of  (13)  reduces  to 


l(y) 


2  i  +  (^//y 


(14) 


again  representing  a  Breit-Wigner  curve  whose  width  at  half-height  is  2T. 

For  arbitrary  values  of  Ta,  the  transmission  also  approximates  a  Breit-Wigner  curve,  but  the  apparent 
width  ra  varies  with  the  absorber  thickness  in  the  manner  described  by  the  Ts  =  0  curve  in  either  fig.  3 
or  fig.  4. 

When  there  exists  no  Doppler  shift  between  source  and  absorber,  the  energy  integral  of  (13)  can  be 
evaluated : 


1(0) 


Jo(iTA/2) 


(15) 


In  section  3.2  and  4.2,  where  very  thin  sources  were  considered,  the  evaluation  of  the  energy  integral 
led  to  the  approximation  given  in  (6).  In  the  case  of  a  non-resonantly  absorbing  source,  no  approximations 
are  needed,  and  the  result  of  (15)  is  exact.  Since  I{oo)  =  1,  we  can  combine  (15)  with  either  (11)  or  (12) 
to  get  the  useful  result 


P(oo)-P(0) 
P(oo) 


/[I 


•jrA 


Jo(«V2)]  • 


(16) 


Note  added  in  proof:  Equation  (16),  firxt  applied  to  the  analysis  of 
Mossbauer  experiments  by  the  Los  Alamos  group,  is  often  being 
usedwhenitisnotapplicable.lt  must  be  remembered  that  (16)  is 

1)  exact  only  for  non-resonantly  absorbing  sources;  it  is  a 
good  approximation  for  sources  where  T$«  1 ; 

2)  derived  on  the  assumption  that  the  emission  and  absorp- 
tion lines  overlap  exactly  at  zero  relative  velocity  between 
source  and  absorber.  If,  as  is  often  the  case,  there  exists  an 
energy  shift  between  emission  and  absorption  spectra,  P(0) 
must  be  replaced  by  P(Sf0),  where  Sf0  is  the  Doppler  shift  re- 
quired to  produce  coincidence; 


3)  valid  for  source  and  absorber  half-widths  equal  to  P,  the 
natural  width  of  the  transition.  It  is  still  correct  if  these  widths 
are  not  the  natural  width,  provided  that  they  are  equal: 
Ps  =  -Ta.-  Iq  this  case,  however,  the  maximum  absorption 
cross-section  a0  must  be  multiplied  by  the  factor  P/Pg  to  keep 
the  total  absorption  constant. 

We  wish  to  emphasize  that  (16)  can  be  used  to  extract  /  and 
/'  from  absorption  measurements  only  if  the  conditions  assumed 
in  the  derivation  are  at  least  approximately  satisfied. 


Acknowledgement 

We  wish  to  thank  Professor  H.  Frauenfelder  as  well  as  Dr.  E. 
Hetherington  for  many  interesting  discussions. 


Liischer,  Dr.  P.  Debrunner,  and  Mr.  J.  H. 


225 


Volume  4,  Number  4 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


February  15,  I960 


POLARIZED  SPECTRA  AND  HYPERFINE  STRUCTURE  IN  Fe57* 

S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J.  Perlow,  R.  S.  Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vincent 

Argonne  National  Laboratory,  Lemont,  Illinois 

(Received  January  26,  1960) 


The  observation  in  this  laboratory1  of  the 
polarization  of  the  resonance  radiation2"5  emitted 
by  the  14-kev  level  of  Fe57  has  led  to  a  study  of 
polarization  in  the  hyperfine  spectrum  of  the 
resonant  absorption.    The  apparatus  and  the 
method  of  producing  and  detecting  polarization 
were  the  same  as  used  in  reference  1  except  that 
the  source  and  the  absorber  were  mounted  on 
separate  Alnico  magnets.   The  magnet  carrying 


the  absorber  was  attached  firmly  to  the  bed  of 
the  lathe  used  in  our  previous  work.4   The  other 
magnet  holding  the  source  was  fastened  securely 
to  the  carriage  of  the  lathe.    The  detector  of 
radiation  (40 -mil  Nal)  was  mounted  on  the  axis 
determined  by  the  source  and  absorber  and  it 
was  well  shielded  from  magnetic  fields. 

The  motion  of  the  carriage  provided  uniform 
velocities  of  the  source,  and  the  polarized  spec- 


177 


226 


Volume  4,  Number  4 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


February  15,  I960 


tra  were  obtained  by  measuring  the  transmission, 
with  crossed  or  parallel  magnetizations  in  source 
and  absorber,  as  a  function  of  the  velocity  of  the 
source.    The  operation  of  the  lathe  was  made 
automatic  so  that  the  carriage  (source)  moved 
to  and  fro  at  a  predetermined  speed.    During  the 
"to"  motions  the  pulses  from  the  detector  were 
recorded  in  the  lower  channels  of  a  2  56 -channel 
analyzer;  and  during  the  "fro"  motions  they 
were  accumulated  in  the  upper  channels  of  the 
analyzer.    In  a  single  run,  therefore,  the  trans- 
mission was  measured  for  a  positive  and  for  an 
equal  negative  velocity. 

The  spectra  obtained  in  this  way  are  shown  in 
Fig.  1.    Since  no  significant  differences  were 
observed  for  positive  and  negative  velocities, 
the  spectra  have  been  folded  about  zero  velocity. 
The  spectrum  obtained  with  source  and  absorber 


5  10  15 

SPEED  IN  mm/sec 

FIG.  1.    Hyperfine  spectra  of  Fe5T.    Top:    unpolarized. 
Middle:    magnetization  in  source  and  absorber  parallel. 
Bottom:    magnetization  in  source  and  absorber  perpen- 
dicular.   The  ordinate  is  in  units  of  2000. 


magnetized  perpendicular  to  each  other  differs 
markedly  from  that  obtained  with  parallel  mag- 
netizations.   For  comparison,  a  spectrum  is 
shown  for  an  unmagnetized  source  and  absorber. 
It  is  seen  that  the  hyperfine  spectrum  consists 
of  six  prominent  lines  instead  of  the  four  pre- 
viously reported.3'5   It  is  clear  therefore  that  the 
earlier  interpretation  based  on  the  existence  of 
only  four  lines  is  incorrect. 

The  level  diagram  of  Fe57  which  seems  to  pro- 
vide a  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  spectra  in 
Fig.  1  is  shown  on  the  left  in  Fig.  2.    In  the  upper 
right  are  given  the  hyperfine  components  for  Ml 
radiation.    (We  have  found  little  need  to  introduce 
a  significant  amount  of  £2.)   The  intensities  of 
the  components  are  those  appropriate  to  a  ran- 
dom orientation  of  the  internal  magnetic  fields  at 
the  nuclei.    At  the  lower  right  are  shown  the 
components  for  the  case  in  which  the  internal 
fields  have  been  aligned.    The  intensities  given 
are  for  radiations  emitted  perpendicular  to  the 
aligned  field.    The  direction  of  polarization  of 
each  component  relative  to  the  direction  of  the 
aligned  field  is  indicated  by  the  symbol  II  or  ± . 

If  one  takes  a  hyperfine  pattern  and  moves  it 
over  itself,  one  obtains  the  hyperfine  spectrum, 


-3/2 
1/2 
1/2 
3/2 


•         ■ — 

*  — t 

*  f 




Li 


UN  POL. 


II   I 

_Li 


6  -  90*.  POL. 


1/2 


1/2 


.57 


FIG.  2.    Level  diagram  of  Fe"  on  which  the  dis- 
cussion is  based.    Upper  right:    unpolarized  hyperfine 
pattern.    The  numbers  give  the  relative  intensities. 
Lower  right:    polarized  hyperfine  pattern  {9  =  90°) . 
The  symbols  II  and  x  stand  for  polarization  parallel 
or  perpendicular  to  the  aligned  field. 


178 


227 


Volume  4,  Number  4 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


February   15,   I960 


each  line  in  the  spectrum  arising  from  the  coinci- 
dence of  hyperfine  components  in  emission  and 
absorption.   At  the  top  in  Fig.  3  is  shown  the 
predicted  spectrum  of  unpolarized  radiation.    In 
the  middle  is  given  the  spectrum  for  the  case  in 
which  the  internal  fields  in  source  and  absorber 
are  aligned  parallel  to  each  other.    In  this  case 
a  line  in  the  absorption  spectrum  will  appear 
only  if  the  respective  hyperfine  components  have 
the  same  polarization.    If,  on  the  other  hand, 
these  polarizations  are  perpendicular,  then  the 
line  will  appear  in  the  absorption  spectrum  only 
if  the  internal  fields  in  source  and  absorber  are 
aligned  at  right  angles.    The  spectrum  predicted 
for  this  case  is  shown  at  the  bottom  in  Fig.  3. 
The  intensities  given  in  Fig.  3  are  those  nomin- 
ally expected  for  a  thin  absorber.    In  addition 
it  is  assumed  that  a  line  which  should  appear 
only  with  one  orientation  of  the  fields  will  actually 
be  present  to  the  extent  of  about  10%  with  the 
other  orientation,  because  of  incomplete  align- 
ment of  the  fields  in  source  and  absorber.    The 
spectra  in  Fig.  3  are  in  good  qualitative  agree-, 
ment  with  the  observations  in  Fig.  1. 

The  hyperfine  pattern  of  six  components  pro- 
duces, in  all,  eight  lines  in  the  absorption  spec- 
trum.   However,  the  splittings  in  the  ground 
state  and  in  the  excited  state  are  such  that  two 
doublets  are  formed  which  are  not  resolved  in 
the  unpolarized  spectrum.   The  resolved  peaks 
are  numbered  from  one  to  six  in  Fig.  3.    One 
member  of  the  doublet  in  line  2  is  too  weak  to 
affect  the  position  of  the  peak.    Thus,  the  spac- 
ings  between  line  1  and  2,  4  and  5,  and  5  and  6 
should  be  equal  to  the  splitting  of  the  ground  state. 
The  spacing  between  lines  2  and  4  gives  the  split- 
ting of  the  ground  state.    Line  3  is  a  doublet,  one 
member  of  which  should  appear  in  the  spectrum 
with  parallel  fields,  the  other  in  the  spectrum 
with  crossed  fields.    The  separation  in  the  doublet 
is  equal  to  2^  -g0,  where  gx  and  g0  are  the  split- 
tings of  the  excited  and  ground  level,  respective- 
ly.  We  have  measured  this  doublet  separation 
with  some  care  by  observing  the  shift  in  line  3 
in  going  from  one  polarized  spectrum  to  the 
other.    The  separation  is  (0.5 ±0.1)  mm/sec.   We 
have  also  measured  the  separation  between  lines 
1  and  2  more  carefully  than  shown  in  Fig.  1  and 
obtained  gx  =(2.23  ±  0.03)  mm/sec.    Hence  g0 
=  (3. 96  i  0.10)  mm/sec. 

Ludwig  and  Woodbury8  have  recently  obtained 
an  accurate  determination  of  the  magnetic  mo- 
ment of  the  ground  state.    If  we  use  their  value  of 
+(0.0903  ±0.0007)  nm,  the  above  measurements 


■  '1 

3    4      5 
2 

5 
UNPOL. 

■1        | 

'        1 

1      1 

1        ' 

1 

1 

1 

9i 


V«o 


*Wo 


FIG.  3.    Spectra  predicted  by  the  scheme  in  Fig.  2. 
Top:   unpolarized.    Middle:    magnetizations  parallel. 
Bottom:    magnetizations  perpendicular.    The  main 
peaks  are  numbered  from  one  to  six.    The  symbols 
g0  and  #i  represent  the  gyromagnetic  ratios  of  ground 
and  excited  levels,  respectively. 


give  -(0.153  ±0.004)  nm  for  the  magnetic  moment 
of  the  excited  state,  and  a  value  of  (3.33  ±0.10)xl05 
oersteds  for  the  effective  magnetic  field  at  the  iron 
nucleus.   We  note  the  opposite  sign  of  the  mag- 
netic moment,  which  is  an  important  feature  of 
the  above  interpretation. 

We  would  like  to  thank  B.  F.  Martinka  and  H.  W. 
Ostrander  for  generous  assistance  in  the  mechan- 
ical aspects  of  our  work.   We  are  grateful  to 


179 


228 


Volume  4,  Number  4 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


February  15,  1960 


G.  W.  Ludwig  and  H.  H.  Woodbury  for  communi- 
cating their  results  to  us. 


Work  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the  U.  S. 
Atomic  Energy  Commission. 

*G.  J.  Perlow,  S.  S.  Hanna,  M.  Hamermesh, 
C.  Littlejohn,  D.  H.  Vincent,  R.  S.  Preston,  and 
J.  Heberle,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  74  (1960). 

2 J.  P.  Schiffer  and  W.  Marshall,  Phys.  Rev.  Let- 


ters 3,  556  (1959). 

SR.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  3,  554  (1959). 

4S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J.  Per- 
low, R.  S.  Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters4,  28  (I960). 

5G.  DePasquali,  H.  Frauenf elder ,  S.  Margulies,  and 
R.  N.  Peacock,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  71  (1960). 

6G.  W.  Ludwig  and  H.  H.  Woodbury,  Phys.  Rev. 
(to  be  published). 


180 


229 


Volume  4,  Number  8 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


April   15,   I960 


EVIDENCE  FOR  QUADRUPOLE  INTERACTION  OF  Fe57w, 
AND  INFLUENCE  OF  CHEMICAL  BINDING  ON  NUCLEAR  GAMMA -RAY  ENERGY" 

O.  C.  Kistner  and  A.  W.  Sunyar 

Brookhaven  National  Laboratory,  Upton,  New  York 

(Received  March  30,  1960) 


The  recoil -free  emission  and  resonant  absorp- 
tion1 of  the  14.4 -kev  nuclear  gamma  ray  of  Fe57, 
has  been  used  to  determine  the  quadrupole  coup- 
ling for  the  3/2-  excited  state  of  Fe57  bound  in 
Fe203,  and  to  measure  an  energy  shift  of  this 
nuclear  gamma  ray  which  is  attributed  to  effects 
of  chemical  binding.    This  effect  is  corollary  to 
the  effects  of  chemical  environment  on  internal 
conversion  coefficients2  and  on  electron  capture 
disintegration  rates.3   These  measurements  also 
yield  the  value  of  the  internal  magnetic  field  at 
the  position  of  the  Fe57  nucleus  when  it  is  bound 
in  antiferromagnetic  Fe203. 

The  Ml  emission  line  of  Fe57  bound  in  ordinary 
metallic  iron  is  split  into  six  components  by  the 
magnetic  hyperfine  interaction.4   The  resonant 
absorption  of  this  emission  spectrum  by  Fe57 
bound  in  Fe203  has  been  examined,  as  well  as 
the  much  simpler  absorption  pattern  which  re- 
sults when  the  "unsplit"  emission  line  from  Fe57 
bound  in  a  stainless  steel  lattice5  is  used.    Be- 
cause the  interpretation  of  the  two  sets  of  meas- 
urements agree,  only  the  latter  measurements 
are  presented  in  this  Letter.    The  former  meas- 
urements, in  which  a  Co57  source  co -plated  with 
iron  onto  1-mil  copper  was  used,  will  only 
briefly  be  remarked  upon. 

The  ~2-mg/cm2  Fe203  absorber  used  in  these 
measurements  contained  Fe57  enriched  to  -30%. 
The  source  consisted  of  Co57  plated  onto  0.001- 
inch  stainless  steel  (25%  Cr,  20%  Ni).    After 
plating,  this  source  was  annealed  for  one  hour 
at  900°C  in  a  hydrogen  atmosphere.   All  meas- 
urements were  made  with  source  and  absorber 
at  a  temperature  of  25°C. 

In  order  to  obtain  a  Doppler  shift  of  the  emis- 
sion line,  a  uniform  motion  was  obtained  by 
coupling  a  pneumatically  driven  cylinder  to 
another  cylinder  filled  with  oil,  the  ports  of 
which  were  connected  via  a  needle  valve.    A 
wide  range  of  uniform  velocities  could  be  selec- 
ted by  adjusting  this  valve.    The  direction  of 
source  travel  was  reversed  automatically  by 
means  of  microswitches.   Additional  micro- 
switches,  set  to  exclude  the  region  of  nonuniform 
motion  near  the  travel  limits,  were  used  to  pro- 
vide gate  signals  for  the  counters.    The  distance 
of  travel  between  the  limits  of  the  counting  gates 
was  0.973  cm.   Source  velocity  was  determined 

412 


by  counting  the  cycles  from  a  1000  cps  tuning 
fork  oscillator  during  the  time  between  the  gate 
limits. 

The  14.4 -kev  gamma  ray  was  detected  with  a 
Nal(Tl)  scintillation  counter.    The  phosphor  was 
2  mm  thick  and  1.5  inches  in  diameter.    The 
counter  face  was  located  5.4  cm  above  the  upper 
limit  of  vertical  travel  of  the  source.    The  ab- 
sorber was  placed  4.7  cm  from  the  counter  face. 
A  single -channel  pulse -height  analyzer  selected 
the  14.4 -kev  gamma  ray  photopeak.    The  outputs 
of  this  analyzer  and  the  1000  cps  clock  were 
switched  between  two  pairs  of  scalers  so  as  to 
record  counting  rate  and  velocity  separately  for 
both  directions  of  source  motion. 

Figure  1  shows  the  counting  rate  (in  arbitrary 
units)  as  a  function  of  source  velocity  relative  to 
the  Fe203  absorber  for  the  stainless  steel  source. 
Absorption  of  the  "unsplit"  emission  line  at  each 
of  the  six  possible  absorption  energies  of  Fe57  in 
Fe203  is  evident.    The  lack  of  symmetry  of  the 
absorption  pattern  about  zero  velocity  shows  im- 
mediately that  one  is  not  dealing  simply  with  a 
magnetic  hyperfine  splitting  pattern. 

The  velocities  at  which  absorption  peaks  occur 
are  given  in  Table  I.    Experimental  values  have 
been  corrected  by  -2.5%  to  take  account  of  the 
effect  of  geometry  on  our  velocity  scale.    These 
absorption  line  velocities  may  be  fitted  precisely 
in  terms  of  an  energy  level  diagram  as  shown 
in  Fig.  2.   It  is  necessary  to  introduce  an  energy 
shift  AE  =  A£x  +  AE2  between  the  center  of  gravity 
of  the  absorption  lines  of  Fe57  in  Fe203  and  the 
emission  line  of  Fe57  in  stainless  steel.    In  addi- 
tion, an  energy  shift  e,  of  positive  or  negative 
sign,  on  the  individual  m  states  of  the  excited 
level  is  required.    This  is  interpreted  as  being 
caused  by  a  quadrupole  interaction  when  Fe57  is 
bound  in  Fe203.    A  least -squares  fit  to  our  data 
yields  the  following  splitting  parameters  (in 
"velocity  units")  for  the  two  Fe57  nuclear  states 


g0'  =  0.611  ±0.005  cm/sec, 

&'  =  0.345 ±0.003  cm/sec, 

AE=  0.047  ±0.003  cm/sec, 

e=0.012 ±0.003  cm/sec. 


230 

Volume  4,  Number  8  PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS  April  15,  I960 


150 

w   145 

O 

>    140 

i 

135 

• 

" 

-10 

-8 

-6 

-4-2024 
VELOCITY   OF  SOURCE   (mm /sec) 

6 

8 

10 

ENERGY  CHANGE  ,  E 


FIG.  1.  The  absorption  by  Fe  '  bound  in  Fe203  of  the  14.4-kev  gamma  ray  emitted  in  the 
decay  of  Fe^m  bound  in  stainless  steel  as  a  function  of  relative  source- absorber  velocity. 
Positive  velocity  indicates  a  motion  of  source  toward  absorber. 


These  data  indicate  that  the  ratio  g0' /gt'  is 
1.77 ±  0.02,  in  excellent  agreement  with  the  re- 
sults of  Hanna  et  al.,4  and  that  the  internal  mag- 
netic field  in  antiferromagnetic  Fe203  is  larger 
than  in  ferromagnetic  iron  by  the  factor  1.547 
±  0.022.    If  we  take  3.33  x  105  oersteds  as  the 
value  of  the  internal  field4  in  Fe,  we  find  a  value 
of  5.15  x10s  oersteds  at  the  Fe  nucleus  in  Fe203. 
It  is  worth  noting  that  the  absorption  peaks  in 
Fig.  1  (reading  from  left  to  right)  should  have 
"thin  absorber"  intensity  ratios  of  3:2:1:1:2:3. 
However,  the  relative  intensities  found  for  the 
absorption  peaks  clearly  exhibit  evidence  of  sa- 
turation due  to  the  rather  large  effective  thick- 
ness of  the  enriched  Fe203  absorber.    Neverthe- 
less, the  experimental  intensity  ratios  are  such 
that  an  inverted  hyperfine  pattern  is  required  for 


Table  I.    Velocities  of  maximum  absorption  (cor- 
rected for  geometry)  for  a  stainless  steel  source  and 
Fe203  absorber.    The  negative  signs  indicate  motions 
of  source  away  from  absorber. 


Absorption  line 


Relative  source-absorber 
velocity  (cm/sec) 


1/2+ —  3/2+ 
1/2+ — 1/2+ 
1/2+ —  1/2- 
1/2-— 1/2+ 
1/2- —  1/2- 
1/2- —  3/2- 


-0.789 
-0.417 
-0.076 
+0.192 
+0.536 
+0.859 


the  3/2-  state,  providing  confirmation  for  this 
fact  as  previously  reported.4 
Let  us  now  consider  the  effect  of  quadrupole 


k 

r 

K 

-  f 

{ 

«c 

• 

\ 

Fe    METAL 


STAINLESS  STEEL 


FIG .  2 .  Schematic  representation  of  the  ground  and 
14.4-kev  excited  states  of  Fe57  bound  in  ordinary  iron, 
Fe203,  and  stainless  steel.  This  diagram  illustrates 
the  details  of  magnetic  hyperfine  splitting,  quadrupole 
interaction,  and  energy  shifts  due  to  chemical  binding 
effects . 


413 


231 


Volume  4,  Number  8 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


April   15,  I960 


interaction.    For  a  pure  quadrupole  spectrum, 
in  the  case  of  axially  symmetric  field  gradients, 
the  shift  e  for  the  substates  of  a  spin  /  state  is 
given  by8 


e2gQ 
4/(27-1) 


[3m2 -/(/  +  !)], 


where  q  denotes  (l/e)(d2V/dz2).    All  other  sym- 
bols have  the  conventional  meanings.   When 
Zeeman  splitting  is  combined  with  quadrupole 
interaction,  the  precise  energy  shifts  for  the 
individual  m  states  due  to  quadrupole  interaction 
depend  upon  the  orientation  of  the  magnetic  axis 
relative  to  the  axis  of  symmetry  for  the  electric 
field  gradient,  and  are  in  general  not  the  same 
for  all  m  states.7   However,  for  a  case  such  as 
we  deal  with  here,  where  the  quadrupole  inter- 
action is  small  compared  to  the  magnetic  inter- 
action, the  absolute  magnitude  of  e  is  the  same 
for  all  m  states  of  the  spin  3/2  state  within  the 
accuracy  of  our  measurements,  independent  of 
the  orientation  of  the  crystal  axes.    Thus,  we 
find  €  =  \\e2qQ\  =0.012±0.003  cm/sec  (5.75xl0~9 
ev).    Since  our  measurements  indicate  that  the 
shift  of  magnitude  e  is  negative  for  the  rn  =±3/2 
substates  and  positive  for  the  m  =±1/2  substates, 
the  product  e2qQ  is  negative.    The  absolute  value 
is  suggestive  of  a  small  quadrupole  moment  for 
pe57w  although  this  statement  cannot  be  ampli- 
fied further  without  knowledge  of  electric  field 
gradients  in  Fe203. 

In  our  earlier  absorption  measurements  on 
Fe203  using  the  emission  lines  of  Fe57  bound  in 
ordinary  iron,  we  find  an  energy  shift  upward 
(see  Fig.  2)  of  AE^O.04  cm/sec.    Within  the 
accuracy  of  our  measurements,  the  splitting 
parameters  g0',  g^,  and  e  remain  the  same.    A 
separate  measurement  of  the  absorption  by  Fe57 
bound  in  stainless  steel  of  the  emission  lines  of 
Fe57  in  ordinary  iron  confirms  the  implied  ex- 
istence of  an  energy  shift  downward  (see  Fig.  2) 
of  AE2  =  0.01  cm/sec  in  this  case. 

The  existence  of  an  energy  shift  AE  =(2.26±0.15) 
xlO"8  ev  between  stainless  steel  and  Fe203  has 
been  definitely  established.   We  will  now  discuss 
the  ways  in  which  differences  in  chemical  environ- 
ment may  produce  such  a  shift.    (1)  Source  and 
absorber  will  in  general  have  different  Debye 
temperatures.    Since  the  nucleus  in  its  excited 
state  has  a  slightly  greater  rest  mass  than  when 
it  is  in  its  ground  state,  the  energy  difference 
between  the  nuclear  states  will  decrease  from  its 
value  for  an  "unbound"  system  by  different 


amounts  because  of  the  difference  in  the  zero- 
point  energies.    This  reduction  in  energy  is  lar- 
ger for  the  substance  having  the  higher  Debye 
temperature.    (2)  In  addition,  when  a  lattice  is 
at  a  finite  temperature,  the  energy  difference 
between  the  nuclear  states  is  reduced  further  by 
virtue  of  the  previously  reported  temperature 
effect.8   Since  the  magnitude  of  this  reduction 
depends  upon  the  integral  of  the  specific  heat  of 
the  lattice  up  to  the  temperature  of  the  substance, 
it  will  be  larger  for  the  substance  having  the 
lower  Debye  temperature.   We  expect  this  tem- 
perature effect  to  be  small,  although  it  should  be 
noted  that  it  acts  to  reduce  the  energy  shift  be- 
tween different  substances  which  results  from 
zero-point  energy  differences.    The  sign  and 
magnitude  of  the  observed  shift  between  stain- 
less steel  and  Fe203  would  require  that  Fe203 
have  a  considerably  lower  Debye  temperature 
than  stainless  steel  or  ordinary  iron.   Were  this 
the  case,  the  Debye -Waller  factor  would  materi- 
ally depress  the  recoil -free  resonant  yield  in 
Fe203,  a  result  which  is  not  indicated  by  the  data. 
(3)  When  chemical  environment  is  altered,  a 
nuclear  isotope  shift  may  result.    This  effect  has 
its  origin  in  the  change  in  the  electronic  wave 
functions  over  the  region  of  space  occupied  by 
the  nucleus,   s  electrons  may  be  expected  to  con- 
tribute most  to  this  effect.    Since  s  electrons  are 
in  effect  removed  in  going  from  Fe  in  metal  to 
Fe  in  Fe203,  a  smaller  charge  radius  for  Fe57W 
than  for  Fe57  in  its  ground  state  would  produce  a 
shift  in  the  observed  direction.    The  direction  of 
the  observed  energy  shift  AE  requires  the  pre- 
sence of  the  nuclear  isotope  shift,  since  the  zero- 
point  energy  shift  is  in  the  opposite  direction. 
This  nuclear  isotope  shift  is  similar  to  the  iso- 
meric isotope  shift9  observed  in  the  optical  spec- 
trum of  Hg197. 

We  wish  to  emphasize  two  additional  points 
about  recoil -free  emission  and  absorption  ex- 
periments when  source  and  absorber  are  chemi- 
cally different.    First,  the  existence  of  energy 
shifts  introduces  asymmetries  into  the  absorp- 
tion pattern  which  make  it  essential  not  to  com- 
bine data  taken  at  equal  velocities  of  opposite 
sense.    Second,  any  recoil -free  absorption  at 
zero  velocity  is  accidental.    In  general,  there- 
fore, a  search  for  this  effect  by  comparing  ab- 
sorption at  zero  velocity  with  absorption  at  a 
large  relative  velocity  between  source  and  ab- 
sorber will  not  yield  significant  results  unless 
source  and  absorber  are  identical  chemically.  It 


414 


232 

Volume  4,  Number  8  PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS  April  15,  I960 


is  amusing  to  note  that  in  the  absorption  by  Fe203 
of  the  emission  lines  of  Fe57  in  ordinary  iron, 
two  such  accidental  coincidences  do  indeed  occur 
to  give  substantial  absorption  at  zero  velocity. 

We  wish  to  thank  many  of  our  colleagues, 
particularly  M.  Goldhaber  and  J.  Weneser,  for 
interesting  discussions,  and  G.  K.  Wertheim 
for  providing  us  with  a  sample  of  the  particular 
stainless  steel  used  in  his  measurements.5 


Work  done  under  the  auspices  of  the  U.S.  Atomic 
Energy  Commission. 

*R.  L.  Mbssbauer,  Z.  Physik  151,  124  (1958). 

2K.  T.  Bainbridge,  M.  Goldhaber,  and  E.  Wilson, 
Phys.  Rev.  90,  430  (1953). 


3R.  F.  Leininger,  E.  Segre,  and  C.  Wiegand,  Phys. 
Rev.  76,  897  (1949). 

4S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J.  Per- 
low,  R.  S.  Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  4,   177  (1960). 

5G.  K.  Wertheim  (private  communication)  has  in- 
formed us  that  Fe57  in  stainless  steel  exhibits  a  single 
absorption  line.    [See  G.  K.  Wertheim,  this  issue, 
Phys.  Rev.   Letters  4,  403(1960).] 

6T.  P.  Das  and  E.  L.  Hahn,  Nuclear  Quadrupole 
Resonance  Spectroscopy,  Solid  State  Physics,  Suppl.  1 
(Academic  Press  Inc.,  New  York,   1958). 

7P.  M.  Parker,  J.  Chem.  Phys.  24,  1096  (1956). 

8R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr. ,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  4,  274  (1960). 

9A.  C.  Melissinos  andS.  P.  Davis,  Phys.  Rev.  115, 
130(1959). 


415 


233 


Volume  6,  Number  2 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


January  15,  1961 


ELECTRIC  QUADRUPOLE  SPLITTING  AND  THE  NUCLEAR 
VOLUME  EFFECT  IN  THE  IONS  OF  Fe87t 

S.  DeBenedetti,  G.  Lang,  and  R.  Ingalls* 
Carnegie  Institute  of  Technology,  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania 
(Received  December  19,  1960) 


A  study  of  the  Mo'ssbauer  spectra  of  Fe57  in 
chemical  compounds  has  revealed  some  striking 
regularities.   Typical  transmission  curves  for 
Fe++  and  Fe+++  ionic  compounds  relative  to  an 
unsplit  room -temperature  stainless  steel  source 
are  shown  in  Figs.  1  and  2,  respectively.    Both 
patterns  exhibit  a  shift  of  the  center  of  gravity 
from  the  zero  of  velocity,  and  the  curve  of  Fe++ 
shows  the  two  absorption  lines  characteristic  of 
a  pure  nuclear  electric  quadrupole  interaction. 
The  quantities  6  and  A£,  which  characterize 
these  effects,  are  defined  in  the  figures;  their 
values  for  various  compounds  are  shown  in 
Table  I.   It  is  noteworthy  that  the  value  of  6  and 
the  low -temperature  value  of  &E  are,  for  a  given 
iron  ion,  relatively  independent  of  the  chemical 
combination. 

The  center  of  gravity  displacement,  or  chemi- 
cal shift,1  arises  from  two  mechanisms:  (a)  the 
second  order  Doppler  shift,2'3  which  is  caused  by 
lattice  vibrations,  and  is  a  function  A(Ts,Ta,9s,6a) 
of  the  source  and  absorber  temperatures  and 
Debye  temperatures,  and  (b)  the  nuclear  volume 
effect,4'5  which  represents  the  change,  from 
source  to  absorber,  in  the  modification  of  the 
nuclear  transition  energy  caused  by  electrons 
overlapping  the  finite  nucleus.   The  total  shift  in 
a  Mo'ssbauer  spectrum  may  be  written: 

6  *A(Ts,  Tq,  es,  ea)  +B(Re2p  -Rg2p)[*a2(0)  -  */(())], 

(1) 


-2 


-I  0        +1        +  2       +3        +4 

SOURCE  VELOCITY    (mm/sec) 


FIG.  1 .    Mbssbauer  spectrum  of  the  Fe++  ion  in  an 
absorber  of  FeSo4'7H20  at  nitrogen  temperature  using 
a  room-temperature  stainless  steel  source.    The  pat- 
tern exhibits  the  chemical  shift  6  and  the  electric  quad- 
rupole splitting  A£  of  the  excited  state  of  the  Fe5T  nu- 
cleus.   The  velocity  is  positive  for  the  source  approach- 
ing the  absorber . 


where  Re  and  Rg  are  the  charge  radii  of  the  nu- 
clear excited  and  ground  states.    *^(0)  is  the 
s -electron  density  at  the  position  of  the  nucleus. 
B  is  a  constant  which  is  1.76 xlO9  cm/sec  for 
iron  when  R^p  an(j  ^2(0)  are  expressed  in  atomic 
units,   p  =(1  -  oPZ2)m  is  a  relativistic  factor5  equal 
to  0.982  for  iron. 

An  estimate  of  Rg/Re  may  be  made  if  one  neg- 
lects the  influence  of  the  crystalline  surroundings 
and  uses  wave  functions6  for  the  free  iron  ions. 
Using  (1)  and  the  room -temperature  shifts  (which 
are  less  sensitive  to  differences  in  6  than  are  the 
low-temperature  shifts),  we  obtain 


6        «B(R 

+++  e 


«/P)[*++~(0) 


We  have  neglected  the  small  difference  A++  -A+++ 
Watson's  wave  functions  yield  *++2(0)<  *+++2(0); 
the  extra  electron  in  Fe++  apparently  shields  the 
3s  electrons  slightly.    Equation  (2)  yields  Rg/Re 
=  1.001. 

Watson6'7  has  also  calculated  wave  functions 
for  the  outer  electron  configurations  3d84s2  and 
3d8  for  iron.    Using  an  equation  similar  to  (2)  one 
obtains  the  shifts  expected  for  each  case: 

6      =-0.178  cm/sec   for   3d4  4s2, 


Fe 


+0.182  cm/sec   for   3d8. 


When  metallic  iron  is  used  as  an  absorber  with 
the  stainless  steel  source  at  room  temperature, 
a  shift  of  +0.01  cm/sec  results.    Since  this  value 
is  midway  between  the  above  calculated  values, 


uji.ao 

\  r 

■  .    ■    ' 

M.IO 

O 
O 

V 

UJlOO 

«*T 

H 

-2         -1            ( 

\        +|         +2 

+3 

£  SOURCE    VELOCITY   (mm/feec) 

FIG.  2.    Mbssbauer  spectrum  of  the  Fe+++  ion  in  a 
FeCls  absorber  at  nitrogen  temperature  using  a  room- 
temperature  stainless  steel  source .    The  velocity  is 
positive  for  the  source  approaching  the  absorber . 


60 


234 


Volume  6,  Number  2 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


January  15,  1961 


Table  I.    A  list  of  quadrupole  splittings  A£  and  chemical  shifts  6  relative  to  the  emission  line  from  a  stainless 
steel  source  at  room  temperature. 


Temperature 


A£(cm/sec) 


6(cm/sec) 


Fe203 

Room 

0.024  ±0.003 

0.047  ±0.003 

a 

Fe203 

Room 

0.024 

0.050 

b 

Fe2(S04)3 

Room 

0 

0.064 

b 

Fe2(S04)3 

Room 

0 

0.055  ±0.005 

this  work 

Fe2(S04)3 

Nitrogen 

0 

0.065  ±0.005 

this  work 

FeCl3 

Room 

0 

0.045  ±0.005 

this  work 

FeCl3 

Nitrogen 

0 

0.065  ±0.005 

this  work 

FeCl2-4H20 

Room 

0.300  ±0.005 

0.135  ±0.005 

this  work 

FeCl2-4H20 

Nitrogen 

0.310  ±0.005 

0.145  ±0.005 

this  work 

FeS04-7H20 

Room 

0.320  ±0.005 

0.140  ±0.005 

this  work 

FeSCy7H20 

Nitrogen 

0.360  ±0.005 

0.150  ±0.005 

this  work 

Fe(NH4)2(S04)2 

•6H20 

Room 

0.175  ±0.005 

0.140  ±0.005 

this  work 

Fe(NH4)2(S04)2 

•6H20 

Nitrogen 

0.270  ±0.005 

0.150  ±0.005 

this  work 

FeF, 

Room 

0.268 

c 

aSee  reference  4. 
I.  Solomon,   Proceedings  of  the  Allerton  Park  Conference  on  Mbssbauer  Effect,  University  of  Illinois, 


Urbana,  Illinois,  June  5-7,  1960  (unpublished),  Sec.  lie. 
"G.  K.  Wertheim,  Phys.  Rev.  121,  63  (1961). 


it  strongly  suggests  that  metallic  iron  has  an 
outer  electron  configuration  equivalent  to  3d74s1. 

Although  the  electric  quadrupole  splitting  seems 
to  be  temperature  dependent,  it  is  roughly  the 
same  at  low  temperatures  for  all  the  Fe++  com- 
pounds listed  in  Table  I.    This  suggests  that  the 
relevant  field  gradient  is  mainly  caused  by  the 
ion  alone.   The  free  Fe++  ion  has  an  outer  elec- 
tron configuration  of  3d6  and  is  in  a  5Z?  state. 
Five  of  these  3d  electrons  have  their  spins  aligned 
and  together  form  a  spherically  symmetric  dis- 
tribution of  charge.   The  sixth  electron  has  oppo- 
site spin  and  also  a  choice  of  the  five  possible 
values  of  mj.    The  crystal  symmetry  dictates  the 
m/  combination  the  ion  will  actually  take.    For 
sufficiently  low  symmetry  the  lowest  energy  state 
will  be  a  linear  combination  of  the  two  states  with 
mi  equal  to  2  and  -2.   Assuming  this,  and  neg- 
lecting all  other  possible  effects  of  the  crystalline 
environment,  it  is  possible  to  calculate  the  ionic 
field  gradient  at  the  nucleus  to  within  the  factor 


(1  -y),  where  y  is  the  Sternheimer  antishielding 
factor.   Taking  A£  to  be  0.3  cm/sec  one  obtains 
I Q(l  -y) I  s=  0.1  b,  where  Q  is  the  nuclear  electric 
quadrupole  moment  for  the  excited  state  of  Fe". 

The  temperature  dependence  of  the  quadrupole 
splitting  could  be  caused  by  thermal  excitation  of 
the  Fe++  ion  into  a  state  which  yields  a  lower  field 
gradient  at  the  nucleus.    For  sufficiently  rapid 
ionic  transitions,  the  nucleus  will  respond  to  the 
time  average  of  the  field  gradient.   This  interpre- 
tation indicates  that  the  level  splitting  of  the  Fe++ 
ion  in  Fe(NH4)2(S04)2-6H20  is  sufficiently  small 
that  significant  excitation  occurs  at  room  tempera- 
ture. 

It  is  noted  that  there  is  very  little  quadrupole 
splitting  in  the  case  of  Fe+++.    Presumably  there 
is  negligible  field  gradient  from  this  ion,  since 
its  3d5  electron  configuration  gives  a  6S  state. 
The  splitting  that  does  occur4  is  therefore  caused 
by  field  gradients  from  the  neighboring  ions  rather 
than  from  the  Fe+++  ion  itself. 


61 


235 

Volume  6,  Number  2  PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS  January   15,   1961 

We  are  grateful  to  Professor  J.  Michael  Rad-  Sec.  He. 
cliff e  for  some  very  helpful  discussions.  2R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr. ,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  4,  274  (1960). 

'''This  work  was  supported  by  the  Office  of  Naval  3B.  D.  Josephson,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  341  (1960) . 

Research.  40.  C.  Kistner  and  A.  W.  Sunyar,  Phys.  Rev. 

'Submitted  by  R.  Ingalls  in  partial  fulfillment  of  the  Letters  4,  412  (1960). 
requirements  for  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Philosophy  at  5G.  Breit,  Revs.  Modern  Phys.  30,  507  (1958). 

the  Carnegie  Institute  of  Technology.  6R.  E.  Watson,  Technical  Report  No.  12,  Solid- 

*0.  C  Kistner,  Proceedings  of  the  Allerton  Park  State  and  Molecular  Theory  Group,  Massachusetts 

Conference  on  Mossbauer  Effect,  University  of  Illi-  Institute  of  Technology  (unpublished), 
nois,  Urbana,  Illinois,  June  5-7,  1960  (unpublished),  7R.  E.  Watson,  Phys.  Rev.  119,  1934  (1960). 


62 


236 


Volume  6,  Number  3 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


February  1,  1961 


INTERPRETATION  OF  THE  Fe57  ISOMER  SHIFT 

L.  R.  Walker,  G.  K.  Wertheim,  and  V.  Jaccarino 

Bell  Telephone  Laboratories,  Murray  Hill,  New  Jersey 

(Received  January  3,  1961) 


We  have  made  a  systematic  study  of  the  Mo'ss- 
bauer  effect1  of  Fe57  in  di-  and  tri-valent  iron 
compounds  and  in  d-group  metals.    The  observed 
"isomer  shift"2  measures  the  total  s -electron 
density  at  the  nucleus.    The  shift  in  compounds 
is  shown  to  depend  mainly  upon  the  3d  configura- 
tion of  iron  involved  and  to  a  lesser  extent  upon 
the  "chemical"  bond.   The  Hartree-Fock  calcula- 
tions of  Watson3  on  the  various  3d  configurations 
of  iron  are  combined  with  the  data  on  the  shifts 
in  the  most  ionic  compounds  to  obtain  a  calibra- 
tion of  the  shift  in  terms  of  s -electron  density. 
This  enables  us  to  estimate  the  difference  in 
charge  radius  of  the  ground  state  and  isomeric 
state  of  Fe57.   We  associate  the  shift  of  an  Fe 
solute  ion  in  a  d -group  metal  with  the  addition  of 
some  fraction  of  a  4s  electron  to  an  Fe  3d7  con- 
figuration; an  estimate  of  the  4s-electron  wave 
function  density  at  the  nucleus  from  the  Fermi- 
Segre-Goudsmit  (FSG)  formula4  enables  this 
fraction  to  be  determined. 

Kistner  and  Sunyar5  first  observed  in  the  recoil - 
free  emission  and  resonant  absorption  of  the 
14.4-kev  nuclear  gamma  ray  of  FeS7,  that  the 


energies  of  the  emitted  and  absorbed  gamma  rays 
were  noticeably  different  if  the  emitter  and  ab- 
sorber were  two  dissimilar  lattices  containing 
iron.    The  origin  of  this  effect  is  as  follows. 

The  ground  and  isomeric  levels  of  the  nucleus 
have  different  effective  charge  radii;  the  elec- 
trostatic interaction  with  the  electronic  charge 
is  then  different  in  the  two  states  and  the  gamma - 
ray  energy  is  consequently  changed  (relative  to 
its  value  for  a  point  nucleus)  by  an  amount  pro- 
portional to  the  s -electron  density  at  the  nucleus. 
If  the  s-electron  density  is  different  for  the  ab- 
sorber and  emitter,  the  difference  in  gamma - 
ray  energies,  Ea  -Ee,  is  defined  as  the  isomer 
shift. 

E    -E    =f7rZe2[Kio2-K     2][l^(0)   l2-l^(0)    I2],   (1) 


is 


gr 


and  ground  states  and  l^(0)al2  and  \ip(0)e  I2  are 
the  total  s-electron  densities  at  the  nucleus  for 
absorber  and  emitter,  respectively.9   It  is  to  be 
noted  that  the  sign  of  the  shift  has  its  origin  in 
the  fact  that  the  level  energy  is  lower  the  more 


237 


Volume  6,  Number  3 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


February  1,  1961 


compact  the  charge  distribution. 

An  examination  of  the  restricted  Hartree-Fock 
calculations  of  Watson3  shows  that  there  are 
significant  differences  in  the  value  of  l^3S(0)l2 
for  different  3d  configurations  of  iron;  the  change 
in  l^lS(0)l2  and  l^2s(°)l2  is  substantially  smaller. 

It  is  perhaps  worthwhile  to  point  out  that  un- 
restricted Hartree-Fock  calculations,  which  ex- 
hibit the  imbalance  of  up  and  down  spin  density 
(exchange  polarization  effect),  appear  to  give  the 
same  total  density  at  the  nucleus  as  the  restricted 
procedure.7   The  variation  of  I</jsS(0)I2  is  such  as 
to  correspond  to  different  degrees  of  shielding 
of  3s  by  3d  electrons.    To  calibrate  the  observed 
shifts  in  terms  of  total  s -electron  density,  we 
associate  the  difference  in  the  shifts  for  the  most 
ionic  Fe2+  and  Fe3+  compounds  with  the  differ- 
ence in  Watson's  values  of  £n=Jl^ws(0)l2  for  3d6 
and  3d5  configurations.   When  an  Fe  atom  is  in- 
troduced into  a  d -group  host  metal,  £w  I  <pns{0)  I2 
will  also  contain  a  contribution  from  4s  conduc- 
tion electrons.   Hartree-Fock  calculations  do 
not  exist  for  single  4s  electrons  outside  3dn  con- 
figurations, but  the  FSG4  formula,  combined  with 
the  known  term  value  of  3dw4s  configurations,8 
provides  an  entirely  adequate  estimate  of  l^4S(0)  I2. 

In  Fig.  1  is  shown  a  possible  interpretation  of 
the  observed  shifts  making  use  of  the  above  ideas. 
The  total  s-electron  density  in  atomic  units  is 
plotted  as  ordinate.    Watson's  values  for 
2En=?l^ns(0)l2  for  the  Fe  3d7*  configurations 
from  n  =  4  to  n  =  8  are  indicated  on  the  left.    The 
scale  on  the  right  for  MOssbauer  center- of- gravi- 
ty shifts  relative  to  stainless  steel  is  established 
by  identifying  the  shifts  in  the  most  ionic  Fe2+ 
and  Fes+  with  Watson's  densities  for  3d0  and  3d5, 
respectively.    The  solid  straight  lines  represent 
s-electron  densities  for  hypothetical  3dn\sx  con- 
figurations.   They  are  drawn  on  the  assumption 
that  the  density  for  such  a  configuration  is  of  the 
form  \ip(3dn)\2+x\ip4S(0)\2,  where  l^4S(0)l2  is 
calculated  from  the  FSG  formula  for  a  single  4s 
electron  outside  the  3d"  configuration.    This 
assumes  no  screening  of  inner  s  electrons  by 
the  single  4s  electron.9   Curves  for  the  configur- 
ations 3d8_x4sJf  and  3d7"*4s*  are  indicated  by 
dashed  lines  and  were  obtained  by  extrapolation 
and  interpolation  of  the  FSG  formula.    The  ex- 
perimental data  are  given  in  Table  I. 

The  shifts  for  Fe  in  various  metals  have  been 
represented  as  horizontal  lines  of  a  length  suf- 
ficient to  cover  what  appear  to  be  the  most  plaus- 
ible configurations.    Since  for  Fe  in  Fe  metal 
there  are  certainly  8  electrons  to  be  accounted 


FIG.  1.    A  possible  interpretation  of  the  Fe"  Mbss- 
bauer  isomer  shifts  In  various  solids.    The  total  s-elec- 
tron density  is  plotted  as  a  function  of  the  percentage 
of  45  character  for  various  d -electron  configurations. 
The  reasons  for  placing  the  experimental  data  on  given 
theoretical  curves  are  discussed  in  the  text.    The  con- 
stant C  =  11  873  at~3. 


for,  the  evidence  seems  to  point  clearly  to  the 
configuration  3d74s  for  this  case.    The  small- 
ness  of  the  spread  in  shifts  between  the  different 
metals  indicates  strongly  that  the  configuration 
of  the  solute  Fe  is  substantially  the  same  in  the 
metals  investigated.    For  the  Fe2+  and  Fes+ 
compounds,  the  experimental  data  are  entered 
upon  the  3d64sx  and  3d54s*  curves,  respectively. 
This  is  consistent  with  the  idea  that  in  these 
covalent  compounds  the  4s  atomic  orbitals  are 
partially  occupied  by  electrons  from  the  ligand 
ions  (bonding  orbitals).10'11   The  data  for  the 
"ferro"  and  "ferri"  cyanides  of  potassium  have 
not  been  plotted  since  it  is  not  clear  how  to  fit 
them  into  the  above  scheme.    Indeed,  since  they 
have  ground  states  which  do  not  follow  Hund's 
rule,  it  is  unlikely  that  Watson's  calculations  are 
applicable  to  them.    The  fact  that  the  isomer 
shifts  in  both  cyanides  are  very  small  relative 
to  each  other  and  to  stainless  steel  appears  to  be 
fortuitous. 

From  the  observed  isomer  shift  and  the  cal- 
culated difference  in  I  ^<0)  I2  for  the  d5  and  de 
free-ion  configurations  we  may  compute  the  dif- 
ference of  the  excited  and  ground-state  charge 


99 


238 


Volume  6,  Number  3 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


February  1,  1961 


Table  I.    Observed  shifts  in  gamma-ray  energy  in 
various  iron  compounds  and  d  -group  metals  measured 
relative  to  type  310  stainless  steel.    (Source  and  ab- 
sorber at  room  temperature.)    The  measured  shifts 
contain  contributions  from  the  second-order  Doppler 
shift  and  the  zero-point  energy  shift  in  addition  to  the 
isomer  shift  discussed  here.    Measurements  at  77°Ka 
indicate  that  the  second-order  Doppler  shift  contribu- 
tions are  small  compared  to  the  total  shift.    More- 
over, since  the  Doppler  shifts  are  likely  to  be  of  sim- 
ilar magnitudes  in  the  compounds  considered,  they 
will  cancel,  since  we  are  ultimately  concerned  only 
with  differences  in  the  shifts  between  similar  mater- 
ials.   The  same  is  true  of  the  zero-point  energy  shift. 
The  uncertainty  in  comparing  metals  with  salts  is 
considerably  greater.    To  convert  the  shifts  from 
cm/sec  to  Mc/sec,  one  should  multiply  the  values  by 
116.    The  errors  indicated  reflect  the  uncertainty  in 
the  last  significant  figure. 


Shift 
(cm/sec) 

3d* 

FeF2  (single  crystal) 

0.140  ±5 

3d* 

KFeFj 

0.139  ±5 

3d* 

FeSCv  7H20 

0.140  ±5 

3d* 

FeCl2-  4H20 

0.130  ±5 

3d* 

FeS 

~0.11    ±1 

3d6 

Fe2(S04)3-  eHjO 

0.052  ±5 

3d5 

Fe20,b 

0.047  ±5 

3d8 

Yttrium-iron  garnet, 
octahedral 

0.057 ±5 

3d' 

Yttrium -iron  garnet, 

tetrahedral 

0.026  ±5 

FeS2  (pyrites)0 

0.048  ±5 

FeS2  (marcasite) 

0.048  ±5 

Metals 

Feb 

0.015  ±5 

Co 

0.012  ±5 

Ni 

0.015  ±5 

Mn 

-0.008  ±2 

Cr 

-0.005  ±2 

Mo 

-0.001  ±2 

Cyanides 

K4Fe(CN)6'3H20 

0.0083  ±10 

KsFe(CN)s 

0.0000  ±10 

aR.  L.  Ingalls,  G.  Lang,  and  S. 
Am.  Phys.  Soc.  5,  429  (1960). 
"See  reference  5. 

DeBenedetti,  Bull. 

radii  using  Eq.  (1),  assuming  the  usual  charge 
radius  dependence  on  mass  number,  i.e., 
R  =  \.20AU3xlO~i3  cm.  We  obtain  t>R/R  =  1.8xl0'3 
as  the  fractional  change  in  the  charge  radius, 
with  the  effective  radius  of  the  ground  state 
larger  than  that  of  the  excited  state.    This  result 
is  not  unexpected12  in  sign  and  magnitude.   The 
shell  model  predicts  that  the  ground  state  for  3 
odd  neutrons  outside  a  closed  shell  (28  neutrons), 
corresponding  to  a  hole  in  the  2p3f2  shell,   is  one 
for  which  7  =  3/2,  as  is  the  case  for  the  14-kev 
excited  state.    The  large  spin-orbit  coupling  pre- 
cludes the  possibility  of  a  2pv2  configuration 
being  the  ground  state. 

Using  the  radial  moments  for  an  isotropic 
square  well13  and  even  assuming  a  proton  ex- 
citation corresponding  to  A/ =  3  or  4,  one  still 
obtains  a  value  of  only  2xl0"3  for  bR/R.    (The 
more  likely  case  of  a  neutron  excitation  would 
leave  the  charge  radius  unchanged  in  a  first  ap- 
proximation.)  It  is  most  unlikely  therefore  that 
the  ground  state  is  a  simple  shell  state.    It  is 
interesting  to  note  that  the  charge  radius  change 
expected  for  the  addition  of  one  particle  (isotope 
shift  at  A  =  57)  is  bR/R  =  $(6A/A)  =  5.9xl0"3. 

In  the  isomeric  transition  of  Hg197  (I     =1/2  — 
/ex  =  13/2),  it  was  estimated2  that  the  charge  re- 
distribution corresponded  to  an  increase  of  one- 
fourth  to  one -fifth  of  that  observed  experimentally 
for  the  addition  of  one  neutron  at  A  =157.    (The 
excited  state  has  the  larger  charge  distribution 
in  this  case.)   Since  both  states  are  identifiable 
as  single -particle  neutron  states,  it  is  clear  that 
a  general  charge  redistribution  accompanies  the 
isomeric  transition. 

We  would  like  to  thank  W.  E.  Blumberg,  A.  M. 
Clogston,  and  M.  Goldhaber  for  several  critical 
discussions. 


'See  reference  6. 


!R.  L.  Mossbauer,   Z.  Physik  151,   124(1958). 

isomer  shift  was  first  observed  in  the  optical  spectra 
of  Hg197  (ground  state  /=  1/2,  excited  state  /=  13/2); 
A.  C.  Melissinos  and  S.  P.  Davis,  Phys.  Rev.  115, 
130  (1959).    If  one  accepts  "isotope  shift"  to  be  the 
proper  name  for  charge  redistribution  effects  resulting 
from  addition  of  particles,  the  name  "isomer  shift"  is 
the  logical  choice  for  the  effect  discussed  herein.    Un- 
fortunately, the  phrase  "chemical  shift"  has  been  used 
to  describe  Mossbauer  isomer  shifts  in  the  past. 

3R.  E.  Watson,  Solid  State  and  Molecular  Theory 
Group,  Technical  Report  No.  12,  Massachusetts  Insti- 
tute of  Technology,  June  15,   1959  (unpublished). 

4E.  Fermi  and  E.  Segre,   Z.   Physik  82,  729  (1933); 
S.  A.  Goudsmit,   Phys.  Rev.  43,  636  (1933). 

sO.  C.  Kistner  and  A.  W.  Sunyar,   Phys.  Rev.  Letters 
4,  412(1960).    A  temperature-dependent  shift  had  been 


100 


239 


Volume  6.  Number  3 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


February  1,  1961 


previously  observed  and  identified  as  a  second-order 
Doppler  shift  resulting  from  the  thermal  motion  of  the 
atoms.    See  R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys. 
Rev.  Letters  4,  274(1960). 

•i.  Solomon,  Compt.  rend.  250,  3828  (1960).    Apart 
from  the  numerical  constant  which  was  not  given  in 
this  reference,  our  Eq.  (1)  is  the  same  as  the  result 
given  there. 

TR.  E.  Watson  and  A.  J.  Freeman,  Phys.  Rev.  120, 
1125(1960). 

8C.  E.  Moore,  Atomic  Energy  Levels,  National 
Bureau  of  Standards  Circular  No.  467  (U.  S.  Govern- 


ment Printing  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.  1952),  Vol.  2 

9R.   E.  Watson,   Phys.  Rev.  119,   1934  (1960).    An 
estimate  of  the  charge  |fy,(0)  |2  for  the  inner  s  electron 
was  made  from  this  reference  in  which  the  configura- 
tions 3dn~24sl  are  considered. 

,0J.  S.  Van  Wieringen,  Discussions  Faraday  Soc. 
No.  19,  118(1955). 

uThe  effect  of  covalency  on  the  occupation  of  d  orbit  - 
als  is  neglected. 

12M.  Goldhaber  (private  communication). 

,3J.  Eisinger  and  V.  Jaccarino,  Revs.  Modern  Phys. 
30,  528  (1958). 


101 


240 

PHYSICAL  REVIEW 
LETTERS 


Volume  4 


APRIL  1,  I960 


Number  7 


APPARENT  WEIGHT  OF  PHOTONS* 

R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr. 

Lyman  Laboratory  of  Physics,  Harvard  University,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts 

(Received  March  9,  1960) 


As  we  proposed  a  few  months  ago,1  we  have  now 
measured  the  effect,  originally  hypothesized  by 
Einstein,2  of  gravitational  potential  on  the  ap- 
parent frequency  of  electromagnetic  radiation  by 
using  the  sharply  defined  energy  of  recoil -free 
y  rays  emitted  and  absorbed  in  solids,  as  dis- 
covered by  MCssbauer.3   We  have  already  re- 
ported4 a  detailed  study  of  the  shape  and  width  of 
the  line  obtained  at  room  temperature  for  the 
14.4-kev,  0. 1 -microsecond  level  in  Fe57.    Partic- 
ular attention  was  paid  to  finding  the  conditions 
required  to  obtain  a  narrow  line.   We  found  that 
the  line  had  a  Lorentzian  shape  with  a  fractional 
full  -width  at  half -height  of  1.13  xlO-12  when  the 
source  was  carefully  prepared  according  to  a 
prescription  developed  from  experience.   We  have 
also  investigated  the  93-kev,  9.4 -microsecond 
level  of  Zn67  at  liquid  helium  and  liquid  nitrogen 
temperatures  using  several  combinations  of 
source  and  absorber  environment,  but  have  not 
observed  a  usable  resonant  absorption.   That  work 
will  be  reported  later.   The  fractional  width  and 
intensity  of  the  absorption  in  Fe57  seemed  suffi- 
cient to  measure  the  gravitational  effect  in  the 
laboratory. 

As  a  preliminary,  we  sought  possible  sources 
of  systematic  error  that  would  interfere  with 
measurements  of  small  changes  in  frequency  using 
this  medium.    Early  in  our  development  of  the  in- 
strumentation necessary  for  this  experiment,  we 
concluded  that  there  were  asymmetries  in,  or 
frequency  differences  between,  the  lines  of  given 
combinations  of  source  and  absorber  which  vary 
from  one  combination  to  another.   Thus  it  is  ab- 


solutely necessary  to  measure  a  change  in  the 
relative  frequency  that  is  produced  by  the  per- 
turbation being  studied.   Observation  of  a  fre- 
quency difference  between  a  given  source  and 
absorber  cannot  be  uniquely  attributed  to  this 
perturbation.    More  recently,  we  have  discovered 
and  explained  a  variation  of  frequency  with  tem- 
perature of  either  the  source  or  absorber.8  We 
conclude  that  the  temperature  difference  between 
the  source  and  absorber  must  be  accurately 
known  and  its  effect  considered  before  any  mean- 
ing can  be  extracted  from  even  a  change  observed 
when  the  perturbation  is  altered. 

The  basic  elements  of  the  apparatus  finally 
developed  to  measure  the  gravitational  shift  in 
frequency  were  a  carefully  prepared  source 
containing  0.4  curie  of  270-day  Co57,  and  a  care- 
fully prepared,  rigidly  supported,  iron  film  ab- 
sorber.  Using  the  results  of  our  initial  experi- 
ment, we  requested  the  Nuclear  Science  and 
Engineering  Corporation  to  repurify  their  nickel 
cyclotron  target  by  ion  exchange  to  reduce  cobalt 
carrier.    Following  the  bombardment,  in  a  special 
run  in  the  high -energy  proton  beam  of  the  high- 
current  cyclotron  at  the  Oak  Ridge  National 
Laboratory,  they  electroplated  the  separated 
Co57  onto  one  side  of  a  2-in.  diameter,  0.005-in. 
thick  disk  of  Armco  iron  according  to  our  pre- 
scription.  After  this  disk  was  received,  it  was 
heated  to  900°-1000°C  for  one  hour  in  a  hydrogen 
atmosphere6  to  diffuse  the  cobalt  into  the  iron 
foil  about  3xl0"5  cm. 

The  absorber  made  by  Nuclear  Metals  Inc., 
was  composed  of  seven  separate  units.   Each 


337 


241 


Volume  4,  Number  7 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


April  1,  I960 


unit  consisted  of  about  80  mg  of  iron,  enriched 
in  Fe57  to  31.9%,  electroplated  onto  a  polished 
side  of  a  3 -in.  diameter,  0.040-in.  thick  disk  of 
beryllium.    The  electroplating  technique  required 
considerable  development  to  produce  films  with 
absorption  lines  of  width  and  strength  that  satis  - 
fied  our  tests.    The  films  finally  accepted,  reso- 
nantly absorbed  about  1/3  the  recoil -free  y  rays 
from  our  source.    Each  unit  of  the  absorber  was 
mounted  over  the  0.001 -in.  Al  window  of  a 
3  in.  x  1/4  in.  Nal(Tl)  scintillation  crystal  in- 
tegrally mounted  on  a  Dumont  6363  multiplier 
phototube.    The  multiplier  supply  voltages  were 
separately  adjusted  to  equalize  their  conversion 
gains,  and  their  outputs  were  mixed. 

The  required  stable  vertical  baseline  was  con- 
veniently obtained  in  the  enclosed,  isolated  tower 
of  the  Jefferson  Physical  Laboratory.7   A  statis- 
tical argument  suggests  that  the  precision  of  a 
measurement  of  the  gravitational  frequency  shift 
should  be  independent  of  the  height.    Instrumental 
instability  but  more  significantly  the  sources  of 
systematic  error  mentioned  above  are  less  criti- 
cal compared  to  the  larger  fractional  shifts  ob- 
tained with  an  increased  height.   Our  net  operating 
baseline  of  74  feet  required  only  conveniently 
realizable  control  over  these  sources  of  error. 


The  absorption  of  the  14.4 -kev  y  ray  by  air  in 
the  path  was  reduced  by  running  a  16-in.  diam- 
eter, cylindrical,  Mylar  bag  with  thin  end  win- 
dows and  filled  with  helium  through  most  of  the 
distance  between  source  and  absorber.  To 
sweep  out  small  amounts  of  air  diffusing  into  the 
bag,  the  helium  was  kept  flowing  through  it  at  a 
rate  of  about  30  liters/hr. 

The  over -all  experiment  is  described  by  the 
block  diagram  of  Fig.  1.    The  source  was  moved 
sinusoidally  by  either  a  ferroelectric  or  a  moving- 
coil  magnetic  transducer.    During  the  quarter  of 
the  modulation  cycle  centered  about  the  time  of 
maximum  velocity  the  pulses  from  the  scintilla- 
tion spectrometer,  adjusted  to  select  the  14.4- 
kev  y-ray  line,  were  fed  into  one  scaler -while, 
during  the  opposite  quarter  cycle,  they  were  fed 
into  another.    The  difference  in  counts  recorded 
was  a  measure  of  the  asymmetry  in,  or  frequency- 
shift  between,  the  emission  and  absorption  lines. 
As  a  precaution  the  relative  phase  of  the  gating 
pulses  and  the  sinusoidal  modulation  were  dis- 
played continuously.    The  data  were  found  to  be 
insensitive  to  phase  changes  much  larger  than 
the  drifts  of  phase  observed. 

A  completely  duplicate  system  of  electronics, 
controlled  by  the  same  gating  pulses,  recorded 


HYDRAULIC     MASTER 


RACK     S     PINION 
CLOCK      DRIVE 


^#fr 


m^ 


JULTL^LTL 


MONITOR      CHANNEL 


AMPLIFIER 
AND 
PULSE     HEIGHTr- 
SELECTOR 


COINCIDENCE 
CIRCUIT 


DISCRIMINATOR 


AMPLIFIER 

AND 

PULSE  HEIGHT 

SELECTOR 


MERCURY 
RELAYS 


COINCIDENCE 


__       CIRCUIT  _  MERCURY 

RELAYS 


DISCRIMINATOR 


| COUNTER | 


|cqunter| 


FIG.  1.  A  block  diagram  of  the  over-all  experimental  arrangement.  The  source  and  ab- 
sorber-detector units  were  frequently  interchanged.  Sometimes  a  ferroelectric  and  some- 
times a  moving-coil  magnetic  transducer  was  used  with  frequencies  ranging  from  10  to  50  cps. 


338 


242 

Volume  4,  Number  7  PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS  April  1,  I960 


data  from  a  counter  having  a  1-in.  diameter, 
0.015-in.  thick  Nal(Tl)  scintillation  crystal  cov- 
ered by  an  absorber  similar  to  the  main  absorb- 
er.   This  absorber  and  crystal  unit  was  mounted 
to  see  the  source  from  only  three  feet  away. 
This  monitor  channel  measured  the  stability  of 
the  over -all  modulation  system,  and,  because  of 
its  higher  counting  rate,  had  a  smaller  statistical 
uncertainty. 

The  relation  between  the  counting  rate  differ- 
ence and  relative  frequency  shifts  between  the 
emission  and  absorption  lines  was  measured 
directly  by  adding  a  Doppler  shift  several  times 
the  size  of  the  gravitational  shift  to  the  emission 
line.   The  necessary  constant  velocity  was  intro- 
duced by  coupling  a  hydraulic  cylinder  of  large 
bore  carrying  the  transducer  and  source  to  a 
master  cylinder  of  small  bore  connected  to  a 
rack -and -pinion  driven  by  a  clock. 

Combining  data  from  two  periods  having  Dop- 
pler shifts  of  equal  magnitude,  but  opposite  sign, 
allowed  measurement  of  both  sensitivity  and 
relative  frequency  shift.    Because  no  sacrifice 
of  valuable  data  resulted,  the  sensitivity  was 
calibrated  about  1/3  of  the  operating  time  which 
was  as  often  as  convenient  without  recording  the 
data  automatically.   In  this  way  we  were  able  to 
pUminate  errors  due  to  drifts  in  sensitivity  such 
as  would  be  anticipated  from  gain  or  discrimina- 
tor drift,  changes  in  background,  or  changes  in 
modulation  swing. 

The  second  order  Doppler  shift  resulting  from 
lattice  vibrations  required  that  the  temperature 
difference  between  the  source  and  absorber  be 
controlled  or  monitored.   A  difference  of  1°C 
would  produce  a  shift  as  large  as  that  sought,  so 
the  potential  difference  of  a  thermocouple  with 
one  junction  at  the  source  and  the  other  at  the 
main  absorber  was  recorded.   An  identical  sys- 
tem was  provided  for  the  monitor  channel.   The 
recorded  temperature  data  were  integrated  over 
a  counting  period,  and  the  average  determined 
to  0.03°C.   The  temperature  coefficient  of  fre- 
quency which  we  have  used  to  correct  the  data, 
was  calculated  from  the  specific  heat  of  a  lattice 
having  a  Debye  temperature  of  420°K.    Although 
at  room  temperature  this  coefficient  is  but  weakly 
dependent  on  the  Debye  temperature,  residual 
error  in  the  correction  for,  or  control  of,  the 
temperature  difference  limits  the  ability  to  meas- 
ure frequency  shifts  and  favors  the  use  of  a  large 
height  difference  for  the  gravitational  experiment. 

Data  typical  of  those  collected  are  shown  in 
Table  I.    The  right  -hand  column  is  the  data  after 


correction  for  temperature  difference.   All  data 
are  expressed  as  fractional  frequency  shift  xlO15. 
The  difference  of  the  shift  seen  with  y  rays  rising 
and  that  with  y  rays  falling  should  be  the  result 
of  gravity.    The  average  for  the  two  directions 
of  travel  should  measure  an  effective  shift  of 
other  origin,  and  this  is  about  four  times  the 
difference  between  the  shifts.   We  confirmed  that 
this  shift  was  an  inherent  property  of  the  particu- 
lar combination  of  source  and  absorber  by  meas- 
uring the  shift  for  each  absorber  unit  in  turn, 
with  temperature  correction,  when  it  was  six 
inches  from  the  source.    Although  this  test  was 
not  exact  because  only  about  half  the  area  of  each 
absorber  was  involved,  the  weighted  mean  shift 
from  this  test  for  the  combination  of  all  absorber 
units  agreed  well  with  that  observed  in  the  main 
experiment.    The  individual  fractional  frequency 
shifts  found  for  these,  for  the  monitor  absorber, 
as  well  as  for  a  11.7-mg/cm2  Armco  iron  foil, 
are  displayed  in  Table  II.    The  considerable  var- 
iation among  them  is  as  striking  as  the  size  of 
the  weighted  mean  shift.   Such  shifts  could  result 
from  differences  in  a  range  of  about  11  %  in  ef- 
fective Debye  temperature  through  producing 
differences  in  net  second  order  Doppler  effect. 
Other  explanations  based  on  hyperfine  structure 
including  electric  quadrupole  interactions  are 
also  plausible.   Although  heat  treatment  might  be 
expected  to  change  these  shifts  for  the  iron -plated 
beryllium  absorbers,  experience  showed  that  the 
line  width  was  materially  increased  by  such 
treatment,  probably  owing  to  interdiffusion.    The 
presence  of  a  significant  shift  for  even  the  Armco 
foil  relative  to  the  source,  both  of  which  had  re- 
ceived heat  treatments,  suggests  that  it  is  unlikely 
one  would  have,  without  test,  a  shift  of  this  sort 
smaller  than  the  gravitational  effect  expected  in 
even  our  "two-way"  baseline  of  148  feet.    The 
apparently  fortuitous  smallness  of  the  shift  of 
the  monitor  absorber  relative  to  our  source  cor- 
responds to  the  shift  expected  for  about  30  feet 
of  height  difference. 

Recently  Cranshaw,  Schiffer,  and  Whitehead8 
claimed  to  have  measured  the  gravitational  shift 
using  the  y  ray  of  Fe57.   They  state  that  they  be- 
lieve their  43%  statistical  uncertainty  represents 
the  major  error.    Two  much  larger  sources  of 
error  apparently  have  not  been  considered:    (1) 
the  temperature  difference  between  the  source 
and  absorber,  and  (2)  the  frequency  difference 
inherent  in  a  given  combination  of  source  and 
absorber.    From  the  above  discussion,  only  0.6°C 
of  temperature  difference  would  produce  a  shift 


339 


243 


Volume  4,  Number  7 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


April   1,   I960 


Table  I.    Data  from  the  first  four  days  of  counting.    The  data  are  expressed  as  fractional  frequency  difference 
between  source  and  absorber  multiplied  by  1015,  as  derived  from  the  appropriate  sensitivity  calibration.    The 
negative  signs  mean  that  the  y  ray  has  a  frequency  lower  than  the  frequency  of  maximum  absorption  at  the  ab- 
sorber. 


Shift 

Temperature 

Net 

Period 

observed 

correction 

shift 

Source  at  bottom 

Feb. 

22,  5  p.m. 

-11.5  ±3.0 
-16.4  ±2. 2a 
-13.8±1.3 
-11.9±2.1a 
-8.7  ±2.0a 

-9.2 
-5.9 
-5.3 
-8.0 
-10.5 

-20.  7  ±3.0 
-22.3  ±2.2 
-19.1  ±1.3 
-19.9±2.1 
-19.2  ±2.0 

Feb. 

23,   10  p.m. 

-10.5  ±2.0 

Source  at  top 

-10.6 

Weighted 

average1 

-21.0±2.0 
-19.7  ±0.8 

Feb. 

24,  0  a.m. 

-12.0±4.1 
-5.7±1.4 
-7.4±2.1a 
-6.5±2.1a 

-13.9  ±3. la 
-6.6±3.0 

-8.6 
-9.6 
-7.4 
-5.8 
-7.5 
-5.7 

-20.6  ±4.1 
-15.3  ±1.4 
-14. 8  ±2.1 
-12.3±2.1 
-21.4±3.1 
-12.3±3.0 

Feb. 

25,  6  p.m. 

-6.5  ±2.0a 
-10.0±2.6 

-8.9 
-7.9 

Weighted 

average = 

-15.4±2.0 
-17.9  ±2.6 
-15.5±0.8 

Mean  shift  = 

-17.6  ±0.6 

Difference  of  averages  = 

-4.2  ±1.1 

aThese  data  were  taken  simultaneously  with  a  sensitivity  calibration. 


Table  II.    Data  on  asymmetries  of  various  absorb- 
ers in  apparent  fractional  frequency  shift  multiplied 
by  1015.    In  the  third  column  we  tabulate  the  Debye 
temperature  increase  of  the  absorber  above  that  of  the 
source  which  could  account  for  the  shift. 


Absorber 

(AiV^)xio15 

A8j)  in  "K 

No.  1 

-8.4*2.5 

+15  ±4 

No.  2 

-24  ±3. 5 

+41  ±6 

No.  3 

-28  ±3. 5 

+48  ±6 

No.  4 

-19  ±3. 5 

+33  ±6 

No.  5 

-24  ±3. 5 

+41  ±6 

No.  6 

-17  ±2.5 

+29  ±4 

No.  7 

-19  ±3. 5 

+33  ±6 

Weighted  mean 

of  No.  1-No.  7 

-19  ±3.0 

+33  ±5 

Monitor  absorber 

+0.55  ±0.15 

-0.95  ±0.26 

Armco  foil 

+10±3.5 

-17  ±6 

as  large  as  the  whole  effect  observed.    Their 
additional  experiment  at  the  shortened  height  dif- 
ference of  three  meters  does  not,  without  con- 
comitant temperature  data,  resolve  the  question 


of  inherent  frequency  difference.    Their  stated 
disappointment  with  the  over -all  line  width  ob- 
served would  seem  to  add  to  the  probability  of 
existence  of  such  a  shift.    They  mention  this 
broadening  in  connection  with  its  possible  influ- 
ence on  the  sensitivity,  derived  rather  than 
measured,  owing  to  a  departure  from  Lorentzian 
shape.    Clearly  such  a  departure  is  even  more 
important  in  allowing  asymmetry. 

Our  experience  shows  that  no  conclusion  can 
be  drawn  from  the  experiment  of  Cranshaw  et  al. 

If  the  frequency -shift  inherent  in  our  source- 
absorber  combination  is  not  affected  by  inversion 
of  the  relative  positions,  the  difference  between 
shifts  observed  with  rising  and  falling  y  rays 
measures  the  effect  of  gravity.    All  data  collected 
since  recognizing  the  need  for  temperature  cor- 
rection, yield  a  net  fractional  shift,   -(5.13  ±0.51) 
x1q-i5     The  error  assigned  is  the  rms  statistical 
deviation  including  that  of  independent  sensitivity 
calibrations  taken  as  representative  of  their  re- 
spective periods  of  operation.    The  shift  observed 
agrees  with  -4.92xl0"ls,  the  predicted  gravita- 
tional shift  for  this  "two-way"  height  difference. 


340 


244 


Volume  4,  Number  7 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


April  1,  I960 


Expressed  in  this  unit,  the  result  is 

(Ai/)       /(AvL.        =+1.05±0.10, 
v      'exp  theor 

where  the  plus  sign  indicates  that  the  frequency 
increases  in  falling,  as  expected. 

These  data  were  collected  in  about  10  days  of 
operation.   We  expect  to  continue  counting  with 
some  improvements  in  sensitivity,  and  to  reduce 
the  statistical  uncertainty  about  fourfold.   With 
our  present  experimental  arrangement  this  should 
result  in  a  comparable  reduction  in  error  in  the 
measurement  since  we  believe  we  can  take  ade- 
quate steps  to  avoid  systematic  errors  on  the  re- 
sulting scale.    A  higher  baseline  or  possibly  a 
narrower  y  ray  would  seem  to  be  required  to 
extend  the  precision  by  a  factor  much  larger  than 
this. 

We  wish  to  express  deep  appreciation  for  the 
generosity,  encouragement,  and  assistance  with 
details  of  the  experiment  accorded  us  by  our 
colleagues  and  the  entire  technical  staff  of  these 
laboratories  during  the  three  months  we  have 


been  preoccupied  with  it. 


Supported  in  part  by  the  joint  program  of  the  Office 
of  Naval  Research  and  the  U.  S.  Atomic  Energy  Com- 
mission and  by  a  grant  from  the  Higgins  Scientific 
Trust. 

*R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr. ,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  3,  439  (1959). 

2A.  Einstein,  Ann.  Physik  35,  898(1911). 

3R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Physik  151,  124(1958); 
Naturwissenschaften  45,  538  (1958);  Z.  Naturforsch. 
14a,  211  (1959). 

*R,  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr. ,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  3,  554  (1959). 

6R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  4,  274  (1960). 

6We  wish  to  thank  Mr.  F.  Rosebury  of  the  Research 
Laboratory  of  Electronics,  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
Technology,  for  providing  his  facilities  for  this  treat- 
ment. 

TSee  E.  H.  Hall,  Phys.  Rev.  17,  245  (1903),  first 
paragraph. 

8T.  E.  Cranshaw,  J.  P.  Schiffer,  and  A.  B.  White- 
head, Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  163(1960). 


245 


Volume  4,  Number  4 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


February  15,   I960 


MEASUREMENT  OF  THE  RED  SHIFT  IN  AN  ACCELERATED  SYSTEM 
USING  THE  MOSSBAUER  EFFECT  IN  Fe57 

H.  J.  Hay,  J.  P.  Schiffer,*  T.  E.  Cranshaw,  and  P.  A.  Egelstaff 

Atomic  Energy  Research  Establishment,  Harwell,  England 

(Received  January  27,  1960) 

In  an  adjoining  paper1  an  experiment  is  described 
in  which  the  change  of  frequency  in  a  photon  pass- 
ing between  two  points  of  different  gravitational 
potential  has  been  measured.    Einstein's  principle 
of  equivalence  states  that  a  gravitational  field  is 
locally  indistinguishable  from  an  accelerated  sys- 
tem.   It  therefore  seemed  desirable  to  measure 
the  shift  in  the  energy  of  14-kev  gamma  rays 
from  Fe"  in  an  accelerated  system.   In  order  to 
do  this  we  have  plated  a  Co57  source  on  to  the 
surface  of  a  0.8 -cm  diameter  iron  cylinder. 
This  cylinder  was  rigidly  mounted  between  two 
Dural  plates  which  also  held  a  cylindrical  shell 
of  Lucite,  13.28  cm  in  diameter  and  0.31  cm 
thick,  concentric  with  the  iron  cylinder.    An  iron 
foil  3.5  mg/cm2  thick  and  enriched  in  Fe57  to 
50%  was  glued  to  the  inside  surface  of  the  Lucite. 
This  assembly  was  mounted  in  a  neutron  chopper 
drive  unit2  and  rotated  at  angular  velocities  up 
to  500  cycles  per  second.    The  gamma  rays 
passing  through  the  absorber  were  detected  in  a 
xenon-filled  proportional  counter.    A  schematic 
diagram  of  the  apparatus  is  shown  in  Fig.  1 . 

The  expected  shift  can  be  calculated  in  two 
ways.   One  can  treat  the  acceleration  as  an  effec- 
tive gravitational  field  and  calculate  the  difference 
in  potential  between  the  source  and  absorber,  or 
one  can  obtain  the  same  answer  using  the  time 
dilatation  of  special  relativity.   The  expected 
fractional  shift  in  the  energy  of  the  gamma  ray 
is  (/ei2-/e22)oj2/2c2=2.44xl0-20u)2. 

The  number  of  gamma  rays  as  a  function  of 
angular  velocity  is  shown  in  Fig.  2.   In  a  sep- 
arate measurement  the  counting  rate  as  a  func- 
tion of  radial  velocity  was  determined  for  this 
same  source  and  absorber.    It  was  found  that 
with  the  source  moving  rapidly  the  counting  rate 
was  1.29  times  what  it  was  with  the  source  sta- 


FIG.  2.  Comparison  of  the  calculated  curve  with 
experimental  points.  The  statistical  errors  of  each 
point  are  indicated.  The  curve  was  calculated  from 
the  parameters  given  in  the  text. 

tionary.    The  measured  full  width  of  the  resonance 
was  0.38  mm/sec.    The  curve  calculated  from 
these  parameters  is  also  shown  in  Fig.  2.    The 
sensitivity  of  the  equipment  to  vibrations  was 
tested  by  vibrating  the  shaft  of  the  rotor  with 
frequencies  corresponding  to  the  rotational  fre- 
quencies involved,  and  negligible  effect  was  ob- 
served.   Changes  in  counting  rate  due  to  forces 
on  the  absorber  were  also  found  to  be  negligible. 

It  appears  that  the  observed  effect  is  in  reason- 
able agreement  with  expectations.    The  size  of 
the  shift  of  the  gamma -ray  energy  in  the  effec- 
tive gravitational  field  of  a  rotating  system  is 
in  agreement  with  that  due  to  the  terrestrial 
gravitational  field,  within  the  accuracy  of  the 
measurements.    The  present  experiment  is  ex- 
pected to  be  improved  when  a  more  pure  source 
is  available  for  reasons  stated  in  the  previous 
paper.    It  will  also  be  necessary  to  study  further 
the  factors  which  could  influence  the  absorption 
process,  including  changes  in  the  magnetic 
hyperfine  fields  due  to  the  high  velocities. 

We  would  like  to  acknowledge  helpful  and  illu- 
minating discussions  with  Dr.  J.  S.  Bell,  Dr.  W. 
Marshall,  and  Dr.  T.  Skyrme.   We  would  also 
like  to  thank  Dr.  E.  Bretscher  for  his  support 
and  encouragement. 


FIG.  1 .    Schematic  diagram  of  the  experimental 
equipment. 


John  Simon  Guggenheim  fellow,  on  leave  from 


165 


246 


Volume  4,  Number  4 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


February  15,  1960 


Argonne  National  Laboratory,  Lemont,  Illinois. 

'T.  E.  Cranshaw,  J.  P.  Schiffer,  and  A.  B.  White- 
head, preceding  Letter  (Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  163 


(I960)]. 

2Egelstaff,  Hay,  Holt,  Raffle,  and  Pickles,  J.  Inst. 
Elec.  Engrs.  (London)  (to  be  published). 


166 


247 


Absence  of  Doppler  Shift  for  Gamma  Ray  Source 
and  Detector  on  Same  Circular  Orbit 

By  D.  C,  CHAMPENEY  and  P.  B.  MOON 

Department  of  Physics,  University  of  Birmingham 
MS.  received  29th  August  1960 

Abstract.  An  experiment  is  described  showing  that  for  a  source  and  absorber  of 
57Fe  placed  at  opposite  ends  of  a  rotor  the  Mossbauer  absorption  is  unaffected  by 
rotation.  This  is  contrary  to  the  situation  with  the  source  at  the  centre  when 
relativistic  effects  cause  a  frequency  shift  between  source  and  absorber. 


Reporting  a  test  of  the  effect  of  circular  motion  on  the  resonant  frequency  of 
the  gamma-ray  transition  in  57Fe,  Hay,  Schiffer,  Cranshaw  and  Egelstaff 
^  (1960)  point  out  that  one  can  treat  the  acceleration  as  an  effective  gravita- 
tional field  and  calculate  the  frequency  shift  from  the  difference  of  potential 
between  source  and  absorber,  or  one  can  obtain  the  same  answer  by  using  the  time 
dilatation  of  special  relativity. 

For  their  arrangement,  with  the  source  at  the  centre  and  the  absorber  at  the 
periphery  of  the  rotating  system,  the  same  result  also  follows  from  the  argument 
that  since  source  and  absorber  have  relative  velocity  v  (<^c)  in  a  direction  perpen- 
dicular to  the  line  joining  them,  there  exists  a  transverse  Doppler  effect  giving  a 
fractional  frequency  shift  v2/2c2. 

It  is  perhaps  surprising  that  the  naive  use  of  this  formula,  without  any  account 
being  taken  of  acceleration,  should  give  the  correct  answer ;  an  indication  of  the 
subtleties  that  may  be  involved  is  obtained  by  considering  source  and  absorber 
to  move  on  the  same  circle,  e.g.  at  opposite  points  on  the  periphery.  Their 
pseudo-gravitational  potentials  are  equal,  so  are  their  time-dilatations,  yet  their 
relative  velocity  is  2v. 

We  are  indebted  to  several  of  our  colleagues  for  interesting  comments  on  this 
problem,  involving  such  matters  as  Coriolis  forces  on  photons  and  the  difference 
between  the  lines-of-flight  of  photons  and  the  line  joining  instantaneous  positions 
of  source  and  absorber. 

Since  in  this  laboratory  we  were  undertaking  a  '  source  at  centre  '  experiment 
similar  to  that  of  Hay  et  al.,  we  decided  also  to  make  an  experimental  test  of  the 
'  peripherally  opposite '  arrangement.  A  null  result,  besides  confirming  the 
consensus  of  theoretical  opinion,  would  give  an  important  check  on  the  absence  of 
Doppler  effect  due  to  mechanical  vibration  of  the  rotor. 

The  source  of  57Co  in  a  matrix  of  56Fe,  was  in  the  form  of  a  slightly  convex  foil 
F,  0-001  in.  thick,  hard-soldered  to  a  short  thin  steel  cylinder  C  which  fitted  inside 
the  tubular  steel  rotor  (Fig.  1 )  against  the  rim  R ;  the  absorber  was  a  similar  foil  of 
natural  iron  (2%  57Fe)  in  the  other  tip  of  the  rotor.  This  assembly  was  spun  within 
an  evacuated  glass  vessel  provided  with  a  thin  window,  behind  which  was  a  pro- 
portional counter  for  the  14  kev  gamma  radiation  (Fig.  2).  Two  standard  speeds 
were  chosen :  100  rev/sec  and  600  rev/sec  and  in  separate  experiments  two  different 
methods  were  used  to  restrict  the  counting  of  gamma  rays  to  those  few  degrees  of 
the  rotor's  azimuthal  position  within  which  the  counter  could  'see'  the  source 
through  the  absorber. 


248 


Absence  of  Doppler  Shift  for  Gamma  Ray  Source 


351 


In  the  first  method,  the  counts  were  displayed  on  the  screen  of  a  100-channel 
kicksorter  by  a  device  that  caused  each  gamma  ray  to  deliver  to  the  kicksorter  an 
impulse  proportional  to  the  azimuth  of  the  rotor  at  the  instant  in  question ;  the 
counts  in  the  four  channels  corresponding  most  nearly  to  the  '  seeing '  position 
were  totalled.     A  typical  record  is  shown  in  Fig.  3. 


Fig.  1.     Diagram  of  the  rotor. 


Proportional 
Counter 


Fig.  2.    Plan  of  the  rotor,  vacuum 
vessel,  shielding  and  counter. 


300 

- '; 

■          i 

i  _ 

200 

\ 

1 

_  \                        Chosen 
%                         Four 
'  "\     •          Channels 

;/ 

/• 

>■    '* 

•'  . 

100 

V        1.'         1 

\      i  »     r 

1              1 

90  180  270 

Azimuthal  Position  of  Rotor  (degrees) 


360 


Fig.  3.     Plot  of  typical  kicksorter  record.     The  channel  number  is  expressed  in   terms 
of  the  angular  position  of  the  rotor. 


In  the  second  method,  the  successive  interception  of  two  light  beams  by  one 
arm  of  the  rotor  opened  and  closed  an  electronic  gate ;  a  scale-of-two  device 
prevented  the  gate  from  responding  to  the  other  arm  of  the  rotor. 

After  subtraction  of  background  (measured  by  placing  |  in.  aluminium  over 
the  window)  the  events  recorded  at  600  rev/sec  were  found  by  the  first  method  to 
be  (0-4  ±3)%  less  and  by  the  second  method  to  be  (2-0  ±  2-5)%  more  than  those 
at  100  rev/sec ;  combining  these  two  results  we  obtain  ( +  0-8  ±  2-0)%. 


249 


352  D.  C.  Champeney  and  P.  B.  Moon 

The  width  of  the  resonance  was  measured  for  the  actual  source  and  absorber 
by  the  method  described  by  Cordey-Hayes,  Dyson  and  Moon  (1960);  it  was 
thence  calculated  that  a  fractional  shift  h(2v)2/c2  would  have  given  a  9-4%  higher 
counting  rate  at  the  higher  speed.  In  comparison  with  this  figure,  our  result 
with  its  associated  probable  error  may  be  taken  as  satisfactory  evidence  in  favour 
of  a  null  result. 

As  an  incidental  check  that  the  null  result  was  not  due  to  instrumental 
deficiencies,  an  experiment  with  the  source  at  the  centre  gave  an  increase  in 
counting  rate  of  (7-1  ±1/7)%  at  900  rev/sec  in  agreement  with  an  expected 
increase   of  5-4%. 

References 

Cordey-Hayes,  M.,  Dyson,  N.  A.,  and  Moon,  P.  B.,  1960,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc,  75,  810. 
Hay,  H.  J.,  Schiffer,  J.  P.,  Cranshaw,  T.  E.,  and  Egelstaff,  P.  A.,  1960,  Phys.  Rev. 

Letters,  4,  165. 
Ruderfer,  M.,  1960,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  5,  191. 

Note  added  in  proof. — It  may  be  pointed  out  that  the  experiment  is  equivalent 
to  that  proposed  by  Ruderfer  (1960)  to  test  for  the  effects  of  other  drift.  No 
special  care  was  taken  to  obtain  readings  in  more  than  one  direction,  but  when 
our  results  are  interpreted  according  to  Ruderfer's  ideas  they  indicate  an 
average  value  for  v  sin  9,  over  the  six  days  of  experimentation,  of  17  ±  43  m  sec-1, 
where  v  is  the  magnitude  of  the  component  of  the  ether  drift  velocity  in  the 
plane  of  rotation  of  the  rotor  and  0  is  the  angle  between  this  component  and 
the  counting  axis. 


250 


Volume  4,  Number  6 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


March   15,  I960 


VARIATION  WITH  TEMPERATURE  OF  THE  ENERGY  OF  RECOIL- FREE 
GAMMA  RAYS  FROM  SOLIDS* 

R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr. 

Harvard  University,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts 
(Received  February  17,   1960) 


The  14.4 -kev  y  ray  emitted  without  recoil  by 
0.1-jLisec  Fe57  in  metallic  iron1"4  excited  great 
interest  as  the  most  precisely  defined  electro- 
magnetic frequency  yet  discovered.    It  may  be 
adequately  well  defined  to  allow  measurement  of 
the  influence  of  a  gravitational  potential  on  fre- 
quency5 and  of  other  small  effects  hitherto  be- 
yond the  sensitivity  available  in  the  laboratory. 
As  a  preliminary  step  in  the  operation  of  an  ex- 
perimental system  designed  to  measure  the 
gravitational  effect,  we  have  been  making  tests 
to  find  out  whether  other  influences  than  the  one 
intended  might  lead  to  systematic  errors  by  in- 
troducing important  frequency  shifts  not  taken 
into  account. 

So  far  the  largest  such  effect  found  is  that  of 
temperature.    That  temperature  should  influence 
the  frequency  exactly  as  we  observe  is  very 
simply  explained.    Thermally  excited  vibrations 
cause  little  broadening  through  first  order 
Doppler  effect  under  the  conditions  obtaining  in 
the  solid  because  the  value  of  any  component  of 
the  nuclear  velocity  averages  very  nearly  to  zero 
over  the  nuclear  lifetime.    The  precision  of  the 
y  ray  of  Fe57  requires  the  second  order  Doppler 
effect  also  to  be  considered.    A  shift  to  lower 
frequency  with  increased  temperature  results 
from  this  because  the  also  well-defined  average 
of  the  square  of  the  velocity  of  the  particle  in- 
creases in  direct  proportion  to  the  average  kine- 
tic energy.    As  a  consequence  one  would  expect 
a  temperature  coefficient  of  frequency  in  a 


homogeneous  solid, 

(Bv/BT)  =  -vC    /2Mc2, 

where  C £  is  the  specific  heat  of  the  lattice  and 
M  is  the  gram  atomic  weight  of  iron.    In  the  high- 
temperature  classical  limit  where  C L  =  ZR, 


(Bv/dT) 


T-oo 


-2.44  xl0"15i/ per  °K. 


At  lower  temperatures  one  would  expect  a  coef- 
ficient reduced  by  the  value  of  the  appropriate 
normalized  Debye  specific  heat  function.    For 
iron,  at  300°K  one  should  find  about  0.9  times, 
and  at  80°K  about  0.3  times,  the  above  classical 
value. 

The  temperature  dependence  has  been  meas- 
ured by  counting  the  y  rays  from  our  0.4 -curie 
Co57  source  transmitted  through  enriched  Fe57 
absorbing  films  (0.6  mg  Fe57/cm2).    The  Co57  of 
the  source  is  distributed  in  about  3xl0"5  cm 
thickness  below  the  surface  of  a  2 -in.  diameter 
iron  disk,  made  in  the  manner  described  ear- 
lier.1  Small  frequency  shifts  that  result  when 
the  source  and  absorber  are  held  at  different 
temperatures  were  measured  by  using  a  trans- 
ducer to  move  the  source  sinusoidally  at  ten  cps 
toward  and  away  from  the  absorber  at  a  peak 
speed  of  about  0.01  cm/sec.    A  gate  pulse  and 
mercury  relays  were  used  to  make  one  counter 
record  during  25  milliseconds  of  the  modulation 
period  symmetrically  disposed  about  the  time  of 
maximum  velocity  toward  the  absorber.    Another 


274 


251 


Volume  4,  Number  6 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


March   15,   I960 


counter  recorded  the  corresponding  counts  with 
the  source  going  away  from  the  absorber.    The 
difference  of  the  counts  in  the  two  registers 
should  be  proportional  to  the  relative  frequency 
shift  of  the  absorber  and  source  for  shifts  small 
compared  to  the  line  width.    Quantitative  know- 
ledge of  the  parameters  of  the  system  that  are 
involved  in  determining  the  constant  of  propor- 
tionality is  rendered  unnecessary  by  adding 
through  a  clock-driven  hydraulic  system  a  con- 
tinuous relative  motion  of  6.3  xlO"4  cm/sec  di- 
rected oppositely  during  each  of  the  two  halves 
of  the  time  for  a  given  datum  point.    In  this  way 
the  sensitivity  to  frequency  shift  originating  in 
the  Doppler  effect  is  measured  simultaneously 
with  the  shift  sought.    The  algebraic  sum  of  the 
counting  rate  differences  for  the  two  halves  of 
the  run  are  proportional  to  the  shift  and  the  dif- 
ference to  the  sensitivity. 

The  shift  at  liquid  nitrogen  relative  to  room 
temperature  is  comparable  to  the  line  width  and 
for  that  point  the  two  counting  rates  were  re- 
corded at  a  series  of  values  of  the  sinusoidal 
modulation  amplitude.    From  these  a  value  of  the 
shift  and  of  the  apparent  line  width  could  be  ob- 
tained although  difficulties  of  calibration  under 
the  conditions  of  operation  have  contributed 
strongly  to  the  uncertainties.    There  is  evidence 
that  the  line  appears  to  broaden  with  such  a  tem- 
perature difference  by  perhaps  a  factor  of  2.3 
which  might  be  evidence  that  the  hyperf ine  struc  - 
ture  splittings  are  temperature  sensitive  to 
some  extent,  as  must  be  expected. 

The  data  are  plotted  in  Fig.  1.    A  solid  line  re- 
presenting the  effect  expected  with  a  Debye  tem- 
perature of  420°K  is  also  drawn.    The  agreement 
can  be  regarded  as  an  experimental  demonstra- 
tion of  the  second  order  Doppler  effect  using 
thermal  velocities  rather  than  a  centrifuge.    It 
might  be  remarked  that  crystalline  anisotropy 
might  make  this  source  of  high  velocities  useful 
for  experiments  to  the  end  of  detecting  such  spa- 
tial anisotropies  as  might  accompany  ether  drift 
or  an  inertial  frame. 

The  temperature  sensitivity  at  room  tempera- 
ture [experimentally  (-2.09 ± 0.24) xlO"15  per 
degree  C,  theoretically  -2.21  xlO"15  per  degree 
C]  is  highly  relevant  to  the  interpretation  of  data 


TEMPERATURE 


200  300 

DEGREES    KELVIN 


FIG.   1.     Fractional  shift  of  energy  of  14.4-kev 
gamma-ray  absorption  of  Fe57  vs  absolute  tempera- 
ture of  the  metal.    The  solid  line  is  derived  from  as- 
suming a  Debye  temperature  of  420°K. 


from  our  experiment  on  the  effect  of  gravitational 
potential.    A  temperature  difference  of  1°C  be- 
tween the  top  and  the  bottom  of  our  22- meter 
tower  would  result  in  a  shift  about  equal  to  that 
predicted  by  the  principle  of  equivalence.    For 
smaller  height  differences  correspondingly 
smaller  temperature  differences  would  be  re- 
quired.   It  is  now  clear  that  correction  for  or 
control  of  the  temperature  difference  and  perhaps 
other  parameters  must  be  included  in  the  instru- 
mentation of  experiments  intending  to  utilize  the 
extreme  frequency  discrimination  available  with 
gamma  rays  of  this  type. 


*Supported  in  part  by  the  joint  program  of  the  Office 
of  Naval  Research  and  the  U.  S.  Atomic  Energy  Com- 
mission. 

1R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,   Phys.  Rev 
Letters  3,  554  (1959). 

2J.  P.  Schiffer  and  W.  Marshall,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  3,  556  (1959). 

3S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J. 
Perlow,  R.  S.  Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vincent,  Phys. 
Rev.  Letters  4,  28(1960). 

4G.  DePasquali,  H.  Frauenfelder,  S.  Margulies, 
and  R.  N.  Peacock,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  71  (1960). 

5R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  3,  439  (1959). 


275 


252 

TEMPERATURE -DEPENDENT  SHIFT  OF  y  RAYS  EMITTED  BY  A  SOLID 

B.  D.  Josephson 

Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  England 

(Received  March  11,  1960) 


Recent  experiments  by  MOssbauer1  have  shown 
that  when  low -energy  y  rays  are  emitted  from 
nuclei  in  a  solid  a  certain  proportion  of  them  are 
unaffected  by  the  Doppler  effect.    It  is  the  pur- 
pose of  this  Letter  to  show  that  they  are  never- 
theless subject  to  a  temperature -dependent  shift 
to  lower  energy  which  can  be  attributed  to  the 
relativistic  time  dilatation  caused  by  the  motion 
of  the  nuclei. 

Let  us  regard  the  solid  as  a  system  of  inter- 
acting atoms  with  the  Hamiltonian 


#=£^.72™.  +  ^, 


The  MGssbauer  effect  is  due  to  those  processes 
in  which  the  phonon  occupation  numbers  do  not 
change.    It  might  appear  that  in  such  cases  the 
energy  of  the  solid  is  unaltered,  but  this  is  not 
so,  as  the  nucleus  which  emits  the  y  ray  changes 
its  mass,  and  this  affects  the  lattice  vibrations. 
Suppose  the  nucleus  of  the  z'th  atom  emits  a  y  ray 
of  energy  E,  its  mass  changing  by  6m j  =  -E/c2. 

The  change  in  energy,  6E,  of  the  solid  is  given 
by 

6£  =  <  Aff>  =  6(p2/2m .)  =  -6w  .</>  .2/2m  2> 


(6w./m.)7\ 


(B/t 


'.c*)T., 
i        i 


where  Tj  is  the  expectation  value  of  the  kinetic 
energy  of  the  rth  atom.    The  energy  of  the  y  ray 
must  accordingly  be  reduced  by  6E  so  there  is  a 
shift  of  relative  magnitude  6E/E  =Ti/wjC2.    The 


same  formula  can  be  deduced  by  regarding  the 
shift  as  due  to  a  relativistic  time  dilatation. 

To  estimate  Ti  we  make  the  following  assump- 
tions:   (i)  The  atoms  all  have  the  same  mass, 
and  the  kinetic  energy  is  equally  distributed 
among  them,    (ii)  The  kinetic  energy  is  half  the 
total  lattice  energy,  i.e.,  we  assume  that  the 
forces  coupling  the  atoms  are  harmonic.    Under 
these  assumptions  7\-/m;-  =  \U,  where  U  is  the 
lattice  energy  per  unit  mass.    The  relative  shift 
is  thus  given  by  6E/E  =£//2c2.    For  Fe  at  300°K 
this  has  the  value  8xl0"13.    Clearly  a  compen- 
sating shift  would  occur  for  absorption  provided 
source  and  absorber  were  identical  and  at  the 
same  temperature.    A  small  difference  in  tem- 
perature between  source  and  absorber  leads  to 
a  relative  shift  per  degree  given  by  6E /E  =Cp/2c2 
where  Cp  is  the  specific  heat.    For  Fe  at  300°K 
this  is  2.2xlO"15/°K.    This  is  sufficient  for  it  to 
be  necessary  to  take  it  into  account  in  accurate 
experiments  using  the  resonance  absorption  of 
y  rays,  such  as  those  to  measure  the  gravitation- 
al red  shift.2'3 

I  would  like  to  thank  Dr.  Ziman,  Professor 
O.  R.  Frisch,  and  Dr.  W.  Marshall  for  helpful 
discussions. 


'R.   L.  MSssbauer,  Z.  Physik  151,  124(1958). 

2R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters 
3,   554  (1959). 

3T.  E.  Cranshaw,  J.  P.  Schiffer,  and  A.  B.  White- 
head, Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,   163(1960). 


342 


253 


Volume  5,  Number   1 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


July   1,   I960 


ACOUSTICALLY  MODULATED  y  RAYS  FROM  Fe" 

S.  L.  Ruby  and  D.  I.  Bolef 

Westinghouse  Electric  Corporation,  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania 

(Received  June  13,  1960) 


The  relationship  between  the  emission  of  y  rays 
by  nuclei  bound  in  a  crystal  and  the  creation  (or 
destruction)  of  phonons  has  been  discussed  by 
Visscher,1  and  suggests  that  a  careful  study  of 
the  "off- resonance"  line  shape  in  a  Mossbauer- 
type  experiment  may  be  used  to  observe  the  fre- 
quency distribution  of  lattice  vibrations  in  the 
crystal.    Unfortunately,  a  direct  attempt  at  such 
a  study  seems  difficult  since  it  requires  the 
measurement  of  nuclear  y-ray  absorption  cross 
sections  much  smaller  than  the  photoelectric 
cross  sections  for  the  same  atom.    In  an  attempt 


to  investigate  the  interactions  between  phonons 
and  emitting  nuclei,  therefore,  it  was  decided  to 
generate  low-energy  phonons  acoustically,  and 
to  study  their  effect  on  the  y-ray  spectrum. 

Source  and  absorber  were  one-mil  thick  321 
stainless  steel  (18%  chromium,  8%  nickel)  foils. 
The  source,  into  which  had  been  diffused  Co", 
could  be  driven  by  either  or  both  of  two  methods: 
(1)  a  low-frequency  (15  cps)  drive  utilizing  a 
loud  speaker,  and  (2)  a  piezoelectric  quartz 
crystal  drive  mounted  on  the  rear  of  the  source 
foil.    The  quartz  crystal  is  driven  by  a  radio- 


254 


Volume  5,  Number  1 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


July  1,  1960 


frequency  oscillator  whose  frequency  and  ampli- 
tude are  continuously  adjustable.    The  counting 
rate  for  the  14.4-kev  y  ray,  as  a  function  of  loud- 
speaker velocity,  is  measured  by  using  the  out- 
put of  a  single -channel  analyzer  to  "command"  a 
multichannel  analyzer  to  measure  the  velocity  at 
a  particular  instant.    This  is  accomplished  by 
feeding  the  amplified  output  of  the  velocity  pickup 
coil  (rigidly  attached  to  the  source)  to  the  appro- 
priate place  in  the  analog -to -digital  converter 
section  of  the  analyzer. 

The  experiment  was  planned  on  the  assumption 
that  the  density  of  ultrasonic  phonons  in  a  narrow 
frequency  band  could  be  markedly  increased  over 
that  corresponding  to  300°K,  and  that  this  should 
lead  to  pairs  of  satellite  peaks,  symmetrically 
located  relative  to  the  main  Mossbauer  peak, 
with  a  spacing  in  energy  units  of  AE  =hq  or,  in 
velocity  units,  vs=(c/E0)AE.    (q/2v  =  ultrasonic 
frequency,  £0  =  14.4  kev.)    This  corresponds  to 
the  creation  or  destruction  of  acoustic  phonons 
with  the  emission  of  the  y  ray.    A  similar  dis- 
crete Doppler  effect  has  been  observed  in  optical 
light  diffracted  by  acoustic  "gratings. "   The  opti- 
cal effect  is  extremely  small,  of  the  order  of 
10"4  A  for  an  optical  wavelength  of  5460  A  and  an 
ultrasonic  frequency  of  10  Mc/sec.    The  effect 
has  been  observed  for  both  traveling  and  station- 
ary sound  waves.2   A  theory  of  this  optical  effect 
has  been  given  by  Raman  and  Nagendra  Nath.3 

Since  the  source  foil  is  thin  (approximately  one- 
tenth  the  wavelength  of  sound  at  20  Mc/sec),  one 
can  alternatively  consider  the  quartz  transducer 
as  simply  vibrating  the  foil  with  a  sinusoidal 
velocity,  vs=vm  cosqt.    This  corresponds  merely 
to  a  sinusoidal  motion  of  the  center  of  mass  of 
the  foil.    The  "instantaneous"  frequency  of  the 
14.4-kev  y  ray  may  therefore  be  expressed  as 


v=  i/j+Av  siaqt, 


(1) 


where 


v0=E0/h  =  3.48x10"  cycles/sec, 

and  the  maximum  frequency  deviation  is  Av 
=  v0(vm/c).    Expressed  in  the  language  of  fre- 
quency modulation,  this  corresponds  to  a  carrier 
of  frequency  v0,  modulated  sinusoidally  at  a  fre- 
quency q/2-n.    The  modulation  index  is  m=  {vm/c) 
x(2rtv0/q).    The  frequency  spectrum  can  be  shown4 
to  consist  of  the  carrier  and  an  infinite  set  of 
side -bands,  with  the  nth  side  frequency  sepa- 
rated from  the  (n  +  l)th  side  frequency  by  the 
modulating  frequency,  <?/2jr.    The  maximum  am- 
plitude of  the  nth  side  frequency  is  given  by 


Jn2(m),  where  Jn(m)  is  the  Bessel  function  of  the 
first  kind  of  order  n. 

In  Fig.  1  the  solid  lines  in  curves  a-e  show  the 
result  of  calculations  for  five  values  of  m,  with 
q/2v  =  20  Mc/sec.    The  vertical  scale  of  the  draw- 
ing is  based  on  curve  a.   Also  shown  in  the  figure 
are  the  experimental  results,  using  a  20-Mc/sec 


-2-10        1         2 
VELOCITY,  MM /SEC 


50   40    30    20     K>     0       10     20    30    40    90 
FREQUENCY,  MC/SEC 

FIG.  1.    Mossbauer  pattern  for  Fe87  y  ray  emitted 
by  a  stainless  steel  source  driven  by  a  20-Mc/sec 
x-cut  quartz  transducer.    The  experimental  points  are 
shown  in  a  -e  for  values  of  the  driving  voltage,  V, 
from  0  to  2.0  volts  rms.    The  solid  curves  are  cal- 
culated on  the  basis  of  FM  theory,  using  a  single  pro- 
portionality constant  between  m  and  Vrms  which  best 
fits  the  data. 


6 


255 


Volume  5,  Number   1 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


July  1,   I960 


x-cut  quartz  transducer,  taken  at  five  different 
transducer  driving  voltages.    The  maximum  ve- 
locity of  the  iron  atoms  resulting  from  the  ultra- 
sonic vibration  has  not  been  measured  directly, 
but  is  expected  to  be  proportional  to  the  driving 
voltage;  the  proportionality  constant  has  been 
chosen  so  as  to  fit  the  solid  curves  as  well  as 
possible  to  the  experimental  points.    Using 
m  =  1.1  V"rms,  one  finds  vm  =  0.29  cm/sec  for 
1.5  VTms  across  the  transducer.    This  value  for 
v m  is  consistent  with  the  value  calculated  from  the 
piezoelectric  properties  of  the  quartz  transducer. 
The  velocity  at  20  Mc/sec  corresponds  to  the 
rather  small  maximum  displacement  of  approxi- 
mately 2xl0"9  cm. 

The  progressive  disagreement  between  the  cal- 
culated and  experimental  curves  with  higher 
drive  voltage,  especially  near  the  carrier  fre- 
quency, suggests  that  all  of  the  iron  atoms  did 
not  have  the  same  velocities.    A  new  source  foil 
was  then  prepared,  care  being  taken  to  preserve 
flatness  of  the  foil  and  uniformity  of  the  acoustic 
bond.    In  Fig.  2,  a  plot  of  the  amplitude  of  the 
carrier  (unshifted  y  ray)  vs  the  20-Mc/sec  driv- 
ing voltage  is  given,  together  with  a  plot  of 
[1  -  0.24J02(w)]  with  m  =0.6  Vrms.    The  calcu- 
lated curve  assumes  that  all  the  Fe57  atoms  have 
the  same  maximum  velocity  vm.    The  pattern 
using  the  new  foil,  however,  still  suggests  a  con- 
tinuous range  of  velocities  with  perhaps  50%  of 
the  Fe57  nuclei  moving  considerably  more  slowly 
than  the  remainder.    Such  an  effect  could  be 
caused  by  bonding  defects,  such  as  air  bubbles 
trapped  in  the  cement  between  foil  and  quartz. 
Velocity  blurring  also  results  from  the  fact  that 
the  thickness  of  the  foil  is  not  negligible  com- 
pared to  the  wavelength  of  the  sound  waves. 

Since  the  energy  shift  of  the  y  ray  is  deter- 
mined solely  by  the  frequency  of  the  ultrasonic 
drive,  this  discrete  Doppler  technique  offers  a 
precise  method  for  adding  or  subtracting  known 
quantities  of  energy  to  the  y  ray.    This  may  be 
useful  in  providing  a  monochromatic  calibration 
of  energy  or  velocity  in  the  measurement  of  line 
splittings  (such  as  Fe57  in  iron)  or  line  shifting 


£  .95 

/^    ^ 

< 

ec 

o    90 

z 

Z.85 

/    '  ••          *  * 

3 

O 

/"    .  . 

°   MO 

•/ 

u 

> 

•-   .75 

< 

• 

_i 

S    .70 

1 

1             1             1             1             1 

FIG.  2.    Relative  intensity  of  carrier  (unshifted  y 
ray)  vs  voltage  on  quartz  transducer.    The  solid 
line  represents  the  theoretically  predicted  function 
[l-0.24JB2(w)],  wherew  =  0.6Frms  for  this  case. 
This  prediction  assumes  that  all  the  Fe57  atoms  have 
the  same  maximum  velocity  vm. 


(such  as  temperature  shifts  of  the  Mossbauer 
peak  due  to  zero-pomt  vibration).    This  method 
for  Doppler  shifting  may  also  be  applicable  at 
low  temperatures  when  more  conventional  drives 
are  inconvenient  to  use.    For  this  purpose,  broad- 
banding  of  the  transducer  frequency  response  will 
be  desirable. 

We  wish  to  thank  Dr.  L.  Epstein  for  help  in  the 
preparation  of  the  source,  Mr.  John  Hicks  for 
his  careful  and  ingenious  help  throughout  the  ex- 
periment, and  Dr.  Meir  Menes,  who  first  sug- 
gested the  FM  approach. 


'W.  M.  Visscher,  Ann.  Phys.  9,  194  (1960). 

2For  a  review  of  this  work  see  L.  Bergmann,  Ultra- 
sonics (John  Wiley  &  Sons,  New  York,  1951),  pp.  66  ff. 

3C.  V.  Raman  and  N.  S.  Nagendra  Nath,  Proc. 
Indian  Acad.  Sci.  (A}2,  406,  413  (1935);  and  (A) 3,  75 
(1936). 

4S.  Goldman,  Frequency  Analysis,  Modulation  and 
Noise  (McGraw-Hill  Book  Company,  New  York,  1948). 


256 


PHYSICAL     REVIEW 


VOLUME     124,     NUMBER    3 


NOVEMBER     I  ,     1961 


Measurement  of  the  Refractive  Index  of  Lucite  by  Recoilless  Resonance  Absorption* 

L.  Grodzins  and  E.  A.  Phillips 

Laboratory  for  Nuclear  Science,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts 

(Received  June  20,  1961) 

A  method  of  frequency-modulating  a  monochromatic  electromagnetic  wave  by  varying  the  optical  path 
length  between  the  source  and  detector  is  described.  The  method  has  been  applied  to  the  measurement  of 
the  refractive  index  of  Lucite  for  the  0.86  A  radiation  emitted  from  Co67 ;  the  small  frequency  shift  was 
detected  by  recoilless  resonance  absorption.  The  refractive  index  was  found  to  be  1—  n=  (1.29±0.03)X10-6, 
in  agreement  with  classical  theory. 


THIS  paper  describes  a  method  of  frequency- 
modulating  a  monochromatic  electromagnetic 
wave  by  varying  the  optical  path  length  between  the 
source  and  detector.  The  method  has  been  applied  to, 
and  is  described  in  terms  of,  the  measurement  of  the 
refractive  index  of  Lucite  for  the  14.4-kev  radiation 
emitted  from  Co57.  The  measured  refractive  index 
agrees,  within  the  2%  experimental  uncertainty,  with 
the  simple  theory  applicable  when  the  radiation  energy 
is  much  greater  than  the  binding  energy  of  the  electrons 
in  the  refractive  medium,  as  in  this  case.  The  technique 
is  in  principle  applicable  to  the  nearly  monochromatic 
radiation  emitted  from  optical-frequency  masers. 

It  is  instructive  to  consider  the  method  from  two 
points  of  view,  first  in  terms  of  frequency  modulation 
and  then  in  terms  of  a  Doppler  shift.  Consider  a  source 
S  and  an  observer  (in  our  case  a  recoilless  resonance 
absorber)  A  separated  by  a  distance  x  [Fig.  1(a)].  A 
wave  of  angular  frequency  o>  emitted  by  5  will  have  the 
form  eia(t~xle)  at  A.  If  a  length  L  of  material  with  re- 
fractive index  n  is  placed  in  the  optical  path,  the  wave 
becomes  eia<-t~x,e)+i't',  where  the  phase  advance 


shift 


<f>=  (l  —  n)o}L/c. 


(1) 


If  <f>  changes  with  time,  the  instantaneous  frequency 
seen  by  A  will  be  (o>+d<t>/dt).  This  is  done  by  moving  a 
wedge-shaped  piece  of  material  to  produce  a  frequency 

*  This  work  is  supported  in  part  through  a  U.  S.  Atomic 
Energy  Commission  contract,  by  funds  provided  by  the  U.  S. 
Atomic  Energy  Commission,  the  Office  of  Naval  Research,  and 
the  Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific  Research. 


1  d<f> 

=Av  = 

lirdt 


(1-n)  dL 
c       it 


(2) 


An  equivalent  point  of  view  considers  the  radiation  as 
being  Doppler-shifted  during  the  refraction  by  the 
moving  wedge  [Fig.  1(b)].  As  it  leaves  the  wedge  the 
radiation  is  deflected  (toward  the  normal,  since  «<1) 
by  an  angle 

A0=(1— n)  tana. 

The  change  in  momentum  of  the  photon  is  Ap=pA6, 
and  since  the  wedge  is  moving  at  a  speed  V  it  does 
work  on  the  photon,  increasing  its  energy  by 

A£=  VAp=  Vp{X-n)  tana=£[(l-«)/c]7  tana, 

which  is  equivalent  to  Eq.  (2)  above. 

For  14.4-kev  radiation,  the  refractive  index  of  Lucite 
is  (see  below) 

(1-»)  =  1.29X10-6, 
so  that 

{Av/v)Xi  kev=4X  lO~17dL/dL 

The  frequency  shift  thus  obtained  for  reasonable  values 
of  dL/dt  can  be  detected  by  recoilless  resonance 
scattering.1 

A  schematic  drawing  of  the  experimental  arrange- 
ment is  shown  in  Fig.  2(a).  The  recoilless  resonance 


■R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Physik  151,  124  (1958);  R.  V.  Pound 
and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  337  (1960). 


257 


MEASUREMENT  OF  REFRACTIVE  INDEX  OF  LUCITE 


775 


apparatus  has  been  described  previously.2  The  14.4-kev 
gamma  rays  from  a  Co67  source  diffused  into  Armco 
iron  passed  through  a  rotating  wheel,  shown  in  profile 
in  Fig.  2(b),  then  through  a  movable  0.5-mil  Armco 
Fe  absorber  to  the  Be- window  Nal(Tl)  detector. 

To  construct  the  wheel,  12-in.  diam.  pieces  of  YS-in. 
brass  and  j-in.  Lucite  were  clamped  together  and  120 
radial  slots  y§-  in.  wide  were  cut  through  both  at  an 
angle  of  60°.  Since  the  gamma  rays  are  stopped  by  the 
brass,  they  are  allowed  to  pass  through  only  one  side 
of  each  Lucite  tooth.  As  the  wheel  rotates,  every  gamma 
ray  which  passes  through  it  does  so  when  the  thickness 
of  Lucite  in  the  tooth  is  changing  in  the  same  direction. 
Thus  all  the  gamma  rays  detected  undergo  a  frequency 
shift  of  the  same  direction  and  magnitude. 

The  absorption  line  profiles  for  four  wheel  speeds  are 
shown  in  Fig.  3.  The  shift  in  the  line  position  is  evident. 
The  high-speed  runs,  1500  rpm  clockwise  and  counter- 
clockwise, show  a  broader  line  which  we  attribute  to 
vibration  transmitted  through  the  air  from  the  rotating 
wheel  to  the  source  and  absorber.  This  effect  diminished 
rapidly  with  decrease  of  angular  speed  and  no  attempt 
was  made  to  alleviate  it.  At  speeds  below  1000  rpm, 
line  broadening  resulted  in  an  error  of  less  than  2%  in 
the  determination  of  the  line  shift. 

The  shift  in  the  position  of  an  accurately  known  line 
profile  is  most  efficiently  determined  by  measuring  the 


Phose  advance 


Fig.  1.  (a)  The  phase  advance  produced  by  interposition  of  a 
length  L  of  refractive  material  between  source  5  and  observer  A . 
(b)  The  deflection  A0  of  the  beam  when  the  refractive  material  of 
Fig.  1  (a)  is  wedge-shaped. 


ftMfcg 


Source       Wheel     Absorber       Detector 
(a) 

I  Detector 


Fig.  2.  (a)  Schematic  diagram  of  experimental  arrangement, 
(b)  Detail  of  the  slotted  wheel ;  not  to  scale. 

change  in  counting  rate  at  the  maximum  slope  points 
of  the  absorption  line  profile,  0.013  cm/sec  in  this  case. 
The  counting  rates  for  absorber  speeds  towards  and 
away  from  the  source  were  separately  recorded  for 
each  of  a  set  of  speeds  of  the  Lucite  wheel ;  the  resulting 
line  shift  as  a  function  of  wheel  speed  is  shown  in  Fig.  4. 
A  least-squares  fit  of  the  data  (from  4  to  12X106  counts 
per  point)  between  900  rpm  clockwise  and  900  rpm 
counterclockwise  yields  a  slope 

Av         Av      1                                       cm/sec 
=c—       =(3.32±0.05)X10"6 ,     (3) 


Attwheel  V    Awwheel 


rpm 


where  Av/v  is  the  relative  frequency  shift. 

The  effective  radius  from  the  axis  of  the  wheel  to 
the  gamma  ray  path  was  14.2  cm  so  that 


(dL/dt) 

Awwheel 


2.58- 


cm/sec 


rpm 


(4) 


A  combination  of  Eqs.   (2)- (4),  yields  the  refractive 
index : 


(1-n)- 


c{Av/v)     3.32  X10-6 


(dL/dt) 


2.58 


(1.29±0.04)X10-6. 


*L.  Grodzins  and  F.  Genovese,  Phys.  Rev.  121,  228  (1961). 


The  stated  error  includes  uncertainties  in  the  effective 
radius,  the  absorption  line  depth,  and  the  absorber 
velocity. 

This  result  is  in  agreement  with  the  theoretical  value 
obtained  for  the  refractive  index  of  a  gas  in  which  the 
binding  energy  of  the  electrons  is  much  less  than  the 


258 


776 


L.     GRODZINS    AND    E.    A.     PHILLIPS 


energy  of  the  radiation.  This  condition  holds  for  14.4- 
kev  radiation  on  Lucite  (CbH802)  since  Ek  (oxygen) 
=0.53  kev.  The  result  is3 


(l-n)  =  N<r 


2A  nuoh 


where  the  symbols  have  their  conventional  meaning'; 
i.e.,  No  is  Avogadro's  number,  p  is  the  density,  etc. 
For  the  case  of  Lucite  and  14.4-kev  radiation,  Z/A 


Da*. 

5BK 

J     ' 

r— 

t 

- 1 1 1 r  ■ 

LUCITE  WHEEL 

h                 1 

i    i    i 
* 

57K 

f 

\     i      , 

t 
i 

1500  RPM    CW 

56K 

- 

> 

»    * 

59K 

_ 

- 

58K 
57K 

"{ 

* 

♦ 

1 

♦♦,   i    H 

t      1 

f       (       t" 

500  RPM    CW 

56K 

- 

< 

► 

♦ !  ♦ 

69K 

tit 

58K 

-t 

t 

>t 

♦*  i  / 

500  RPM    CCW 

57K 

- 

t 

56K 

_ 

- 

► 

♦♦    t 

1 

59K 
58K 

J 

1 

♦ 

1          l          1 

56K 

- 

lit 

1500  RPM    CCW 

S6K 

',; 

54K 
S3K 

1 

l 

, 

» 

i    i    i 

l          l           1 

.06     .06     .04     .02       O      .02     .04     .06     .08     .0 
AbMrbtr  Velocity    cm /sec 

Fig.  3.  Absorption  line  profile  versus  wheel  speed. 


800     1000    1200 


Wheel  Sptrt   RPM 


*  F.  K.  Richtmeyer  and  E.  H.  Kennard,  Introduction  to  Modern 
Physics  (McGraw-Hill  Book  Company,  New  York,  1947),  4th  ed., 
pp.  522-527. 


Fig.  4.  Reduced  data:  Line  shift  versus  wheel  speed;  the 
theoretical  slope  contains  an  uncertainty  in  the  wheel  radius. 
(See  text.) 


=0.54,  p=  1.185,  and  w=2.185X1019.  Then 
l-»=  1.285  X10-6. 

The  exact  theory  of  the  index  of  refraction,  which 
takes  into  account  the  binding  energies  of  the  elec- 
trons,45 yields  a  result  differing  from  the  above  number 
by  about  0.1%. 

The  measurement  of  the  index  of  refraction  at  x-ray 
wavelengths  is,  of  course,  not  new.3  Indeed,  Bearden* 
measured  the  refractive  index  of  diamond  at  1.39  A  to 
an  accuracy  of  1  part  in  10*.  The  phase  modulation 
technique  can,  if  desirable,  be  made  as  accurate  for 
those  wavelengths  observed  by  recoilless  nuclear  gamma 
emission. 

We  have  shown  that  the  frequency  of  a  nearly  mono- 
chromatic electromagnetic  wave  may  be  shifted  by 
modulating  the  optical  path  between  source  and  ob- 
server. The  application  to  an  optical-frequency  maser 
where  Av/p<lOr*  is  evident.  Since  (1— n)  is  ~10* 
times  as  large  for  optical  frequencies  as  for  x  rays,  fre- 
quency modulation  may  be  observed  by  varying  either 
»  or  L.  For  example,  L  may  be  varied  by  vibrating  a 
mirror  [1— »=2  in  Eq.  (2)]  from  which  the  light  is 
reflected.  The  corresponding  experiment  for  recoilless 
gamma  radiation  has  been  reported  by  Ruby  and  Bolef,' 
who  acoustically  vibrated  the  source. 

*  J.  A.  Bearden,  Phys.  Rev.  54,  698  (1938). 
s  J.  A.  Prins,  A.  Physik  47,  479  (1928). 

•  S.  L.  Ruby  and  D.  I.  Bolef,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  5,  5  (1960). 


259 


Time  Dependence  of  Resonantly  Filtered  Gamma  Rays  from  Fe57f 

F.  J.  Lynch,  R.  E.  Holland,  and  M.  Hamermesh 

Argonne  National  Laboratory,  Argonne,  Illinois 

(Received  June  6,  1960) 


The  time  dependence  of  gamma  rays  emitted  by  the  14.4-kev  state  of  Fe57  has  been  studied  by  delayed- 
coincidence  measurements  between  a  123-kev  gamma  ray  preceding  formation  of  the  state  and  the  14.4-kev 
gamma  ray  from  the  state.  When  no  filter  was  used,  the  number  of  gamma  rays  decreased  exponentially 
with  the  known  half -life  of  0.1  /usee.  When  a  foil  of  Fe57  (which  was  resonant  to  14.4-kev  radiation)  was 
used  as  a  filter,  the  number  of  gamma  rays  observed  through  the  filter  did  not  decrease  exponentially. 
Instead,  the  filter  absorbed  almost  none  of  the  gamma  rays  first  emitted  by  the  14.4-kev  state;  at  later  times 
the  absorption  increased.  Data  were  taken  with  three  different  thicknesses  of  absorber  and  with  emission 
and  absorption  peaks  separated  by  0  to  11  times  the  width  of  the  resonance.  The  energy  separation  resulted 
from  the  Doppler  shift  associated  with  a  constant  velocity  between  source  and  absorber.  These  data  were, 
for  the  most  part,  in  good  accord  with  the  prediction  of  a  theory  based  on  a  classical  model  for  absorber  and 
source.  In  particular,  the  results  verified  the  theoretical  prediction  that  at  certain  times  the  intensity  of 
radiation  observed  would  be  greater  with  the  filter  than  without  it. 


I.  INTRODUCTION 

IN  an  earlier  paper,1  we  showed  that  the  intensity  of 
the  gamma  rays  transmitted  through  an  absorber 
which  is  resonant  to  the  incident  gamma  radiation  does 
not  decrease  exponentially  with  time.  Instead,  the  trans- 
mitted beam  appears  initially  to  decay  faster  than  the 
rate  corresponding  to  the  life-time  r  of  the  emitting 
state.  The  intuitive  picture  which  led  us  to  undertake 
the  initial  experiments  was  that  the  resonance  absorp- 
tion tends  to  reduce  the  intensity  at  the  center  of  the 
emitted  line  relative  to  the  intensity  in  the  wings. 
Thus  the  width  at  half  maximum  of  the  remaining  peak 
is  greater  than  the  value  T=H/t  of  the  original  peak; 
and  the  lifetime  of  the  state  appears  to  be  correspond- 
ingly shorter. 

A  quantitative  theoretical  treatment  was  developed 
by  describing  the  emitted  radiation  as  a  damped 
electromagnetic  wave.2  On  passing  through  a  medium 
filled  with  resonators,  the  frequency  spectrum  of  the 
radiation  is  altered,  so  that  its  time  dependence  is  no 
longer  exponential.  The  theoretical  analysis,  which  is 
presented  in  Sec.  II,  suggested  some  of  the  experiments 
which  are  described  in  Sec.  III. 

The  14.4-kev  state  of  Fe57  provides  a  convenient 
source  for  observation  of  this  effect.  The  formation  of 
the  14.4-kev  state  is  announced  by  a  123-kev  gamma 
ray  in  the  decay3  of  Co67,  the  Mossbauer  effect  is  large4 
(about  60%  of  the  radiation  is  emitted  without  recoil 
at  room  temperature),  the  half -life3  is  0.1  ^sec,  and  the 


fWork  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the  U.  S.  Atomic 
Energy  Commission. 

1  R.  E.  Holland,  F.  J.  Lynch,  G.  J.  Perlow,  and  S.  S.  Hanna, 
Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  181  (I960). 

*M.  Hamermesh,  Argonne  National  Laboratory  Report 
ANL-6111,  February,  1960  (unpublished),  p.  6. 

*  Nuclear  Data  Sheets,  National  Academy  of  Sciences,  National 
Research  Council,  1959  (U.  S.  Government  Printing  Office, 
Washington,  D.  C). 

«R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Physik  151,  124  (1958);  J.  P.  Schiffer 
and  W.  Marshall,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3,  556  (1959);  R.  V.  Pound 
and  J.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3,  554  (1959). 


gamma  ray  is  highly  converted6  (a  =15)  so  that 
imprisonment  of  the  resonance  radiation  need  not  be 
considered. 

II.  THEORY 

The  time  dependence  of  the  14-kev  radiation  of 
Fe87  as  observed  in  transmission  through  an  Fe67 
absorber  can  be  explained  on  a  simple  classical  theory. 
As  in  standard  treatments  of  emission  and  dispersion, 
the  medium  is  assumed  to  consist  of  damped  oscillators 
with  natural  frequency  wo  and  decay  constant  X.  The 
radiation  emitted  by  the  Fe67  source  has  an  electric 
field 


a(/)  =  exprjtw0/- 


1   r 

§x/]=—  I 

2iri  J- 


to— wo— ?*X 


■r 


dto  a(to)e^.     (1) 


The  constant  X  is  just  the  reciprocal  of  the  mean  life 
of  the  excited  state.  In  the  case  of  the  14-kev  line  of 
Fe57,  93%  of  the  radiation  is  internally  converted;  the 
quantity  X  contains  contributions  from  all  types  of 
decay  (radiation  and  internal  conversion). 

The  effect  of  transmission  through  the  Fe57  absorber 
can  be  found  by  standard  methods.6  Each  mono- 
chromatic component  a(a))e*"'  excites  forced  oscillations 
of  the  resonators  in  the  medium.  The  complex  dielectric 
constant  is 


e(w)  =  l+r^-^+wX)"1 


(2) 


We  have  written  coo'  for  the  resonant  frequency  of  the 
absorber  to  take  account  of  a  possible  Doppler  shift 
due  to  motion  relative  to  the  source. 


5H.  R.  Lemmer,  O.  J.  A.  Segaert,  and  M.  A.  Grace,  Proc. 
Phys.  Soc.  (London)  A68,  701  (1955). 

•J.  A.  Stratton,  Electromagnetic  Theory  (McGraw-Hill  Book 
Company,  Inc.,  New  York,  1941),  p.  321. 


513 


260 


514 


LYNCH,     HOLLAND,    AND     HAMERMESH 


From  Eq.  (2),  the  propagation  vector  in  the  medium 
is  found  to  be 

k=  (w/c^l+Kwo^-c^+wX)-1]*.  (3) 

The  wavelength  of  the  radiation  is  about  10~8  cm  and, 
as  in  the  x-ray  case,  we  can  expand  Eq.  (3)  and  retain 
only  the  first  term.  The  effect  of  passage  through  the 
absorber  is  to  change  a(w)  to  a'(w),  where 

a'(«)  =  c(«)  exp{-2^[w0'2-w2+wX]-1},       (4) 

in  which  b  is  a  constant. 

At  w=w0',  a'(wo')  =  a(w0')  exp[—  2b/\~],  so  the  trans- 
mission at  the  center  of  the  line  is  exp[— lb/\\. 

By  combining  Eqs.  (1)  and  (4),  the  time  dependence 
of  the  transmitted  amplitude  is  found  to  be 


1   c 

*'«)=—  I 

2nd  J_ 


dor- 


>— Wo-  §*X 


[2iboi  "I 
; —  • 
w2— wo'2— *wXj 


(5) 


v  '      aJ-o     ' 

>v         0    »I6 

- 

io-' 

rv^o 

- 

lO"2 

:zi 

V 

\     - 

r 

V      75%' 

io"3— 

/ 

\  = 

- 

100% - 

Iff4 

,  11   , 

1 

This  integral  is  evaluated  in  the  Appendix  with  the 
result  expressed  as  either 

o'(t)  =  exp\jo)o't— %\Q 

<*>  ri{w0— wo'}  1" 
X  E    (bt)**Jn(2bW),     (6a) 

n=oL  b  J 


12  3  4 

t/T 

Fig.  2.  Time  dependence  of  radiation  after  transmission  through 
a  resonant  filter  according  to  Eq.  (7),  assuming  all  radiation  is 
recoilless  or  75%  is  recoilless  03=16,  Ao>=0).  The  straight  line 
represents  an  exponential  decay  for  comparison. 


:exp  iojo't — 1\\  —  expil h(w0— w0')2 

I  2JI  Lw0-w0'  J 

+  £  (— )  (iO-»'V„(2ftn*)l.     (6b) 


'(ty 


The  time  dependence  of  the  transmitted  intensity  is 
given  by   |o'(/)|2.  Setting  w0— wo'=Aw,  /3=46/X,  and 


io-'- 


T=\t  in  Eq.  (6a)  yields 

4  Ao>1Bf  jSr-]*" 

i-- 

In  particular,  for  Aw=0  this  reduces  to 
|a'(r)p=e-^/003iri)]2. 


I  oo  r  4  Awyrjer-ii" 

I  «=o  L  jS   X  J  L  4  J 


(7) 


(6) 


For  large  values  of  Aw,  the  series  (7)  converges  very 
slowly.  In  this  region,  we  use  Eq.  (6b)  for  a'(t).  The 
transmitted  intensity  is 


XV      ' 

1 

Aw 

1 
»0 
=  4 

- 

-  v\ 

- 

. 

=     \ 

\   75%  ~ 



100% 

1 

1 

l«'(DI! 


■expt 


+  E 


fAw         X  /Si 

— T+ 

L  X  Aw  4J 


JntfW) 


(9) 


IO"2 


io-3- 


12  3  4 

t/T 

Fig.  1.  Time  dependence  of  radiation  after  transmission  through 
a  resonant  filter  according  to  Eq.  (7),  assuming  all  radiation  is 
recoilless  or  75%  is  recoilless  03=4,  Ao>=0).  The  straight  line 
represents  an  exponential  decay  for  comparison. 


In  computing  the  time  behavior  of  the  transmitted 
intensity,  Eq.  (7)  converges  rapidly  for 

2  Aw 

— Gsr)*<i, 

P  X 
while  Eq.  (9)  gives  rapid  convergence  for 
2  Aw 


■0ST)*>1. 
fi  X 

The  detailed  comparison  of  the  theoretical  formulas 
with  the  experimental  results  is  quite  complicated. 
Here  we  only  indicate  some  of  the  points  to  be 
considered. 

Only  some  fraction  of  the  14-kev  radiation  is  recoil- 


261 


TIME     DEPENDENCE    OF     RESONANTLY    FILTERED    y     RAYS 


515 


less,  while  the  remainder  is  shifted  far  from  resonance 
and  decays  exponentially.  In  Figs.  1  and  2  we  show  the 
time  dependence  of  the  transmitted  beam  for  two 
different  absorber  thicknesses  when  Aw=0,  for  the 
pure  resonance  radiation  and  for  the  case  when  75% 
of  the  radiation  is  recoilless. 

The  effect  of  relative  motion  of  source  and  absorber 
on  the  time  dependence  of  the  transmitted  beam  is 
shown  in  Fig.  3  (Aw=5X)  and  Fig.  4  (Aw=4X). 

Figure  4  shows  the  surprising  behavior  which  should 
occur  as  the  source  and  absorber  frequency  are  separated 
more  and  more:  the  intensity  oscillates  about  the 
exponential  curve.  Thus,  at  certain  times  more  gamma 
rays  are  received  through  the  absorber  than  would  have 
arrived  if  the  absorber  were  absent.  The  medium 
behaves  like  a  resonant  filter  and  appears  to  "ring"  in 
response  to  the  incident  damped  oscillation.  As  Aw  is 
increased  the  oscillations  shown  in  Fig.  4  are  shifted 
toward  shorter  and  shorter  times  so  that,  for  very  large 
Aw,  the  normal  exponential  decay  is  approached. 

The  transmitted  intensity  given  by  Eq.  (7)  or  (9) 
can  be  written  as 

|a'(*)|2=exp(-X*)FG3,*), 

where  X=  1/r.  The  deviations  from  exponential  behavior 
are  more  easily  seen  if  one  plots  the  product  of  the 
counting  rate  with  the  factor  expQu).  For  the  emitted 
line  this  product  is  a  constant.  For  the  transmitted  line, 
the  theory  predicts  that  the  product  will  vary  as  F(J3,t). 
The  theory  given  above  assumes  that  there  is  a 
single  emission  (and  absorption)  line.  However,  the 
14.4-kev  line  of  Fe87  has  a  hyperfine  structure  of  six 
lines.7  Since  the  separation  of  the  hyperfine  components 
is  large  compared  to  the  linewidth,  we  assume  that 


Fig.  3.  Effect  of 
relative  motion  on 
time  dependence  of 
transmitted  radia- 
tion according  to 
Eq.  (7)  03  =  4,  Ato 
=  JX).  For  compari- 
son, the  straight  line 
represents  an  expo- 
nential decay. 


Fig.  4.  Effect  of 
relative  motion  on 
time  dependence  of 
transmitted  radia- 
tion according  to 
Eq.  (7)  03  =  4,  Ao> 
=4X).  For  compari- 
son, the  straight  line 
represents  an  expo- 
nential decay. 


DELAY 
IOOO  FT 
RG  63/U 


HP  202  A 
FUNCTION 
GENERATOR 


3L 


AMPLIFIER   | 


|  HP  460  A  | 


T 


I  HP  460  B  |     |HP460A| 


[COINCIDENCE  I 


ATE     *]_ 


Fig.  5.  Schematic  diagram  of  equipment. 

each  emitted  hyperfine  component  is  absorbed  only  in 
the  corresponding  transition  in  the  absorber.  By  use 
of  the  values  for  the  intensities  of  the  hyperfine  compo- 
nents, the  time  dependence  of  the  transmitted  radiation 
is  found  to  be 

|a'(0|»=exp(-XO[l-/+/{iF(fcM) 

+mw)+m-hmi  (io) 

where  /  is  the  fraction  of  gamma  rays  emitted  without 
recoil  and  /?  is  the  thickness  of  the  absorber  expressed  in 
mean  free  paths  at  the  peak  of  the  absorption  curve. 
Although  in  principle  /3  is  measurable,  it  is  difficult  to 
determine  it  accurately.  We  have  used  £  as  a  parameter 
in  fitting  the  theoretical  formula  to  the  experimental 
data.  Equation  (10)  was  evaluated  on  an  IBM-704 
computer  for  various  values  of  /?  and  the  other  param- 
eters, and  the  calculated  curve  giving  the  best  visual 
fit  was  plotted  with  the  data.  One  should  expect  that  /3 
would  be  given  by  N<r0f,  where  /'  is  the  fraction  of 
Fe67  nuclei  which  can  absorb  without  recoil,  N  is  the 
number  of  atoms  of  Fe67  per  cm2,  <70=47rX2/  (1+a),  X 
is  the  wavelength  of  the  14.4-kev  gamma  ray  divided 
by  2ir,  and  a  is  the  internal  conversion  coefficient. 

IH.  EQUIPMENT  AND  PROCEDURE 

The  measurements  were  made  with  a  source  of  Co67 
(25  000  disintegrations  of  Co57  per  sec)  co-plated8  with 
Fe66  on  a  thin  copper  foil  and  annealed  in  vacuum  at 
800°C.  Absorbers  consisted  of  rolled  foils  of  Fe67 
(enriched  to  75%  in  Fe57)  or  normal  Armco  iron  rolled 
foils  annealed  at  800°C.  The  geometric  arrangement  of 
source,  absorber,  and  detectors  is  shown  schematically 
in  Fig.  5.  The  source,  f  in.  in  diameter,  was  mounted 
on  an  extension  of  the  speaker  diaphragm  which  could 
be  used  to  shift  the  resonant  frequency  of  the  source  by 
the  Doppler  effect.  The  absorber  foil  (1  in.  in  diameter) 
was  clamped  between  two  Lucite  disks  mounted  f  in. 
above  the  source.  The  detector  for  the  14.4-kev  gamma 


7  S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J.  Perlow,  R.  S. 
Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  177  (1960). 


8  S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J.  Perlow,  R.  S. 
Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  28  (1960). 


262 


516 


LYNCH,     HOLLAND,    AND    HAMERMESH 


ray  consisted  of  a  Nal(Tl)  scintillator  1  in.  in  diameter 
and  0.006  in.  thick  mounted  on  a  Lucite  light  pipe 
and  an  RCA  7265  photomultiplier  tube.  A  second 
Nal(Tl)  scintillator,  1  in.  in  diameter  and  \  in.  thick, 
served  as  a  detector  for  the  123-kev  gamma  ray  and 
was  mounted  §  in.  from  the  source  on  a  line  making  an 
angle  of  120°  with  the  line  connecting  the  centers  of 
the  other  detector  and  the  source. 

The  speaker  coil  was  driven  with  a  peak-to-peak 
amplitude  of  \  in.  by  the  amplified  signal  coming 
alternately  from  a  triangular  wave  generator9  and 
from  a  40-cps  sinusoidal  signal.  The  triangular  wave 
caused  the  source  to  move  with  a  constant  velocity 
either  toward  or  away  from  the  absorber,  except  during 
the  short  interval  of  reversal  of  direction.  This  constant 
velocity  produced  a  small  constant  increase  or  decrese 
in  gamma-ray  energy  through  the  Doppler  effect.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  sinusoidal  signal,  because  of  its 
much  higher  frequency,  produced  a  wide  range  of 
energy  shifts;  most  of  the  time  the  gamma  rays  were 
not  resonant  nor  even  nearly  resonant  with  the  absorber. 
Other  sources  of  absorption,  such  as  the  photoelectric 
effect,  would  be  scarcely  affected  by  the  energy  shift. 
Thus  we  observed  the  effect  of  both  nonresonant  and 
resonant  absorption  for  small  energy  shifts  with  the 
triangular  wave  applied  to  the  voice  coil  and  we 
observed  the  effect  of  nonresonant  absorption  alone 
with  the  sinusoidal  voltage  applied  to  the  voice  coil. 

Because  the  average  geometric  arrangement  was 
slightly  different  for  the  two  signals,  measurements 
were  taken  without  an  absorber,  and  the  sinusoidal 
signal  was  adjusted  slightly  to  bring  the  coincidence 
counting  rate  within  1%  of  the  counting  rate  with  the 
triangular  drive. 

It  is  desirable  that  the  triangular  wave  of  voltage 
should  move  the  source  with  constant  speed.  The 
degree  to  which  this  condition  holds  is  determined  by 
the  linearity  of  speaker  movement  with  current,  the 
linearity  of  the  triangular  wave  voltage,  the  duration 
of  the  transient  vibration  occurring  during  reversal  of 
the  direction  of  motion,  and  the  isolation  of  the  system 
from  mechanical  vibrations  conducted  by  the  air  or 
by  the  building. 

We  investigated  the  movement  of  the  voice  coil  as  a 
function  of  current  and  found  the  relationship  to  be 
linear  within  the  accuracy  of  measurement  (2%). 
The  duration  of  the  transient  at  the  peaks  of  the 
triangular  wave  from  the  generator  was  known  to  be 
small.  From  the  observed  duration  of  the  transient 
voltage  induced  by  a  sudden  displacement  of  the  voice 
coil,  the  effect  due  to  the  inertia  of  the  voice  coil  and 
source  holder  was  estimated  to  be  less  than  25  msec. 
At  the  frequencies  we  used  (<0.2  cps),  this  corre- 
sponded to  less  than  1%  of  the  period. 

The  transmission  of  noise  to  the  speaker  was  greatly 
reduced    by    mounting    the    assembly    consisting    of 

•Model  202A  function  generator,  manufactured  by  Hewlett- 
Packard  Company,  Palo  Alto,  California. 


speaker,  source,  absorber,  and  detectors  in  a  box  lined 
with  sound-absorbing  material  and  acoustically  isolated 
from  the  floor.  With  these  precautions,  the  observed 
vibration  of  the  voice  coil  because  of  acoustic  noise 
was  less  than  0.0004  in.  per  sec,  which  should  be 
compared  to  the  velocity  of  0.0037  in.  per  sec  needed  to 
produce  a  Doppler  shift  of  one  resonance  width.  The 
over-all  performance  of  the  system  was  investigated  by 
observing  the  width  of  the  central  dip  in  transmission. 
This  was  20%  wider  than  expected  for  the  thickest 
absorber  and  40%  wider  for  the  thinnest. 

The  circuits  for  measuring  the  coincidence  rate  as  a 
function  of  time  delay  after  formation  of  the  14.4-kev 
state  are  shown  schematically  in  Fig.  5  and  were  the 
same  (except  for  slight  modifications)  as  those  used 
previously  to  measure  the  lifetimes  of  excited  states  of 
nuclei.10  The  output  of  the  time-to-pulse-height  con- 
verter was  stored  in  the  right  half  of  the  256-channel 
analyzer  when  the  voice  coil  was  driven  with  the 
triangular  wave  and  in  the  left  half  when  the  voice 
coil  was  driven  with  the  sinusoidal  voltage.  During  a 
run,  the  triangular  wave  and  sinusoidal  voltages  were 
applied  alternately  for  4-min  intervals  by  a  timing 
mechanism,  and  data  were  accumulated  over  a  24-hr 
period.  Signals  from  slow  amplifiers  and  single-channel 
analyzers  set  on  the  photopeaks  of  the  two  gamma  rays 
were  required  in  order  to  record  an  event. 

Because  of  the  method  of  recording  data,  slow 
drifts  were  not  important.  The  calibration  of  the 
time-to-pulse-height  converter  (as  obtained  by  using 
the  data  from  the  sinusoidal  run  to  measure  the 
lifetime  of  the  14.4-kev  state  of  Fe57)  remained  constant 
within  1.5%  over  a  period  of  1  month.  A  slow  drift  of 
the  peak  channel  was  also  observed  (about  \  channel 
per  day).  The  converter  was  linear  to  within  1%  in  the 
region  of  interest. 

IV.  RESULTS  AND  DISCUSSION 

The  results  of  a  typical  measurement  for  the  thickest 
absorber  foil  (2.7  mg/cm2  of  Fe67,  isotopic  enrichment 
75%)  is  shown  in  Fig.  6.  The  upper  part  of  the  figure 
shows  a  conventional  semilogarithmic  plot  of  the  data 
after  subtraction  of  background  due  to  accidental 
coincidences.  This  background  was  determined  from 
the  counting  rate  at  times  preceding  the  peak  shown  in 
Fig.  6(a).  In  general  it  was  less  for  the  part  of  the  run 
in  which  the  source  was  moved  at  constant  velocity 
than  for  the  part  in  which  the  source  was  vibrated 
sinusoidally  because  the  counting  rate  in  the  14.4-kev 
detector  was  less  in  the  former  condition.  The  total 
number  of  accidental  coincidences  was  2.5%  of  the 
total  number  of  true  coincidences  for  the  data  with 
vibrated  source  shown  in  Fig.  6.  The  steep  rise  at  the 
left  side  of  the  figure  represents  the  time  resolution  of 
the  fast  circuit;  it  corresponds  to  a  resolution  curve 


»  F.  J.  Lynch  and  R.  E.  Holland,  Phys.  Rev.  114,  825  (1959); 
R.  E.  Holland  and  F.  J.  Lynch,  Phys.  Rev.  113,  903  (1959). 


263 


TIME     DEPENDENCE    OF     RESONANTLY    FILTERED 


RAYS 


517 


with  a  full  width  at  half  maximum  of  25  rmisec.  The 
curve  obtained  with  vibrated  source  shows  the  expo- 
nential decay  with  a  half-life  of  0.10  /usee  in  agreement 
with  previous  measurements.3  The  curve  obtained  with 
the  stationary  source  demonstrates  the  effect  we 
expected. 

The  lower  portion  of  Fig.  6  shows  the  same  data 
plotted  in  such  a  way  as  to  exhibit  the  deviations  from 
exponential  decay  predicted  in  Sec.  II.  Here  the 
count  in  each  time  channel  has  been  multiplied  by  e*', 
where  X  is  the  decay  constant  and  t  is  the  time,  and  the 
resulting  numbers  have  been  adjusted  so  that  the 
average  value  of  the  vibrated  data  was  equal  to  unity 
after  the  initial  rise.  Data  in  several  adjacent  channels 
were  averaged  when  the  counting  rate  was  low.  Vertical 
bars  give  the  standard  deviations  as  calculated  from 
the  number  of  counts.  The  solid  curve  shown  was 
calculated  for  this  absorber  from  the  prescription  given 
at  the  end  of  Sec.  II,  with  the  thickness  parameter 
/3  adjusted  for  best  fit  to  the  data.  This  value  of  /J  was 
twice  that  expected  from  the  thickness  of  the  absorber. 

Figure  7  gives  typical  results  for  a  number  of  runs 
in  which  the  source  was  moved  at  constant  velocity 
alternately  toward  and  away  from  the  absorber,  and 


•.        %  VIBRATED 


STATIONARY 


v.' 


*vi: 


■oo05    i    ■ 
VIBRATED 


it, 


**U-.-LU 


STATIONARY 


0  20  40  60  80 

TIME   CHANNEL    (  I  CHANNEL  »9.4  m/i$«c) 

Fig.  6.  (a)  Semilogarithmic  plQt  of  delayed  time  spectra  taken 
with  source  and  absorber  (2.7  mg/cms  of  Fe",  isotopic  abundance 
75%)  stationary  and  with  source  and  absorber  vibrated  relative 
to  one  another;  (b)  Data  of  Fig.  6(a)  replotted  with  ordinate 
multiplied  by  «X|  in  order  to  compare  with  theoretical  expression 
given  by  the  solid  line. 


data    were    accumulated    without    distinguishing    the 
direction  of  motion.  This  motion  of  the  source  produced 


1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 

oU 


I        A   I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I 


AE  =  ur 


0       10     20     30    40     50     60     70     80 
TIME   CHANNEL     (I    CHANNEL  =  9.4  m^sec) 

Fig.  7.  Time  spectra  obtained  with  various  energy  shifts  of  the 
emitted  gamma  ray.  The  absorber  was  the  same  as  in  Fig.  6. 
The  energy  shift  AE  is  given  in  terms  of  the  linewidth  deduced 
from  the  mean  life  of  the  state,  T=h/r.  The  dashed  curves  give 
the  time  spectra  when  the  source  is  vibrated;  the  solid  curves 
are  the  theoretical  predictions. 


264 


518 


LYNCH,    HOLLAND,    AND     H A M E R M E S H 


a  shift  in  energy  of  the  emitted  gamma  ray.  The 
amount  of  the  shift,  AE,  is  given  on  the  figure  in  terms 


1.0 
0.8 

.          ' 1 " '___'_     ■         '        1  .' 

■L 

. 

0.6 
0.4 

"i 

.'ilp 

0.2 

.f         AE«0 

- 

Ot 



1       1        1 

i.o- 

-i 1 1 1 1 1 — 

1      1  ■    1 

0.8- 
0.6- 

0.4- 

- 

0.2- 

!       AE  =  ir 

- 

Qi 

1       1        1 

i.o- 

i     i  ■  >-\ ' — i — ' — 
Ls&togMi+j 

1      1       1  - 

0.8- 
z 
8    0.6- 

"pv/ 

-      0.4- 
0.2- 

j           AE=3r 

i 

i.o- 

^^^^i^ 

-l+ift 

0.8- 

V 

0.6- 

- 

0.4- 

- 

0.2- 

j            AE«5r 

- 

0^ 

' 

1          1          1 

i.o- 

J^j&^UiJ. 

-M+U 

0.8- 

H 

0.6- 

f 

• 

- 

0.4- 
0.2- 

1 

f           AE=7r 

1 

; 

0* 

4    .    ,   .    1    1 

1       1       1. 

0       10     20     30     40     50     60     70     80 
TIME  CHANNEL     (I  CHANNEL  -9.4  m/tsecj 

Fig.  8.  Time  spectra  obtained  with  various  energy  shifts  of  the 
emitted  gamma  ray.  The  absorber  was  a  rolled  foil  (1.27  mg/cm2 
of  Fe",  isotopic  abundance  75%).  The  energy  shift  AE  is  given 
in  terms  of  the  line  width  deduced  from  the  mean  life  of  the  state, 
T=A/t.  The  dashed  curves  give  the  time  spectra  when  the  source 
was  vibrated;  the  solid  curves  are  the  theoretical  predictions. 


of  T=h/r,  the  expected  full  width  at  half  maximum  of 
the  emitted  line.  The  data  taken  with  the  source 
vibrated  has  been  represented  in  these  figures  by  the 
light  dashed  line  in  order  to  keep  the  number  of  data 
points  from  becoming  so  large  as  to  be  confusing.  The 
solid  curve  is  as  before  a  theoretical  curve  calculated 
according  to  Sec.  II,  with  the  foil  thickness  parameter 
the  same  as  that  used  in  Fig.  2.  Similar  data  for  a 
thinner  foil  (1.27  mg/cm2  of  Fe67  in  an  enriched  foil) 
is  shown  in  Fig.  8  and  for  a  still  thinner  foil  (0.22  mg/cm2 
of  Fe67  in  a  normal  isotopic  concentration)  in  Fig.  9. 

Not  shown  are  data  which  were  obtained  to  verify 
the  prediction  of  the  theory  that  the  delayed  time 
spectrum  depends  only  on  the  magnitude  of  the  shift  in 
gamma-ray  energy  and  not  on  its  sign.  A  run  was  made 
in  which  data  were  accumulated  only  during  travel  of 
the  source  in  one  direction  and  the  result  was  compared 
with  that  obtained  when  data  were  accumulated  during 
travel  in  both  directions.  No  difference  could  be 
observed  between  the  two  runs. 

All  of  the  data  have  been  compared  to  the  theoretical 


0       10     20     30     40     50     60     70     80 
TIME   CHANNEL   (I  CHANNEL  =  9.4  m/tsec) 

Fig.  9.  Time  spectra  obtained  with  various  energy  shifts  of  the 
emitted  gamma  ray.  Absorber  was  rolled  foil  (0.20  mg/cmJ  of 
Fe",  natural  isotopic  abundance).  The  energy  shift  AE  is  given  in 
terms  of  the  linewidth  deduced  from  the  mean  life  of  the  state, 
T=H/t.  The  dashed  curves  give  the  time  spectra  when  the  source 
was  vibrated ;  the  solid  curves  are  the  theoretical  predictions. 


265 


TIME     DEPENDENCE    OF     RESONANTLY    FILTERED     y     RAYS 


519 


expression  at  the  end  of  Sec.  II,  the  values  of  parameters 
given  in  Table  I  being  used.  These  are  all  as  expected 
except  j8;  all  theoretical  curves  are  plotted  for  a  value 
of  /8  twice  that  obtained  from  the  weight  of  the  absorber 
foil.  With  this  reservation  and  when  allowance  is  made 
for  the  effect  of  finite  resolution  time,  the  fit  between 
theory  and  experiment  is  fairly  good.  In  particular, 
the  predicted  overshoot  was  observed;  this  is  most 
noticeable  in  Fig.  7,  where  the  curves  for  5r,  7r,  and 
lir  show  that,  at  certain  times,  a  higher  intensity  is 
obtained  with  the  absorber  than  without  it. 

We  have  chosen  to  plot  the  relative  transmission  as 
a  function  of  time,  using  the  energy  shift  AE  as  a 
parameter  to  label  the  various  curves.  This  has  the 
advantage  of  allowing  a  direct  estimate  of  the  effect 
of  time  resolution.  One  could,  of  course,  plot  the  trans- 
mission as  a  function  of  AE  with  the  time  as  a  param- 
eter. This  is  done  in  Fig.  10  which  shows  the  theoretical 
and  experimental  transmission  (relative  to  that  of  the 
vibrated  condition)  vs  AE  for  the  times  t=r/2  and 
/=4r  after  the  formation  of  the  excited  state.  Note 
that  the  apparent  half-width  at  half  maximum  decreases 
from  about  3r  at  t=r/2  to  about  0.7r  at  /=4r.  The 
half-width  measured  without  consideration  of  time  was 
about  1.6r  for  this  particular  absorber  (1.27  mg/cm2 
Fe»). 

In  some  cases  the  discrepancies  are  larger  than 
experimental  error.  A  number  of  possible  sources  of 
deviation  from  the  theory  were  investigated.  First, 
the  theory  assumes  that  no  scattered  radiation  was 
detected.  However,  the  geometric  arrangement  we 
used  in  order  to  keep  the  coincidence  rate  high  was  such 
that  any  appreciable  scattering  would  have  been 
detected.  We  made  a  crude  check  of  this  by  increasing 
the  distance  from  the  source  to  detector  from  f  in.  to 
2  in.  The  fact  that  no  change  in  the  time  spectra  other 
than  the  reduced  counting  rate  was  observed  indicates 
that  scattered  radiation  was  not  contributing  to  the 
effect.  Second,  the  source  and  detector  might  be 
polarized  (because  of  permanent  magnetization  or 
by  stray  magnetic  field)  arid  thus  change  the  relative 
intensities  and  polarizations  of  the  hyperfine  lines.  To 

Table  I.  Values  of  parameters  used  with  theory  of  Sec.  II 
to  fit  data  in  Figs.  6,  7,  8,  and  9. 


Parameter 

Value 

Comment 

/ 

0.6 

Fraction  of  14.4-kev  gamma 
rays  emitted  without  recoil. 

/' 

0.6 

Fraction  of  Fe"  nuclei  absorb- 
ing without  recoil. 

a 

15 

Internal  conversion  coefficient. 

<r0 

1.48XlO-»cm* 

Peak  absorption  cross  section 
for  no  hyperfine  splitting. 

0 

2N<r0f 

Thickness  parameter  of  theory. 
(This  value  is  twice  the  ex- 
pected value.) 

N 

Number  of  Fe"  nuclei  per  cm' 
in  absorber.  (Obtained  from 
weight  of  foil.) 

2345678        10 
ENERGY    DIFFERENCE   IN  UNITS  OF  r 


Fig.  10.  Transmission  (relative  to  the  vibrated  condition)  of 
enriched  Fe"  absorber  obtained  at  \t  and  4r  after  formation  of 
the  14.4-kev  state.  The  solid  and  dashed  curves  represent  the 
theoretical  predictions;  the  circles  the  experimental  data  points. 


test  for  static  polarization  of  source  and  detector, 
transmission  measurements  were  made  with  various 
orientations  of  the  clamped  source  and  absorber.  No 
effect  larger  than  the  statistical  accuracy  of  1%  was 
found.  In  another  measurement,  an  upper  limit  of  5 
gauss  was  put  on  the  local  magnetic  field,  with  a 
probable  value  close  to  the  earth's  field.  These  two 
observations  make  it  unlikely  that  the  source  or 
absorbers  were  polarized.  Third,  because  the  measured 
linewidths  were  somewhat  greater  than  they  should  have 
been,  one  should  perhaps  average  over  a  range  of  energy 
shifts  in  the  region  of  the  nominal  displacement  AE. 
A  series  of  curves  were  calculated  by  averaging  the 
curves  for  a  given  AE  over  a  Gaussian  distribution  of 
AE.  Although  the  agreement  between  theory  and 
experiment  could  be  improved  in  some  cases  in  this 
way,  it  was  worse  in  other  cases  and  no  net  improvement 
resulted. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We  are  indebted  to  Dr.  G.  J.  Perlow  and  Dr.  S.  S. 
Hanna  for  suggesting  the  original  problem  and  for 
supplying  the  proper  sources  and  absorbers  for  perform- 
ing the  experiments.  J.  B.  Baumgardner  and  A.  Vander- 
gust  built  most  of  the  special  electronic  circuits  used. 


APPENDIX 


The  integral 

1     r+- 
a'{t)= —  I      d<*- 
2iri  J„      u 


■\i\ 


[2ibw        I 
w2— wo'2- twXJ 


(Al) 


can  be  evaluated  by  completing  the  contour  on  a 
semicircle  in  the  upper  half  of  the  complex  o>  plane  and 
finding  the  residues  of  the  integrand.  Since  wo'^X,  the 
exponent  has  singularities  at  w=±aj</+$tX.  It  is  easily 
shown  that  the  contribution  from  w=—  wo'-f-ftA 
contains  a  factor  X/W,  so  this  term  can  be  neglected. 


266 

520  LYNCH,     HOLLAND,    AND    HAMERMESH 

We  are  then  left  with  Substitution  in  Eq.  (A4)  yields 

J  ~  giut 

2m  J      W-«0-£*X  **-—  f         Gdw 

Xexp[ib(co— W—  2^)_1]= —  <p  Gdw  «    /     ib 


= — I  <f       Gdw+  <f        GdoA.     (A2) 


a>o— wo 
+«x™  '  J-o'+h-x       J'     V     '  X(^)-i<«+1>7n+1(26i/i)     (A6) 


=  -exp[W/-|Xf]  £  ( ) 

<(ft*)-*(B+ 

[A] 

X(ft/)~ 


In  the  first  integral  we  let  z=w— wo— ?iX  so  that  _.    ,      ,    _  " 

=  -exp[W<-§XOE 

1      y  1  n-1  LO)0- 

Ji= — ®        Gdw=-^—  exp(W—  2^0 

2«.A*+ja  2«  X(bt)-n'2Jn(2bW)     (A6a) 


(A6b) 


=  exppo>0/— |X/+tft/(«o— wo')]-     (A3) 


where  S„  is  the  summand  in  Eq.  (A6a). 
In  the  second  integral  we  set  z=w-a>o'-|«X  so  that  We  use  the  generating  function  (A5)  in  the  first  sum 

I  j  and  find  a  term  which  cancels  Ih  so  we  are  left  with 

Ii= —  <p  Gdco= — exp[io)o't— %\t]  ., 

w/,r+»         2iri  «'(/)=«pCW/-ixo  L  [-—  I 

K^x-i  *— °°  Lo)0  —  0>o'J 


dz  r  /       ft\i  »— »Lo)o-o)0 

exp 


UzW-«o  L  V        z/J  X(bt)-»i*Jn(2bW) 

1  «   fi(wo_ o)o')T 

exp[W/-|X<]  =exp[W/-§XO  £    

2m  n=o  L        6        J 


/£)  <fe expU  ( tz+-  \  1     (A4) 
«-0        (a)0-0)o')n+1  L    \  Z/J 


X(ft/)"/2/„(2ftM).     (A7) 


For  large  values  of  (o)0— o)0')  it  is  convenient  to  obtain 
From  the  formula  for  generating  Bessel  functions,  a'(t)  from  the  sum  of  (A3)  and  (A6a).  Then  we  have 


exp[^(«-l/«)]=    E    «-/«(*),  (A5)  f  r     ft 

«— «>  a  (/)  =  exp[to)o  /— jA/Jj  —  expj 

we  find  '  Lo)o— o)o' 


a'(/)  =  exp[zo)o'/— |X0J  — expi h(o>o— o>o')2 

I  LO)o— O)o'  J 


exp[i(te+-)]  =    L    im(t/b)**z»Jm(2bW).     (ASa)  +  £  f — )  (bt)-"'Vn(2bHi)  \      (A3) 

L    V  Z/  J         m— co  «=1    \O)0  —  0)0 '/ 


267 


Effect  of  Radiofrequency  Resonance  on  the  Natural  Line  Form  (*). 

M.  N.  Hack  and  M.  Hamermesh 
Argonne  National  Laboratory  -  Argonne,  III. 

(ricevuto  I'll  Ottobre  1960) 


Summary.  —  The  form  of  Zeeman  lines  in  the  presence  of  a  resonant 
rotating  r.f .  magnetic  field  is  determined.  The  spontaneous  emission  distri- 
butions are  obtained  from  the  steady- state  solutions,  leading  to  a  pre- 
diction of  the  splitting  of  Zeeman  lines  at  rotation  frequencies  corre- 
sponding to  well  separated  single-  and  multiple -quantum  resonance  fre- 
quencies,  as  well  as  at  the  resonance  frequency  in  the  Majorana  case. 


1.  -  Introduction. 

Some  time  ago  Bitter  (x)  and  Pryce  (2)  indicated  the  possibility  of  a  new 
method  of  detecting  radiofrequency  resonance,  by  means  of  certain  changes 
in  the  radiation  emitted  by  an  atom  when  it  is  subjected  to  a  radiofrequency 
field  at  a  resonance  frequency  between  its  Zeeman  levels  in  a  constant  mag- 
netic field.  At  that  time  the  observation  of  such  an  effect  appeared  difficult 
to  perform,  since  it  would  require  large  radiofrequency  field  amplitudes  and 
high  resolution  of  the  emitted  radiation  in  order  to  detect  the  changes  pro- 
duced by  applying  the  radiofrequency  field.  However,  the  possibility  of  an 
experiment  on  the  nuclear  Zeeman  lines  by  means  of  the  Mossbauer  effect 
has  renewed  interest  in  this  problem  (3). 


(*)  Work  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the  IT.  S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission. 
f1)  F.  Bitter:  Phys.  Mev.,  76,  833  (1949). 

(2)  M.  H.  L.  Pryce:  Phys.  Rev.,  77,  136  (1950).  We  are  indebted  to  Professor 
A.  Abragam  for  bringing  references  (x)  and  (2)  to  our  attention  when  we  informed 
him  of  our  results. 

(3)  A  preliminary  experimental  attempt  was  reported  by  E.  C.  Avery,  C.  Little- 
john,  G.  J.  Perlow  and  B.  Smaller  at  the  Allerton  Park  Conference,  University  of 
Illinois  (June  1960). 


268 

4-9-  **^.^.***^.*4-**4»9"?"9-*****4»9'********4"9»^  44-4-4-4-4-4-4-J>4-4-4>4-4-4-4-4-4-4'4- 

2  EFFECT   OF  RADIOFREQUENCY  RESONANCE   ON   THE   NATURAL  LINE   FORM  [547] 

In  the  present  note  we  study  the  influence  of  radiofrequency  resonance  on 
the  natural  line  form  of  the  emitted  radiation.  The  general  theory  is  closely 
related  to  the  steady-state  solutions  found  in  the  study  of  multiple-quantum 
transitions  (4). 


2.  -  The  two-level  ease. 

We  first  consider  a  system  undergoing  radiative  decay  from  a  pair  of  levels  a 
and  p  to  levels  a'  and  p'  respectively,  in  the  presence  of  a  rotating  r.f .  field 
which  produces  transitions  between  a  and  ft  (Fig.  1).  We  wish  to  study  the 
effect  on  the  emitted  spectral  lines  when  the  angular 

frequency  of  rotation  co  is  close  to  the  resonance  f re-         a r . 

quency   o)ap=  (Ea  —  Ep)lh  between  the  upper  states,  q       ( J6^ 

and  the  amplitude  of  the  rotating  field  is  sufficiently 

large  to  produce  an  appreciable  probability  of  trans-  ' 

fer  between  a  and  ft  during  their  mean  life-time.    We 

shall  assume  that  both  states  decay  at  the  same  rate.        a'  — 

For  the  present  we  neglect  the  influence  of  other 
levels    on    the  resonance   a  <-->/?.     In   the    following        * 


section  the  possibility  of  transitions  to  other  levels  Fig.  1.  -  Decay  transi- 
will  be  taken  into  account,  leading  to  corresponding  tions  in  the  presence  of 
results  also  at  the  resonance  frequencies  associated  a  rf-  field- 

with   well    separated   single-   and   multiple-quantum 

transitions,  as  well  as  at  the  single  resonance  frequency  in  the  case  of  equally 
spaced  levels. 

To  investigate  the  effect  of  the  radiofrequency  resonance  on  the  natural 
line  form,  we  study  the  solution  of  the  system  of  equations 

(la)  ibao  =  H  exp  [i(coap-  co)t]  bpo  +  2  sM\a'il  exP  C*K«'  ~  ^xW  6<*'i  » 

x 

(16)  iba,h  =  Ba.Hm  exp  [*(a>1—  co^)t]ba0 , 

(lc)  ibpo  =  H  exp  [i(co  —  co^f]  bao  +  J  H^,^  exp  [i{co^,  -  coa)t]  b^  , 

a 

(Id)  ibfi%  =  Hp,lg{fi0  exp  [i(oa -  topp)  t]  bp  , 

subject  to  the  condition  that  initially  no  photons  are  in  the  radiation  field, 

(2)  ba,h(0)  =  bfi,la(0)  =  0  . 


(4)  M.  N.  Hack:  Phys.  Bev.y  100,  975(A)  (1955);  104,  84  (1956);  H.  Salwen: 
Phys.  Rev.,  99,  1274  (1955);  C.  Besset,  J.  Horowitz,  A.  Messiah  and  J.  M.  Winter: 
Journ.  Phys.  et  Bad.,  15,  251  (1954);  J.  M.  Winter:  Ann.  Phys.,  4,  745  (1959). 


269 


[548 J  m.  n.  hack  and  m.  hamermesh  3 

For  H  =  0,  i.e.,  for  zero  amplitude  of  the  radiofrequency  field,  these  equa- 
tions reduce  to  the  equations  of  Weisskopf  and  Wigner  (6)  for  describing  the 
radiative  decay  of  excited  states.  For  vanishing  matrix  elements  of  the  inter- 
action with  the  radiation  field,  -H^^i  =  0,  etc.,  they  would  reduce  to  the 
equations  describing  the  transitions  produced  by  the  radiofrequency  field  alone. 

In  general  eqs.  (1)  are  too  complicated  to  solve  exactly.  Nevertheless,  for 
the  cases  of  practical  interest  a  satisfactory  approximate  solution  can  be  ob- 
tained.   For  this  purpose  we  look  for  solutions  of  the  form 

(3a)  ba0=  Caexv[—ipf], 

(36)  b0o  =  Cp  exp  [—  i(p  +  o>afi  —  a))t]  . 

Substituting  (3a)  into  (lb)  and  integrating,  subject  to  the  initial  condition  (2), 
and  inserting  the  result 

GW  +  P  —  COX 


and  eqs.  (3)  into  (la)  gives 

(5)  pC^HCp+C.^B 


1  —  exp  [i(wa<x>  +  p  —  co?.)  t] 


(For  simplicity  photon  occupation  numbers  have  been  suppressed.) 

It  is  now  important  to  note  that  for  the  times  of  actual  interest,  i.e.,  during 
a  long  time  interval  which  includes  the  mean  lifetime  of  the  decaying  states, 
by  virtue  of  the  smallness  of  the  decay  constant  (line  width)  compared  to 
the  line  frequency,  the  last  term  in  eq.  (5)  is  practically  constant  (6).    Denoting 


(5)  V.  Weisskopf  and  *E.  Wigner :  Zeits.  Phys.,  63,  54  (1930). 

(6)  V.  Weisskopf  and  E.  Wigner:  ref.  (6).  One  can  estimate  the  upper  limit 
of  the  interval  to  be  of  the  order  of  a  few  times  r-1  In  (w0/JT),  for  r  <  co0.  At  the  same 
time  one  obtains  an  estimate  for  the  lower  limit  (non-linear  decay  contribution  to  the 
change  in  probability  of  remaining  in  the  initial  state  at  very  early  times)  as  being 
at  most  of  the  order  of  the  period  2n/co0 .  These  results  follow  already  in  the  Weisskopf- 
Wigner  approximation,  even  with  the  usual  neglect  of  the  frequency  variation  of  the 
matrix  element  and  density  of  states.  In  this  case  the  second  term  in  the  sum  in 
eq.  (5)  leads  to  a  factor 

OD 

r[exp[i(w-a>A-£;r)f|  rln<1T 
^ rr^ dc°A  =  2m  +  exp  [£  rt]I , 


270 

4  EFFECT   OF  RADIO-FREQUENCY   RESONANCE   ON   THE   NATURAL  LINE   FORM  [549] 

its  value  by  —  (ij2)r-C<x  (7),  we  have 


(6a) 


In  the  same  way  we  get 


v  +  -r\ca  =  nc,. 


(46) 
and 
(66) 


exp[—  iico^'  +  p—  co  —  coa)t]  —  1 

Or'  =  tLR'fiKjfi  -  : , 


CO, 


p  —  CO  —  COc 


HCa=  [p  +  ^r+co^-co 


)<v, 


where  by  the  restriction  to  the  case  of  equal  lifetimes  r  has  the  same  value 
as  in  (6a). 

The  simple  eigenvalue  problem,  eqs.  (6a,  6),  has  the  solutions 


(7a) 
where 
(76) 
and 

(8a) 


1  i 

P±  =2  (<»  — (wfl/j)  +  w±—  -T, 


^±  =  ±K(co-co^)2  +  4ff^> 


± 


i± 


COtf  —  CO 


[(co  -  co„pY  +  4H«]* 


(86) 


^../. 


1 

V2 


IT 


[(G)-0)^)«  +  4fl-»]*] 


where  r  >  0,  (7)  and  the  last  term  furnishes  the  deviations.  For  all  t>0  we  have 
|I|<l/a>t,  and  for  £  »  1/eo,  I  ~  {exp  pia>£]}/*(co  —  ir/2)t.  More  refined  estimates  tairing 
into  account  the  frequency  variation  of  the  matrix  element  and  density  of  states  lead 
to  similar  results.  The  dependence  of  the  decay  constant  on  the  r.f.  quantities  in  our 
case  (co  —  coa/3 ,  H )  is  also  weak  since  these  are  very  small,  of  the  order  of  the  line 
width,  compared  to  the  frequency  of  the  line.  Decay  theory  has  been  discussed  from 
a  different  viewpoint,  based  on  the  characteristic  functions  of  the  total-energy  operator, 
by  L.  A.  Khalfin:  Sov.  Phys.  Journ.  Exp.  Theor.  Phys.,  6,   1053  (1958). 

(7)  We  suppose  the  imaginary  parts  of  the  decay  constants  to  be  absorbed  into 
the  energies  Ea  and  Ep.  Then  Tis  purely  real  and  moreover,  as  one  readily  verifies,  >0. 
We  take  r  strictly  positive,  since  we  naturally  are  not  interested  in  oases  where  selection 
rules  forbid  the  decay. 


271 


[550] 


M.    N.    HACK    and    M.    HAMERMESH 


The  particular  superposition  satisfying  the  initial  condition  that  the  system 
is  in  the  state  a0  at  time  t  =  0  is  given  by 


(9) 


\o  =  Q\«  exP  [-  W+  Q  +  &-*  exP  [-  *P-  fl  » 

.ft/J0  =    (C+«0+/>  eXP   [—  *+fl  ■+■    0-«  C-/3  eXP  [—  V-  Q)    eXP  t—  *( 


W 


c«)q . 


The  probabilities  of  finding  the  system  subsequently,  at  time  t,  in  the  states 
a0  or  /?0  are  therefore 


(10) 

where 

(11) 


\bao(t)\*=(l-P)exj>[-n], 

\bpo(t)\*=PexV[-rt], 


42?2  1 

(a,-«,tf).  +  4Hi  Sin2  2  «»  ~  »^"  +  *** * ' 


i.e.,   the  Eabi  transition  probabilities  multiplied  by  the  exponential  decay 
factor  exp[—  TV], 

The  probability  amplitudes  for  finding  the  system  in  the  lower  levels  after 
decay,  with  a  photon  of  frequency  a>x  or  a>a  respectively  in  the  radiation  field, 
are  (7) 


(12) 


Moo)  =  Ha>alr}+C+l 
bp\oo)  =HpJr)+C+t 


0>X  —  CDaa>  —  pH 

1 

<*>o  —  0>*/3'  —  P+  +  CD 


+  rj-C-x 


(Dl—O)  «• 


+  V-C. 


0)a  —  0)a 


P-  +  0) 


where  the  constants  r]±(\r]+\2  4-  \v~\2  =  1)  determine  the  particular  superposi- 
tion satisfying  an  arbitrary  initial  condition. 

For  the  initial  condition  corresponding   to  (9),  rj+=C+i(X   and   r}-=G_%, 
For 

(13)  o)  =  wap    (r.f.  resonance), 

the  corresponding  emission  probabilities  are  therefore 

(a>A-a)o)2  +  r*/4 


(14) 

where 
(15) 


b^a-(oo) 


(#«*'|2 


b^(oo)\^  =  \m^Y 


[((ox  -  <wo)a  -  r*/4  -  #2]2  +  r*(m  -o)0y' 


[{coa  -  o>i)2  -  r^/4  -  b"2]2  +  r2(o>0  -  o)o)z 


0)n  =  O), 


272 


6 


EFFECT   OF  RADIOFREQUENCY   RESONANCE   ON   THE   NATURAE  LINE   FORM 


[551] 


Similarly  for  the  condition  that  the  system  is  initially  in  the  state  /?0  at  time 
*=0, 


(16) 


m 


[{o)X  -  co0)2  -  r*/4  -  H*Y  +  r*(a>x  -  a>0)2  ' 

(ayo-cooy  +  r'l* 

[{coa  -  co'0y  -  T^/4  -  F2]2  +  r*{a>a  -  co0)2  ' 


The  effects  of  the  r.f .  field  on  the  emitted  spectral  lines  are  readily  seen  in 
the  solutions  (14)  and  (16).  They  persist  and  take  an  even  simpler  form  in  the 
case  of  equal  populations  (and  random  phase  difference)  in  the  levels  a  and  /?. 
In  this  case  the  emission  distribution  is  the  superposition  with  equal  weights 
of  the  distributions  for  the  pure  steady-state  solutions  where  the  components 
are  displaced  without  change  of  shape. 

Averaging  over  the  inital  states  and  summing  over  all  the  final  photon 
states  at  the  energy  tiwK ,  we  obtain  for  the  line  a  ->  a'  the  photon  frequency 
distribution 

(a>x  -  o)0)2  +  #2  +  T2/4 

w0)2* 


(17) 


P(COA)res  =  — 


4tt  [{(ox  -  co0)2  -  T2/4  -  #2]2  +  r*((ox 


The  similar  distribution  for  the  line  f$  ->/?'  is  obtained  by  replacing  co0  by  co0. 
The  corresponding  results  in  general,  i.e.,  not  restricted  to  r.f.  resonance,  are 


(18)  P(mx)  = 


a>x—a)0 


±71 


T  +  T  +  I  {(°  ~  W^)2+  Hi-(°>-  <°«J  (^A-«0-  ™**\ 


<ox— 0)Q 


0>  —  (O*8 


\2       1  3        1 

)____(co_^)2_^2 


+  r«uA-to0- 


co  —  (Oxfi 


and  the  similar  relation  for  the  line  (i  ->  ft'   obtained  by  replacing  co0  by 
a)a5,  —  co  and  changing  the  sign  of  the  last  term  in  the  numerator. 

Fig.  2  shows  the  behavior  of  the  emission  distribution  at  resonance,  for 
increasing  values  of  the  radiofrequency  field  amplitude.  When  the  field  ampli- 
tude is  sufficiently  large  that  the  angular  frequency  of  oscillation  between  a 
and  /?  is  comparable  to  the  decay  rate,  the  spectral  lines  a  ->  a'  and  ft  ->  /?' 
each  exhibit  two  peaks.  The  distribution  P(a>A)re,  is  the  superposition  of  two 
Lorentzian  (8)  components  of  equal  intensity,  and  widths  equal  to  r,  centered 
at  ft>0  ±  H . 


(8)  The  frequency  dependence  of  the  factor  (\Eaet-  \te(a>A)&Q  leads  to  asymmetry 
of  the  normal  line  (5).  For  the  frequencies  of  interest,  however,  because  of  r<eo0, 
we  make  a  negligible  error  by  replacing  this  factor  for  simplicity  by  its  value  at  the 


273 


[552J 


M.    N.    HACK    and   BI.    HAMERMESH 


One  verifies  further  that  the  splitting  of  the  spectral  lines  appears  only 
for  co  close  to  resonance.  As  the  relative  deviation  of  co  from  resonance  in- 
creases, both  lines  tend  to  their  natural  forms  (the  intensity  of  the  off-frequency 
component  drops  to  zero).  The  emission  distribution  near  resonance  in 
the  two-level  case  is   illustrated  in  Fig.  3. 


(1/2) 


PM2    ("*ks 


H  =  2T 


CO- 


CO =U)r 


Ct)-Ct)r  =  H 


Fig.  2.   -  Emission  distribution  P^co^) 
at    resonance  for  increasing  r.f.    ampli- 
tude. 


Fig.  3.  -  Emission  distribution   P^co^) 

for  fixed  R=\r  and  varying  deviation 

from  resonance. 


line  center.  At  large  wA  it  tends  to  zero  by  virtue  of  the  retardation,  as  required  for 
convergence  of  the  total  radiated  energy.  For  small  coA  (frequencies  up  to  and  even 
beyond  the  line  frequency)  it  has  the  approximate  value  jTco^/a)0. 


274 


EFFECT   OF  RADIO-FREQUENCY   RESONANCE   ON   THE    NATURAL  LINE   FORM  [553] 


3.  -  Arbitrary  number  of  levels. 

The  preceding  treatment  of  the. decay  from  two  levels  can  readily  be  ex- 
tended to  the  case  of  an  arbitrary  number  of  decaying  states  (9).  We  will 
show  that  the  splitting  of  spectral  lines  by  r.f .  fields  also  occurs  at  distinct  mul- 
tiple-quantum resonance  frequencies,  as  well  as  at  the  resonance  frequency 
in  the  case  of  equally  spaced  levels. 

For  this  purpose  we  consider  a  rotationally  invariant  system  which  inter- 
acts, through  magnetic  moments  yJt  and  ya/a,  with  an  external  magnetic 
field  consisting  of  a  constant  field  3^Q  and  a  perpendicular  rotating  field  of 
constant  amplitude  Jf  and  angular  velocity  co,  which  causes  transitions  be- 
tween the  levels  of  the  system  in  the  constant  field. 

Omitting  for  the  moment  the  interaction  with  the  radiation  field,  and 
choosing  the  z  direction  along  the  constant  field  and  the  x  axis  along  the 
direction  of  the  rotating  field  at  time  t  =  0,  we  have  for  the  Hamiltonian  of 
the  system 

(19)  8=H0  +  H', 
where 

(20)  H'=  {yxJx  +  yzJ^'W?  cos  cot)i  +  (^  sinco«)y] . 

H0  contains  the  interaction  with  the  constant  field  and  the  J,  -J2  interaction, 
and    commutes    with    the    z   -component    of    the    total    angular    momentum 

The  Schrodinger  equation  takes  on  a  more  convenient  form  if  we  transform 
to  the  co-ordinate  system  of  the  rotating  magnetic  field  (10)  by  means  of  the 
unitary  operator   U=  exp[iJsa>*/^].    Then 

(21)  <p  =  Uy>  =  exTp[iJzwtlfi]y) 
satisfies 

(22)  ih^  =  W<p, 


(9)  When  the  calculation  is  extended  in  addition  to  an  arbitrary  number  of  lower 
levels  to  which  a  given  state  can  decay,  the  decay  constants  combine  additively  to 
give  the  total  width  (5).  It  is  this  summation  which  leads  in  practice  to  the  (approx- 
imate) equality  of  lifetimes  of  the  decaying  states.  When  several  states  decay  to  the 
same  level,  cross  terms  appear  which  are  rapidly  oscillating  for  co  >  J*. 

(10)  I.  I.  Rabi,  N.  F.  Ramsey  and  J.  Schwinger:  Bev.  Mod.  Phys.,  26,  167  (1954). 


275 


[554]  m.  n.  hack  and  m.  hamermesh  9 

where  the  transformed  Hamiltonian 

(23)  W=H0-coJz+V 
with 

(24)  V=  yxJv>X+y%J*# 

is  independent  of  the  time. 

The  transformed  Schrodinger  equation'  (22)  has  steady-state  solutions 

(25)  cp  =  w-exp  [—  iwt]  . 

By  means  of  this  transformation,  the  problem  is  reduced  to  the  solution 
of  an  eigenvalue  problem.  As  in  the  two -level  case  treated  in  the  previous 
section,  the  introduction  of  the  decay  transitions  effectively  changes  w  accord- 
ing to 

(26)  w-+w-2r, 

where  r  is  the  decay  constant.  Here,  as  before,  we  consider  the  case  where 
all  levels  decay  at  the  same  rate.  In  this  case  the  eigenvalue  problem  is  the 
same  as  in  the  absence  of  decay.  (In  the  general  case,  the  effect  of  decay  is 
to  introduce  constants  }i/\,  HT2>  •••  into  the  diagonal  terms  of  the  eigen- 
value equations.    In  the  case  treated  here,  all  the  .T's  are  equal). 

For  well  separated  resonance  frequencies  and  for  a>  in  the  neighborhood 
of  a  resonance  frequency,  it  has  been  shown  (4)  that  the  eigenvalue  problem 
can  be  reduced  to  a  two-level  problem,  even  in  the  case  of  the  higher  order 
multiple-quantum  transitions. 

Equations  (1)  then  apply  directly,  with  H  replaced  by  an  expression  of 
the  type  of  higher  order  perturbation  theory,  (n)  and  o>  —  co^  replaced  by 
a  quantity  Q'  (12).  The  splitting  of  the  spectral  lines  thus  occurs  for  each  of 
the  resonance  frequencies,  including  the  ones  corresponding  to  multiple- quan- 
tum transitions.  Only  the  two  lines  emanating  from  the  particular  initial  and 
final  levels  of  the  given  resonance  transition  are  split  by  the  application  of 
the  r.f .  field.  This  follows  from  the  fact  that  only  these  levels  have  appreciable 
components  in  the  corresponding  steady-state  solutions  which  become  almost 
degenerate  at  the  given  resonance. 

The  opposite  case  of  equally  spaced  levels,  where  several  resonance  fre- 
quencies coincide,  can  be  treated  by  similar  methods.    Apart  from  the  field- 


(u)  M.  N.  Hack:  reference  (4),  eq.  (51)  for  8. 
(12)  M.  N.  Hack:  reference  (4),  eq.  (42),  (50),  (51). 


276 


10  EFFECT   OF   RADIOFREQUENCY   RESONANCE   ON    THE    NATURAL   LINE    FORM  [555] 

independent  term  of  w,  the  steady-state  solutions  for  this  case  (Majorana  case) 
can  be  expressed  in  the  form  (13) 

(27)  O£=d£.(0), 

(28)  wf  =  ju[{oj  —  wrY  +  4#2]*  , 
where 


{29a)  cosO  = 

{29b)  sin  d  = 


[{a)  —  (ory  +  4#2]* 

2H 

[(co  —  a)ry  +  4B"2]*  ' 


cor  =  yjJ^0,  2H  =  yjyf1  and  the  d(^m  are  representations  of  the  rotation  group. 
Applied  to  the  decay  problem,  they  lead  to   the  probability  amplitudes 

(30)  V»m  =  dfm  exp  {-  i(m[co  -  cor]  +  (x[{m  -  cor)2  +  4#2]*  -  \ir)t)  , 

(31)  &;(£(oo)  =  dfmHt 


coa  -  K  +  m[w  -  ojr]  +  j*[(a>  -  corY  +  4fl-2]*)  +  JiT ' 
In  the  case  of  equal  populations  and  random  phases,  this  gives 

(32)       p;>,)  =  ^7i£2I<U0)I2- 

1 

*{co7-  (co0  +  m[(o  -  ojr]  +  /x[{a7^1oJ*~+lH>¥)y  +  T2/4  ' 
i.e.,  a  superposition  of  normal  components  with  widths  r,  centers  at 

co0+7n[co  —  tor]+ix[{w  —  cor)24-4ff2]^,         ju  =  —  j,  —  7+1,  ...?, 

and  intensities  proportional  to  the  squares  of  the  coefficients  of  the  rotation 
matrices. 

In  this  case,  each  line  thus  splits  in  general  into  a  number  of  components 
equal  to  the  multiplicity  2j-\-l.  However,  in  certain  cases  fewer  components 
may  appear,  because  some  of  the  intensity  coefficients  vanish.  At  resonance 
{(o  =  cor),  this  occurs  when  the  multiplicity  is  odd,  for  the  central  level  (the 
next  to  last  and  alternate  components  are  absent)  and  besides  the  central 


(13)   H.  Sal  wen:  reference  (4),  eq.  (38),  (39). 


277 


[556] 


M.    N.   HACK   and   M.   HAMERMESH 


11 


level  for  all  the  alternate  levels  starting  from  the  next  to  last  (the  central 
component  is  absent). 


- 

ct)-(t)r*UH     r\ 

P(33/22W 

- 

0)-OJr  --2H    n  \       \ 

H-f 

- 

0)-Wr-H  //1Y\%" 

- 

0J=CJr  //// 

"* 

1        1        1       1        1 

1        1        1 

1        1        I 

0Jf 


*V3y 


a) 


Photon     frequency  tco^ 


Photon     frequency  ,  co* 

Fig.  4.  -  Emission  distribution  P^ioy^)  for  fixed  H=^T  and  varying  co>(or.  (a)  ra=f ; 
(6)  m=\.    The  corresponding  curves  for  co<cor  are  obtained  by  reflection  in  the  ver- 
tical axis  through  co0.    The  curves  for  negative  m  are  obtained  by  reflection  in  the 
same  axis  and  displacement  to  the  corresponding  mean  emission  frequency. 


In  the  particular  case  of  j  =  \,  eq.  (32)  reduces  to  eq.  (18)  ff.  (Figs.  2 
and  3).  The  graphs  of  P^ico^)  for  the  case  of  j  =  f  are  shown  in  Fig.  4a  and  b 
for  fixed  H  =  T/2. 


278 

12  EFFECT   OF   RADIOFREQUENCY  RESONANCE   ON   THE   NATURAL  LINE   FORM  [557) 


RIASSUNTO  (•) 


Si  determina  la  forma  delle  linee  di  Zeeman  in  presenza  di  un  campo  magnetico 
rotante  risonante  a  r.f.  Le  distribuzioni  della  emissions  spontanea  vengono  ottenute 
dalle  soluzioni  per  lo  stato  continuo,  e  portano  alia  predizione  della  scissione  delle  linee 
di  Zeeman  sia  per  frequenze  di  rotazione  pari  alle  ben  distinte  frequenze  di  riso- 
nanza  quantistiche  singole  e  multiple,  sia  per  la  frequenza  di  risonanza  nel  caso 
di  Majorana. 


(*)  Traduzione  a  cur  a  della  Redazione. 


279 


Volume  4,  Number  8 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


April  15,   I960 


RECOILLESS  RAYLEIGH  SCATTERING  IN  SOLIDS 

C.  Tzara  and  R.  Barloutaud 

Centre  d'  Etudes  Nucleai res  de  Saclay,  Gif-sur-Yvette  (Seine-et-Oise),  France 

(Received  March  21,  1960) 


Using  the  Mossbauer  effect,  photon  sources 
and  analyzers  extremely  selective  in  energy  are 
now  available.   We  study  here  with  such  an  ana- 
lyzer the  recoilless  Rayleigh  scattering  by  atoms 
in  solids. 

This  effect  is  related  to  the  x-ray  diffraction  by 
crystals  as  follows.    The  interference  at  the  ex- 
act Bragg  angles  occurs  when  the  scattering  is 
elastic  with  respect  to  the  lattice  as  a  whole, 
that  is,  without  any  phonon  exchange.    Debye  and 
Waller  have  calculated  the  reduction  in  intensity 
of  x  rays  scattered  at  the  Bragg  angles  in  a 
solid  at  temperature  T,1 

.x 


exp 


2   k6  L  4    x  •'o  eU  -  J' 


(1) 


where  x  =  T/Q,  d  is  the  Debye  temperature,  and 
ER  =  (E2/Mc2)  (1  -  cosfl)  is  the  recoil  energy 
given  to  the  free  atom  by  a  photon  of  energy  E 
scattered  at  the  angle  Q. 


In  the  present  work,  where  we  detect  the  elas- 
tic scattering  directly  by  an  energy  selection 
instead  of  analyzing  a  diffraction  pattern,  the 
factor  cpT  is  the  relative  number  of  photons  scat- 
tered without  energy  change.    It  is  clearly  the 
same  factor  which  gives  the  proportion  of  re- 
coilless y  rays  in  the  Mossbauer  effect2;  in  that 
czseER=E2/2Mc2  in  Eq.  (1). 

In  order  to  measure  the  factor  <p T,  we  have 
studied  the  Rayleigh  scattering  for  several  ma- 
terials:   Pt,  Al,  graphite,  and  paraffin.    The 
23.8-kev  photons  emitted  by  Sn119*  were  scat- 
tered at  50°  ±  5°  and  absorbed  by  a  Sn119  foil 
40  mg  cm"2  thick  (almos*  completely  black  for 
the  recoilless  photons3)  (Fig.  1).    The  scatterers' 
thicknesses  were  such  that  the  transmission  of 
the  y  rays  was  of  the  order  of  10%. 

The  Rayleigh- scattered  photons  are  accom- 
panied by  inelastically  scattered  photons  (Raman, 
Compton),  considerably  shifted  in  energy,  so 
that  the  selective  abs'orption  in  Sn119  occurs  only 


405 


280 

Volume  4,  Number  8  PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS  April  15,  1960 


Table  I.    Experimental  and  calculated  values  oi<pj 


Wet 


Pt 

1.05 

Al 

2.15 

C 

4.13 

CH, 

5.30 

calc 


0.27    ±0.03  0.72  ±0.09  0.80 

0,19    ±0.016  0.92±0.09  0.62 

0.10    ±0.01  0.79±0,09  0.68 

0.020  ±0.01  0 


FIG.   1.    (1)  Sn119*  source;  (2)  scatterer;  (3)  bismuth 
stopper;  (4)  40  mg  cm"2  Snm  foil  (71.5%  Sn119);  (5)  62 
mg  cm"2  Pd  foil  absorbing  Sn  x  rays;  (6)  1.5  mm 
Nal(Tl)  scintillator  and  photomultiplier. 


for  a  fraction  a  of  all  the  scattering  processes; 
a  is  extracted  from  the  form  factors  given  by 
Compton  and  Allison.4 

We  have  measured  the  relative  decrease  A  of 
counting  rate  between  room  temperature  T1  -  300°K 
and  T„  =  80°K.    The  recoilless  scattering  proportion 


T2 


I    A'€ 

a  f2-e 


where /2  is  the  ratio  of  recoilless  emission  of  the 
Sn119*  source  and  e  is  its  self- absorption  at  T2. 
Here /2  =  0.32 ±0.01 5  and  e  =  0.05±0.01.    We  neg- 
lect the  small  recoilless  emission  at  300°K  which 
introduces  a  negligible  correction  for  (pT  . 

The  results  are  given  in  Table  I.    The  agree- 
ment between  the  calculated  and  experimental 
values  of  <p  is  reasonably  good,  especially  when 


we  notice  that  the  Debye  temperatures  are  de- 
duced from  specific  heat  measurements  rather 
than  from  x-ray  diffraction. 

We  have  also,  using  a  thin  Sn119  foil  as  a  scat- 
terer, observed  at  low  temperature  the  resonant 
Mossbauer  scattering.5 

This  method  extends  the  range  of  solids  which 
can  be  studied  by  means  of  the  Mossbauer  effect 
or  by  x-ray  diffraction. 

It  is  a  pleasure  to  acknowledge  interesting  dis- 
cussions with  Dr.  Abragam,  Dr.  Cotton,  and 
Dr.  Jacrot. 


1I.  Waller,  Ann.  Physik  79,  261  (1926). 

2R.   L.  Mossbauer,   Z.  Physik  151,   124(1958). 

3R.  Barloutaud,   E.  Cotton,  J.  L.  Picou,  and  J. 
Quidort,  Compt.  rend.  250,  319(1960). 

*A.  K.  Compton  and  S.  K.  Allison,  X-Rays  in  Theory 
and  Experiment  (D.  Van  Nostrand  Company,  Inc., 
Princeton,  New  Jersey,   1947),  2nd  ed. ,  p.  781. 

5C.  Tzara  and  R.  Barloutaud,  Compt,  rend,  (to  be 
published). 


406 


281 


PHYSIQUE  NUCLEAIRE.  —  Sur  la  possibility  de  mettre  en  evidence  la  coherence 
de  phase  dans  la  diffusion  de  resonance  des  rayons  y  par  des  noyaux  ato- 
miques.  Note  de  M.  Alfred  Kastler,  presentee  par  M.  Gustave  Ribaud. 


Lorsque  la  diffusion  de  resonance  des  rayons  y  par  des  noyaux  atomiques  d'un 
rgseau  se  fait  sans  recul  du  noyau,  la  coherence  des  radiations  diffusees  doit  se 
manifester  par  une  repartition  d'intensite  analogue  a  celle  de  la  diffraction  des 
rayons  X  par  les  electrons  d'un  cristal. 

La  decouverte  faite  par  Mossbauer  (d)  que  des  rayons  y  de  faible  energie 
peuvent  etre  emis  ou  absorbes  par  des  noyaux  situes  dans  un  reseau 
cristallin  sans  perte  d'energie  due  au  recul  du  noyau,  a  souleve  un  interet 
considerable.  La  finesse  extraordinaire  des  rayons  y  obtenus  dans  ces 
conditions  permet  d'aborder  des  investigations  nouvelles  :  L'etude  de  la 
largeur  de  raie  par  analyse  cinetique  grace  a  l'effet  Doppler,  l'etude  par 
ce  meme  procede  de  la  structure  Zeeman  et  de  la  structure  hyperfine 
de  la  raie,  la  mise  en  evidence  par  une  experience  de  laboratoire  de  l'effet 
Einstein,  c'est-a-dire  de  la  difference  de  frequence  entre  deux  etalons 
identiques  liee  a  la  difference  de  potentiel  gravifique  (2).  D'autres  etudes, 
confinees  jusqu'a  present  au  domaine  optique  vont  pouvoir  etre  etendues 
au  domaine  des  rayons  y.  Citons  a  titre  d'exemples  les  mesures  de  varia- 
tion de  frequence  dans  la  diffusion  des  ondes  electromagnetiques  par  les 
ondes  d'agitation  thermique  (effet  Brillouin),  les  etudes  des  effets  de  pola- 
risation et  d'anisotropie  spatiale  des  radiations  de  resonance  lorsque 
emetteur  et  absorbant  sont  soumis  a  des  champs  magnetiques  de  directions 
variees  (3),  enfin  les  applications  des  methodes  optiques  de  spectroscopic 
des  radiofrequences  (4). 

Une  autre  question  interessante  va  pouvoir  recevoir  maintenant  une 
reponse  experimentale,  celle  de  savoir  si  les  radiations  de  resonance  electro- 
magnetiques diffusees  par  des  centres  resonnants  presentent  des  effets  de 
coherence  de  phase.  Une  telle  coherence  a  ete  explicitement  admise  par 
Weisskopf  (5).  Si  la  radiation  de  resonance  diffusee  est  totalement  inco- 
herente,  sa  repartition  spatiale  doit  etre  continue  et  conforme  aux  rela- 
tions de  correlation  angulaire  qui  ne  font  entrer  en  jeu  que  le  caractere 
multipolaire  de  la  transition  spectrale  et  les  nombres  de  spin  des  niveaux 
qui  bordent  la  transition.  Si,  au  contraire,  la  radiation  diffusee  est  partiel- 
lement  coherente,  comme  on  peut  le  supposer  pour  la  composante  Zeeman 
qui  ramene  le  noyau  au  niveau  magnetique  initial,  il  faut  s'attendre  a 
observer  des  effets  d'interferenCe.  Une  diffraction  selective  doit  se  faire 
dans  les  directions  de  von  Laue-Bragg,  ou  dans  celles  des  anneaux  de 
Debye-Scherrer,  suivant  que  la  matiere  diffusante  est  mono-  ou  poly- 
cristalline. 


282 


(   *   ) 

Dans  le  domaine  optique,  lorsqu'il  y  a  diffusion  resonnante  de  la  lumiere 
par  les  atomes  d'une  vapeur  sous  faible  densite,  la  lumiere  diffusee  ne 
presente  pas  de  caracteres  de  coherence.  Dans  ce  cas,  l'irregularite  des 
positions  des  centres  diffusants  et  les  fluctuations  de  densite  masquent 
completement  la  coherence  (si  elle  existe)  de  Facte  de  diffusion  elementaire 
(tout  comme  l'irregularite  des  mouvements  de  translation  de  ces  centres 
masque  la  finesse  «  naturelle  »  de  la  raie).  L'apparition,  aux  fortes  densites 
de  vapeur,  d'une  reflexion  reguliere  sur  la  face  d'entree  de  la  vapeur  (6) 
revele  la  coherence. 

Dans  le  cas  de  la  diffusion  resonnante  de  rayons  y  par  des  noyaux, 
le  caractere  quantique  du  phenomene  est  predominant.  Ce  caractere 
n'exclut  pas  les  proprietes  de  coherence.  Dans  le  cas  de  la  diffusion  de 
photons  y  par  les  noyaux  d'un  reseau,  le  noyau  diffusant  devient  identi- 
fiable lorsqu'il  recule  (par  exemple,  il  peut  quitter  un  noeud  du  reseau 
pour  se  mettre  en  position  interstitielle).  Dans  ce  cas,  la  faculte  d'inter- 
ference  du  photon  diffuse  se  trouve  detruite.  Mais  lorsqu'il  n'y  a  pas  de 
recul  nucleaire,  lorsque  c'est  le  reseau  tout  entier  qui  encaisse  la  quantite 
de  mouvement  du  recul,  le  noyau  diffusant  n'est  pas  identifiable.  Dans  ce 
cas,  la  coherence  de  phase  du  rayonnement  liee  a  l'arrangement  spatial 
periodique  des  centres  diffusants  doit  se  manifester. 

II  faut  remarquer  que  la  coherence  n'est  que  difficilement  observable 
lorsque  les  noyaux  diffusants  sont  ceux  d'un  isotope  irregulierement 
repartis  dans  un  melange  isotopique.  L'observation  de  la  coherence  par- 
faite  necessite  un  arrangement  spatial  regulier  des  noyaux  diffusants,  done 
Femploi  d'un  cristal  forme  d'un  isotope  pur  ou  fortement  concentre. 
Lorsqu'on  ajoute  a  cet  isotope  actif  des  proportions  croissantes  d'isotopes 
inactifs  dans  le  reseau,  l'intensite  des  raies  de  diffraction  diminue  au  profit 
du  fond  continu  incoherent  et  le  contraste  se  trouve  affaibli. 

II  faut  pouvoir  distinguer  la  diffusion  de  resonance  nucleaire  coherente 
de  la  diffusion  normale,  egalement  coherente,  par  les  electrons  des  atomes 
du  reseau.  Dans  le  cas  de  57Fe,  ce  dernier  phenomene  est  d'ailleurs  d'inten- 
site  negligeable  (7).  Les  deux  effets  sont  separables  en  comparant  l'in- 
tensite diffusee  avec  une  source  immobile  et  une  source  mobile.  Le  mou- 
vement de  la  source  permet  de  supprimer  la  resonance  nucleaire,  il  ne 
modifie  pas  l'intensite  de  la  diffusion  des  rayons  y  par  les  electrons.  II  est 
a  prevoir  que  la  diffraction  nucleaire  donne  des  raies  de  diffraction  beau- 
coup  plus  fines  que  la  diffraction  electronique  a  cause  de  la  grande  finesse 
spectrale  des  radiations  de  resonance  nucleaire.  La  localisation  precise  des 
noyaux  dans  le  reseau  donne  lieu  a  des  caracteres  particuliers  :  les  franges 
d'interference   d'ordres   eleves   doivent   etre  intenses. 

II  faut  noter  qu'un  cristal  emetteur  de  substance-fille  (57Fe)  conte- 
nant  des  noyaux  emetteurs  de  substance-mere  (57Co)  donne  lieu  au  pheno- 
mene d'autodiffusion  dont  la  coherence  peut  se  manifester  par  des  lignes 
de  Kossel  (8). 


283 


(  3   ) 

(*)  R.  J.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Physik,  151,  1958,  p.  124;  Naturwissenschaften,  45,  1958, 
p.  538;  Z.  Nalurforschung,  14  a,  1959,  p.  538. 

(2)  Craig,  Dash,  Mc  Guire,  Nagle  et  Reiswig,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.,  3,  1959,  p.  221; 
Lee,  Meyer-Schutzmeister,  Schiffer  et  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.,  3,  1959,  p.  223; 
R.  V.  Pound  et  G.  A.  Rebka,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.,  3,  1959,  p.  43g  et  554;  J-  P-  Schiffer 
et  W.  Marshall,  Physik.  Rev.  Lett,  3,  1959,  p.  556. 

(3)  A.  C.  Mitchell  et  M.  W.  Zemansky,  Resonance  Radiation  and  Excited  Atoms, 
Cambridge,  University  Press,  1934;  P.  Pringsheim,  Fluorescence  and  Phosphorescence, 
Interscience,  1949. 

(*)  A.  Kastler,  Nuovo  Cimento,  6,   1957,  Supplemento  n°  3,  p.   11 48. 

(8)  V.  Weisskopf,  Ann.  Phys.,  9,   1939,  p.   23  (voir  particulierement  p.   25-26). 

(6)  R.  W.  Wood,  Physical  Optics,  Mac  Millan,  New- York,  3*  ed.,  1934,  p.  534;  J.  L. 
Cojan,  These,  Paris,  1953,  Ann.  Phys.,  9,  1954,  p.  385. 

(7)  S.  S.  Hanna  et  coll.,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett,  4,  i960,  p.  28. 

(8)  W.  Kossel  et  H.  Voges,  Ann.  Physik,  23,  1935,  p.  677. 

(Laboratoire  de  Physique  de  I'Ecole  Normale  Superieure, 
24,  rue  Lhomond,  Paris,  5e.) 


284 


Resonant  Scattering  of  the  14-keV.  lron-57 

y-Ray,  and  its  Interference  with  Rayleigh 

Scattering 

When  radiation  is  scattered  by  a  resonator,  the 
question  of  its  identity  of  frequency  and  coherence  of 
phase  with  the  incident  radiation  is  not  simply 
answered  except  for  an  infinitely  narrow  incident 
line,  when  the  scattering  is  fully  coherent  (see,  for 
example,  the  discussion  by  Heitler1,  written  in  the 
context  of  atomic  resonances  but  equally  relevant  to 
nuclear  ones). 

Coherence  may  be  experimentally  proved  by 
observing  interference  between  the  resonance  radiation 
and  some  other  form  of  scattering  that  is  known  to  be 
coherent  ;  for  y-rays,  one  would  naturally  look  for 
interference  with  the  Rayleigh  (elastic  electronic) 
scattering.  In  the  long-studied  411  keV.  resonance  of 
mercury- 198,  such  interference  is  unobservable2, 
because  of  the  thermal  broadening  of  the  line  as 
well  as  for  other  reasons.  It  might  just  be  observable 
in  samarium- 152,  where  the  natural  width  of  the 
961-keV.  line  is  not  completely  negligible3,4  in  com- 
parison with  the  thermal  ;  but  the  best  conditions 
appear  to  be  provided  by  the  very  narrow  low- 
energy  lines  discovered  by  Mossbauer5  in  which  a 
substantial  part  of  the  radiation  is  unaffected  by 
recoil  or  thermal  broadening. 

After  preliminary  experiments  in  collaboration 
with  Dr.  B.  S.  Sood,  in  which  the  resonant  scattering 
in  metallic  iron  of  the  14-keV.  line  of  iron-57  was 
found  to  have  the  expected  intensity,  we  decided 
that  a  foil  of  65  per  cent  iron-57,  electroplated  on 
thin  copper  by  the  Isotope  Division,  Atomic  Energy 
Research  Establishment,  Harwell,  would  give  com- 
parable amplitudes  of  resonant  and  Rayleigh  scatter- 
ing at  convenient  angles.  We  in  fact  chose  an  angle 
of  43  ±  2°,  which  would  include  the  (211)  Bragg 
reflexion.  The  geometry  of  the  apparatus  is  indicated 
in  Fig.  1  ;  the  source6,  about  20  mc.  of  cobalt-57  in  a 
matrix  of  iron- 56,  was  mounted  on  a  30  c.p.s.  vibrator 
so  that  the  exact  energy  of  the  emitted  radiation 
could  be  oscillated  through  the  resonant  energy. 
Auxiliary  apparatus  enabled  the  intensity  of  trans- 
mission through,  or  scattering  from,  the  foil  to  be 
plotted  automatically  as  a  function  of  speed,  the 
abscissae    of    the    resultant     graphs     extending    over 


285 


*&^^&$ 


>» ~* «. 


IV 


5  cm. 


Fig.  1.  Diagram  of  experimental  arrangement.  B,  vibrator; 
S,  source  ;  C,  proportional  counter  ;  F,  iron  foil.  The  shaded 
blocks  are  heavy  alloy  shielding.  The  different  positions  of  the 
source  and  vibrator  are  :  I,  for  scattering  ;  II,  for  transmission ; 
III  and  IV,  for  checking  absence  of  shift  in  transmission 


12,000 


11,000    - 


3  10,000 

»      3,000 


2,500 


2,000 


cpoo^ 


cP°° 


o°o 


-2  0  +2      +6 

4  +4 


+  81  +  8 


+  6       +2  0 
+  4 


Velocity  of  source  (10-2  cm./sec.) 

Fig.  2.  Plots  of  intensity  versus  velocity  for  transmission  (dots) 
and  scattering  (circles).  The  zero  of  the  velocity  scale  is  fixed 
only  by  the  position  of  the  transmission  minima.  Positive 
velocities  are  for  the  source  approaching  the  foil.  The  position 
M  on  the  velocity  scale  is  the  point  at  which  the  acceleration 
reverses 


rather  more  than  half  a  cycle  of  vibration,  so  that 
passages  through  zero  velocity  in  both  senses  of 
acceleration  were  displayed. 

Fig.  2  shows  the  transmission  minima  and  scattering 
maxima  obtained  ;  it  will  be  seen  that  the  scattering 
peaks  are  somewhat  broader  and  slightly  nearer  to 
one  another  than  are  the  absorption  minima. 

The  reduced  separation  of  the  peaks  was,  however, 
due  entirely  to  the  shift  of  one  of  them  ;  presumably 
the  whole  pattern  had  suffered  an  instrumental  drift 


286 

26,000 


23,000 


»  '20,000 
|      8,000 

O 
O 


7,000 


6,000 


0^0 


000° 


^oo%*P*W 


j_L 


+4+2  0-2-4-6   -8  M-S    -6-4-2  0+2+4  +  6 
Velocity  of  source  (10~2  cm./sec.) 

Fig.  3.  Plots  of  intensity  versus  velocity  for  a  separate  experiment 

in  which,  as  indicated  on  the  velocity  scale,  negative  velocities 

are  displayed  in  the  centre 


during  the  long  periods  of  operation  that  were 
necessary.  We  repeated  the  measurements  with  the 
apparatus  set  to  display  negative,  instead  of  positive, 
speeds  at  the  centre,  alternating  transmission  and 
scattering  measurements  and  adding  the  results  of  all 
sets  of  each  kind.  Fig.  3  shows  that  the  peaks  now 
appeared,  as  expected,  more  widely  spaced  than  the 
dips,  with  no  evidence  of  general  drift.  Thus,  assuming 
the  transmission  dips  to  occur  at  exactly  zero  velocity, 
we  can  say  that  the  maximum  scattering  occurs  when 
the  source  is  approaching  the  scatterer  with  a  velocity 
corresponding  to  a  fraction  of  the  line-width. 

It  remains  to  verify  that  the  dips  correspond 
precisely  to  zero  velocity  ;  this  need  not  be  so  if 
source  and  scatterer  materials  are  not  identical.  This 
point  was  checked  at  the  suggestion  of  Mr.  D.  A. 
O'Connor,  by  successive  transmission  experiments 
with  the  source  assembly  set  in  the  positions  marked 
III  and  IV  in  Fig.  1  ;  this  amounts  to  reversing  the 
velocity-scale  about  the  true  zero.  No  change  in  the 
dip  position  was  found. 

If  there  is  some  coherence  of  phase  between 
resonant  and  Rayleigh  scattering,  we  should  expect 
them  to  be  in  quadrature  at  exact  resonance,  moving 
towards  coincidence  of  phase  on  the  high-frequency 
side.  Thus,  on  top  of  the  constant  intensity  of  the 
Rayleigh  and  the  sharply  peaked  contour  of  the 
resonant  scattering,  there  should  be  added  a  dis- 
persion-type curve  representing  the  interference 
between  them,  with  its  maximum  a  fraction  of  a 
line-width  to  the  positive  side  of  zero  velocity.    The 


287 


observed  shift  and  broadening  are  probably  to  be 
explained  in  terms  of  such  coherence,  but  the  measure- 
ments are  not  yet  detailed  enough  to  show  clearly 
the  asymmetry  of  line-shape  that  is  also  to  be  expected 
or  to  determine  what  percentage  of  coherence  exists  ; 
full  coherence  is  not  to  be  expected  when  the  incident 
line  is  of  similar  breadth  to  that  of  the  resonance. 

We  have  also  observed  the  resonant  scattering 
from  ordinary  iron  (2-2  per  cent  iron-57)  at  a  mean 
angle  of  90°,  in  the  presence  of  a  relatively  large 
intensity  of  Rayleigh  scattering.  We  found  neither 
shift  nor  broadening  of  the  scattering  resonance, 
which  is  consistent  with  the  expectation  that,  at  this 
angle  of  scattering  in  a  magnetic  dipole  transition, 
the  resonant  component  will  be  polarized  at  right 
angles  to  the  Rayleigh. 

It  is  to  be  expected  that  the  narrow -line  resonance 
radiation  will  show,  in  its  scattering  from  crystals 
containing  iron-57,  interference  phenomena  similar  to 
those  of  X-rays.  Interesting  differences  may  arise 
from  the  resonant  absorption  which  accompanies  the 
scattering,  from  the  narrowness  of  the  line  as  com- 
pared with  X-ray  lines,  and  from  the  simple  way  in 
which  the  exact  energy,  and  with  it  the  phase  of  the 
resonant  scattering,  may  be  varied. 

P.  J.  Black 
P.  B.  Moon 

Department  of  Physics, 
University  of  Birmingham. 

1Heitler,  W.,  "The  Quantum  Theory  of  Radiation",  chap.  3  (Oxford 

Univ.  Press,  1944). 
*  Moon,  P.  B.,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc,  A,  63,  1189  (1950). 
8  Grodzins,  L.,  Phys.  Rev.,  109,  1014  (1958). 
4  Moon,  P.  B.,  and  Sood,  B.  S.,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  A,  257,  44  (1960). 
•Mossbauer,  Pv.  L.,  Z.  Phys.,  151,  124  (1958);    Naturwiss.,  45,  538 

(1958). 
•Chackett,  G.  A.,  Chackett,  K.  F.,  and  Singh,  B.,  J.  Inorg.  Nucl. 

Chem.,  14,  138  (1960). 


288 


The  Mbssbauer  Effect  in  Tin  from  120  °k  to  the  Melting  Point 

By  A.  J.   F.   BOYLE,   D.    St.   P.   BUNBURY,  C.   EDWARDS   and 

H.   E.   HALL 

The  Physical  Laboratories,  University  of  Manchester 
Communicated  by  B.  H.  Flowers;  MS.  received  \%th  June  1960 

Abstract.  Measurements  have  been  made  of  the  intensity  of  the  recoilless 
resonance  absorption  of  the  24  kev  y-ray  from  the  decay  of  119Snm  in  metallic 
tin  from  120°k  to  the  melting  point.  Values  of  the  Debye-Waller  factor  deduced 
from  these  results  tend  towards  the  values  calculated  for  a  Debye  0  of  142  °k 
at  low  temperatures;  the  behaviour  of  the  Debye-Waller  factor  at  higher 
temperatures  indicates  considerable  anharmonicity  of  the  lattice  vibrations. 
Comparison  with  evidence  from  the  thermal  expansion  and  specific  heat  suggests 
that  the  quartic  term  in  the  interatomic  potential  is  positive,  and  that  the  ratio  of 
quartic  to  cubic  terms  is  of  the  same  order  as  the  ratio  of  cubic  to  quadratic  terms. 

In  the  last  few  degrees  below  the  melting  point  the  resonance  absorption  shows 
a  rapid  drop  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  line  width.  It  is  suggested  that  this 
effect  is  due  to  enhanced  self-diffusion  in  the  solid,  and  it  is  estimated  that  the 
diffusion  coefficient  reaches  a  value  of  10-8cm2sec-1  about  0-6°k  below  the 
melting  point. 


§  1.  Introduction 

Th  e  primary  purpose  of  the  experiments  to  be  described  in  this  paper  was 
to  investigate  the  way  in  which  the  recoilless  y  emission  discovered  by 
Mossbauer  (1958)  is  affected  by  the  transition  from  solid  to  liquid;  for 
this  purpose  the  24  kev  y-ray  of  119Snm  in  metallic  tin  was  used.  The  experiments 
show  that  the  effect  disappears  continuously  in  the  last  few  degrees  below  the 
melting  point,  and  this  result  is  attributed  to  self- diffusion  in  the  solid.  In 
addition,  measurements  of  the  intensity  of  the  effect  down  to  liquid  air  tempera- 
tures have  yielded  some  information  about  the  nature  of  the  atomic  vibrations  in 
tin. 

For  the  purpose  of  this  paper  it  is  convenient  to  express  the  emission  of  y-rays 
from  a  solid  in  a  way  analogous  to  the  elegant  result  derived  by  Van  Hove  (1954) 
for  the  scattering  of  x-rays  or  neutrons  by  an  assembly  of  atoms.  Van  Hove 
shows  that  the  differential  cross  section  for  scattering  with  momentum  change 
fix,  and  energy  change  ha*  is  proportional  to  a  quantity  »S(x,  a>)  which  is  the  Fourier 
transform  in  space  and  time  of  a  time  dependent  pair  correlation  function. 
S(x,  a>)  is  given  by 

S(x,a>)=J-r    e^/Bexpt-m.r^jexptm.r^)]),      (1) 

^7r  J  —  oo  ij 

where  rt(t)  is  the  Heisenberg  position  operator  of  the  ith  atom  and  the  symbol  (  ) 


289 


130         A.  J.  F.  Boyle,  D.  St.  P.  Bunbury,  C.  Edwards  and  H.  E.  Hall 

denotes  an  average  value  in  thermal  equilibrium.  For  emission  of  a  y-ray  from 
a  given  atom  the  equivalent  result  (Marshall  and  Schiffer,  private  communication) 
is  that  the  probability  of  the  emitted  y-ray  having  wave  number  k  is 

P(k)=  o-  P    exP  [ic{k-K)t]  exp  (-  £ry|*|)<exp[-xk.  r(t)]  exp  [ik.  r(0)]></f, 

^J     -00 

(2) 

where  hck0  is  the  energy  of  the  y  transition  and  Fy  its  width.  The  correlations 
in  (e"-*k-r(/)e*k-r(0))  at  small  times  give  the  emission  of  y-rays  with  recoil;  at  large 
times  this  factor  tends  asymptotically  to 

exp(-2W0  =  exp(-*V),  (3) 

where  x2  is  the  mean  square  displacement  of  the  atom  (assumed  Gaussian)  in  the 
direction  of  emission  of  the  y-ray.  The  factor  (3)  is  the  Debye-Waller  factor, 
familiar  in  x-ray  crystallography,  and  from  Eqn  (2)  we  see  that  this  fraction 
of  the  y-rays  is  emitted  as  a  sharp  line  with  the  energy  and  width  of  the  nuclear 
transition.  The  cross  section  for  resonance  absorption  is  likewise  multiplied 
by  this  factor.     For  a  Debye  solid 

where  Ey  is  the  energy  of  the  y-ray  and  M  the  mass  of  the  emitting  atom. 

§  2.  Experimental  Method 

The  resonance  absorption  was  measured  by  moving  the  source  so  as  to  destroy 
the  resonance  by  the  Doppler  effect.  The  source  was  driven  by  a  flat-topped 
saw-tooth  waveform,  so  that  it  was  stationary  and  moving  for  equal  periods  of 
time;  a  feedback  amplifier  was  used  to  ensure  that  the  motion  of  the  source 
followed  the  driving  waveform.  Pulses  from  a  scintillation  counter  were  passed 
through  a  single-channel  pulse  height  analyser  and  then  gated  into  separate 
counting  channels  for  the  stationary  and  moving  periods ;  the  counting  rate  was 
obtained  by  simultaneously  gating  pulses  from  a  standard  oscillator.  The 
velocity  in  the  moving  part  of  the  waveform  was  such  as  to  shift  the  emission  line 
off  resonance  by  about  ten  half-widths.  This  velocity  was  calculated  from  the 
frequency  of  the  driving  waveform  and  the  amplitude  of  motion  (about  0-2  mm, 
measured  with  a  micrometer-eyepiece  microscope). 

To  obtain  maximum  recoilless  emission  the  source  was  maintained  within  a 
few  degrees  of  liquid  air  temperature  throughout  the  experiments,  by  enclosing 
it  in  a  chamber  surrounded  by  liquid  air.  The  absorber  was  situated  in  the 
vacuum  space  below  this  liquid  air  vessel.  It  was  held  between  graphite  disks 
clamped  in  an  aluminium  ring ;  the  graphite  disks  were  machined  so  as  to  preserve 
the  shape  of  the  absorber  when  it  was  melted.  Palladium  foils  placed  on  either 
side  of  the  absorber  served  both  to  absorb  unwanted  x-rays  and  as  thermal 
radiation  shields.  Absorber  temperatures  above  room  temperature  were  obtained 
by  electrical  heating;  for  temperatures  below  room  temperature  the  absorber 
was  connected  thermally  to  the  liquid  air  vessel,  and  electrical  heating  was  again 
used  to  obtain  temperatures  up  to  room  temperature.  The  temperatures  of 
source  and  absorber  were  measured  by  copper-constantan  thermocouples  in 
contact  with  them ;  the  thermocouples  were  calibrated  in  liquid  nitrogen  and  at 
the  melting  point  of  tin. 


290 


The  Mossbauer  Effect  in  Tin 


131 


Since  the  temperatures  of  source  and  absorber  were  normally  different,  a 
small  correction  had  to  be  made  to  the  results  to  allow  for  the  thermal  shift 
reported  previously  (Boyle  et  al.  1960) ;  this  never  amounted  to  more  than  7%. 
The  apparent  absorption  actually  measured  was  less  than  the  true  absorption 
because  of  the  finite  source  velocity  used ;  this  factor  was  allowed  for  in  the  sub- 
sequent reduction  of  the  results. 

§  3.  The  Debye- Waller  Factor 

To  convert  the  measured  absorptions  into  values  of  the  Debye- Waller  factor 
it  was  necessary  to  know  the  fraction  of  recoilless  y-rays  emitted  by  the  source. 
To  this  end  measurements  were  made  with  three  absorber  thicknesses  of 
approximately  0-001  in.,  0-003  in.  and  0-008  in.  After  correcting  for  back- 
ground to  the  24  kev  photopeak  passed  by  the  single-channel  analyser  and  for  the 
thermal  shift,  the  values  of  absorption  as  a  function  of  absorber  thickness  were 
plotted  on  double  logarithmic  graph  paper  for  six  selected  temperatures.  These 
six  sets  of  three  points  could  then  be  compared  with  a  calculated  curve  of  apparent 
fraction  of  recoilless  y-rays  absorbed  as  a  function  of  na0e~2W,  where  n  is  the 
number  of  atoms  per  cm2,  and  a0  is  the  absorption  cross  section  at  resonance.  In 
this  way  six  values  of  the  fraction  of  recoilless  y-rays  emitted  by  the  source  were 
obtained;  they  agreed  within  the  experimental  error  and  had  a  mean  value  of 
19-4%.  All  the  results  could  then  be  expressed  as  fractions  of  recoilless  y-rays 
absorbed,  and  using  the  known  value  of  a0  and  the  measured  values  of  «,  e~2W 
could  be  found  from  the  theoretical  absorption  curve.  The  results  are  shown  as 
a  function  of  temperature  in  Fig.  1.  A  slight  extrapolation  of  these  results 
yields  an  expected  Debye- Waller  factor  for  the  source  of  40%  ;  after  correction 
for  self-absorption  due  to  finite  source  thickness  we  expect  a  recoilless  emission 
of  23%.  The  presence  of  113In  K  x-rays  in  the  source  could  account  for  the 
difference  between  this  value  and  the  directly  measured  value  of  19-4%;  this 
latter  estimate  is  probably  about  10%  too  low,  however,  because  of  broadening 


200  300 

Temperature  (\) 


Fig.  1.  Temperature  dependence  of  the  Debye-Waller  factor.  Broken  line,  Eqn  (5) 
for  0=142°k;  chain  curve,  corrected  for  change  in  0  due  to  thermal  expansion; 
full  curve,  corrected  for  change  in  0  due  to  thermal  expansion,  and  for  the  effect 
of  anharmonicity  at  constant  volume. 


291 

132         A.  J.  F.  Boyle,  D.  St.  P.  Bunbury,  C.  Edwards  and  H.  E.  Hall 

of  the  emission  line  by  self-absorption.  Fortunately,  the  corresponding  error 
in  our  values  of  the  Debye- Waller  factor  for  the  absorber  is  of  second  order  in  the 
source  and  absorber  broadenings,  and  is  probably  less  than  1%. 

For  T>\®  the  high  temperature  approximation  to  Eqn  (4)  is  not  in 
error  by  more  than  7%,  and  we  may  put 

-       37?  2T 

2W=kV=w  (5) 

The  broken  line  in  Fig.  1  represents  Eqn  (5)  with  0  =  142°k.  Measure- 
ments of  the  specific  heat  of  tin  indicate  a  Debye  0  of  195  °k  below  2°k,  but  the 
effective  value  of  0  falls  rapidly  to  a  minimum  of  125 °K  at  about  12°k.  In  view 
of  these  large  deviations  from  the  Debye  law,  an  effective  0  of  142°k  for  the 
Debye- Waller  factor  does  not  seem  unreasonable.  But  the  experimental  results 
deviate  more  and  more  from  the  linear  law  of  Eqn  (5)  as  the  temperature 
rises.  The  result  x2ozT  at  high  temperatures  depends  only  on  the  assumption 
of  harmonic  forces ;  an  explanation  of  the  non-linear  relation  between  W  and  T 
shown  in  Fig.  1  must  therefore  be  sought  in  terms  of  anharmonicity  of  the 
lattice  vibrations. 

Anharmonicity  can  affect  x2  in  two  ways.  First,  the  effective  Debye  0  will 
be  altered  by  thermal  expansion;  this  is  the  effect  considered  by  Zener  and 
Bilinsky  (1936).  If  we  assume  that  all  lattice  frequencies  are  changed  in  the 
same  proportion  by  expansion 

31n0  _    VP  ,,v 

aTnT~c^'  {} 

where  /3  is  the  coefficient  of  cubic  expansion  and  K  is  the  isothermal  com- 
pressibility.    From  Eqn  (6)  we  have 

^ln0       VjP_ 
dT        CVK'  {) 

and  if  we  further  assume  Gruneisen's  law  that  jSocCv 

-(I)  -  *©7> 

=  S(r-5e>  <8> 

since  the  specific  heat  is  almost  classical  in  the  temperature  range  with  which  we 
are  concerned.  If  we  insert  numbers  into  Eqn  (8)  we  find  that  the  value  of 
x2  given  by  Eqn  (5)  has  to  be  increased  by  a  fraction  (2-63  x  10_4)(r  — 10); 
values  thus  corrected  are  shown  by  the  chain  line  in  Fig.  1.  It  can  be  seen  that 
this  correction  is  too  small  by  a  factor  of  more  than  3  to  account  for  the  experi- 
mental results.  The  correction  is  not  very  certain  because  we  have,  for  example, 
ignored  the  very  large  anisotropy  in  the  thermal  expansion  of  tin ;  but  it  seems 
most  unlikely  that  our  estimate  could  be  in  error  by  so  large  a  factor,  and  there  is 
indeed  a  second  mechanism  by  which  anharmonicity  can  increase  x2.  Even  at 
constant  volume  x2  is  not  proportional  to  T  at  high  temperatures  if  the  forces  are 
anharmonic.  To  estimate  the  magnitude  of  this  effect  consider  a  particle  bound 
in  the  one- dimensional  potential 

V(x)  =  %ax2  +  bx3  +  cx*;  (9) 


292 

The  Mossbauer  Effect  in  Tin  133 

it  is  then  easily  shown  that  in  classical  conditions  (cf.  Peierls  1956)  the  specific 
heat  is,  including  only  the  lowest  order  corrections, 

"-"■{'♦?[-©'-<©]} <■•> 

and  the  mean  square  displacement  is 

-tKtW"12©]}-       j <"> 

This  model  therefore  leads  us  to  expect  a  fractional  deviation  in  x2  about  three 
times  that  in  the  specific  heat ;  more  or  less  according  to  the  sign  and  magnitude 
of  the  quartic  term  in  the  potential.  The  measured  expansion  coefficient  and 
specific  heat  of  tin  show  that  the  fractional  excess  in  Cv  at  high  temperatures, 
excluding  the  electronic  specific  heat,  is  moderately  well  represented  by 

Af 

=1  =  1-38  x  10-*(T-  50).  (12) 

Cv 

If  a  correction  of  4-5  times  this  amount  is  added  to  the  previous  correction  to  the 
value  of  ^calculated  from  Eqn  (5)  we  obtain  the  full  curve  of  Fig.  1,  which 
is  in  excellent  agreement  with  the  experimental  results.  This  factor  of  4-5 
implies  that  in  Eqn  (9) 

5-K9'-  <13> 

In  view  of  the  grossly  over-simplified  model  used  to  derive  this  result  too  much 
significance  should  not  be  attached  to  it;  but  it  is  perhaps  worth  pointing  out 
that  for  a  12-6  interatomic  potential  ac/b2=  1-26. 

§  4.  Diffusion  near  the  Melting  Point 

Experimental  values  of  absorption  in  the  0-008  in.  absorber  near  the  melting 
point  are  shown  in  Fig.  2.  The  full  line  corresponds  to  the  full  curve  of  Fig.  1. 
It  is  clear  that  there  is  a  significant  decrease  in  resonance  absorption  below 
the  value  expected  from  the  Debye- Waller  factor  in  the  last  few  degrees  below 
the  melting  point.  Measurements  of  line  width  were  also  made  at  temperatures 
approximately  0-8  and  8°k  below  the  melting  point,  by  taking  additional  readings 
with  a  source  velocity  corresponding  approximately  to  the  half- width;  it  was 
found  that  0-8 °k  below  the  melting  point  the  width  of  the  absorption  line  had 
increased  by  a  factor  of  l'97j;J:||. 

To  see  how  such  an  effect  might  arise,  consider  the  effect  of  diffusion  on  the 
factor  (e~*-r(')e*lc-r(0))  in  Eqn  (2).  In  an  ideal  lattice  this  tends  asympto- 
tically to  e~2W  at  infinite  time,  but  if  any  diffusion  occurs  this  is  no  longer  true. 
In  fact,  the  wavelength  of  24kev  y-rays  is  sufficiently  short  that  if  the  atom  has 
jumped  to  another  lattice  site  at  time  t,  (e_lkr(<)>  is  effectively  zero.  The  value 
of  ^e_ik r(0eikr(0))  is  thus  the  value  in  the  absence  of  diffusion  multiplied  by  the 
chance  that  the  atom  concerned  has  not  diffused  from  its  original  lattice  site,  i.e. 

(e-*K0e*K0))^e-2prexp[-rD|f|],  (14) 

where  rD  is  the  mean  jump  frequency  of  the  atoms  in  the  diffusion  process. 
Eqn  (2)  thus  becomes 


p{k) 


-If"     exp  [ic(k  -ka)t]  exp  [(|ry  +  rD)|*|]e-^A (15) 


293 


134         A.  J.  F.  Boyle,  D.  St.  P.  Bunbury,  C.  Edwards  and  H.  E.  Hall 

The  effect  of  diffusion  is  thus  to  increase  the  width  of  the  absorption  line  by  a 
factor  (ry  +  2rD)/ry  and  thus  to  reduce  its  maximum  height  by  the  same  factor. 
When  this  absorption  line  is  folded  with  the  emission  line  of  width  \Ty,  we  find 
that  the  actual  reduction  in  resonant  absorption  is  by  a  factor  (ry  +  rD)/ry. 


-w-v^- 


T-Tm  (°K) 


W^-^H-o- 


Fig.  2.    Resonance  absorption  in  the  0-008  in.  absorber  near  the  melting  point. 
The  full  line  corresponds  to  the  full  curve  in  Fig.  1 . 


Fig.  3.  Diffusion  near  the  melting  point.  The  point  marked  by  a  circle  was  deduced 
from  the  width  of  the  resonance  absorption,  and  the  other  points  from  its  amplitude 
(Fig.  2). 


Values  of  2rD/ry  calculated  from  the  measured  reduction  in  absorption  are  shown 
in  Fig.  3  ;  a  point  calculated  from  the  change  in  line  width  is  also  shown ;  the 
agreement  with  the  other  points  provides  some  confirmation  of  Eqn  (15). 
The  diffusion  coefficient  D  may  be  estimated  from  the  relation  for  a  random  walk 
in  three  dimensions 

rD  =  6D/S2,  (16) 

where  8  is  the  step  length.  A  tin  atom  has  four  nearest  neighbours  at  3-02  A,  and 
two  others  at  3T6  A.  We  therefore  have  taken  a  mean  value  of  3T  A  to  obtain  the 
approximate  values  of  diffusion  coefficient  indicated  on  the  right-hand  ordinate  of 
Fig.  3.  Measurements  of  self- diffusion  in  tin  (Fensham  1950)  only  extend  up  to 
223- 1°k  (8-8°k  below  the  melting  point),  where  Z>=2-65  x  lO"10  cm2  sec"1  along  the 
tetrad  axis  and  Z)  =  0-93  x  10~10  cm2  sec-1  perpendicular  to  it.  Our  results  could 
reasonably  be  extrapolated  to  join  these  smoothly,  but  they  indicate  a  greatly 
accelerated  rise  in  diffusion  near  the  melting  point.  Such  an  effect  has  been  found 
by  conventional  methods  in  indium  close  to  the  melting  point  by  Eckert  and 
Drickamer  (1951).   This  encourages  us  to  believe  that  our  proposed  explanation  of 


294 

The  Mossbauer  Effect  in  Tin  135 

the  behaviour  of  the  Mossbauer  effect  near  the  melting  point  is  indeed  correct.  We 
may  also  mention  that  very  rapid  recrystallization  of  an  unmelted  absorber  foil 
was  observed  at  temperatures  where  the  Mossbauer  effect  was  reduced. 

§  5.  Conclusion 

Our  experiments  show  that  the  intensity  of  the  Mossbauer  effect  is  essentially 
determined  by  the  mean  square  displacement  of  the  emitting  atom  during  the 
lifetime  of  the  excited  state,  in  accordance  with  Eqn  (2).  The  effect  of 
diffusion  may  be  thought  of  crudely  as  defining  rather  precisely  the  time  at  which 
the  y-ray  was  emitted,  and  thereby  broadening  its  energy.  It  is  essentially 
because  of  diffusion  that  the  effect  is  not  observed  in  the  liquid ;  but  there  seems 
to  be  no  reason  in  principle  why  it  should  not  be  observed  in  a  liquid  if  the  diffusion 
coefficient  were  sufficiently  low  and  the  lifetime  sufficiently  short. 

Our  analysis  in  §  3  shows  that  measurements  of  the  Debye- Waller  factor 
may  give  useful  information  about  lattice  anharmonicity,  if  a  more  thorough 
theoretical  analysis  can  be  given.  For  this  purpose  the  Mossbauer  effect  has  the 
advantage  over  x-ray  diffraction  that  it  readily  yields  absolute  values  of  the  Debye- 
Waller  factor. 

Acknowledgments 

We  should  like  to  thank  Dr.  S.  F.  Edwards,  Dr.  A.  Herzenberg  and  Dr.  J.  O. 
Newton  for  a  number  of  helpful  discussion,  and  Mr.  J.  R.  Rook  for  computing 
the  theoretical  absorption  integrals.  One  of  us  (C.E.)  is  indebted  to  the  Depart- 
ment of  Scientific  and  Industrial  Research  for  financial  support. 

References 

Boyle,  A.  J.  F.,  Bunbury,  D.  St.  P.,  Edwards,  C,  and  Hall,  H.  E.,  1960,  Proc.  Phys. 

Soc,  76,  165. 
Eckert,  R.  E.,  and  Drickamer,  H.  G.,  1951,^.  Chem.  Phys.,  20,  13. 
Fensham,  P.  J.,  1950,  Aust.  J.  Set.  Res.  A,  3,  91 ;  4,  229. 
Mossbauer,  R.  J.,  1958,  Z.  Phys.,  151,  124. 

Peierls,  R.  E.,  1956,  Quantum  Theory  of  Solids,  §  2.3  (Oxford:    University  Press). 
Van  Hove,  L.,  1954,  Phys.  Rev.,  95,  249. 
Zener,  C,  and  Bilinsky,  S.,  1936,  Phys.  Rev.,  50,  101. 


295 


Mossbauer  Effect :  Applications  to  Magnetism 

G.  K.  Wertheim 
Bell  Telephone  Laboratories,  Inc.,  Murray  Hill,  New  Jersey 


The  Mossbauer  effect,  the  resonant  absorption  of  nuclear 
gamma  rays  in  solids,  may  be  used  to  obtain  the  hyperfine 
structure  of  Fe"  in  magnetic  materials.  Experiments  are  per- 
formed by  observing  the  absorption  by  stable  Fe67  of  the  14.4-kev 
gamma  ray  coming  from  a  source  which  contains  radioactive 
Fe"  produced  by  the  decay  of  Co57.  The  experiments  are  not 
limited  to  naturally  iron-bearing  materials;  other  substances  can 
be  studied,  provided  only,  that  small  amounts  of  cobalt  can  be 
introduced  into  lattice  sites  of  interest.  The  magnetic  moments 
of  the  ground  and  first  excited  states  of  FeS7  are  known  and 
make  possible  direct  determination  of  the  field  at  the  iron  nucleus 
once  the  hyperfine  structure  has  been  measured.  The  magnetic 
field  at  iron  nuclei  has  been  determined  in  the  ferromagnetic 


transition  metals  (Fe  3.42X106  oe,  Co  3.12X106  oe,  Ni  2.80X105 
oe  at  0°K),  but  no  hyperfine  structure  has  been  observed  down  to 
4°K  in  the  antiferromagnetic  transition  metals,  Mn  and  Cr.  In 
the  case  of  yttrium-iron  garnet  the  fields  at  the  iron  atoms  in  the 
two  types  of  sites  have  been  obtained  (tetrahedral  3.9X105  oe, 
octahedral  4.7  X106  oe).  The  most  complete  analysis  so  far  has 
been  made  in  FeF2  where  the  magnetic  field  in  the  antiferro- 
magnetic state  (,Hr_o  =  3.40Xl06  oe)  and  the  quadrupole  splitting 
in  the  paramagnetic  state  (31.2  Mc/sec)  have  been  obtained. 
Other  materials  under  investigation  are  the  iron  oxides  and 
some  ferrites,  where,  for  trivalent  iron,  fields  in  the  vicinity  of 
5.0X106  oe  have  generally  been  found. 


INTRODUCTION 

THE  realization  by  R.  L.  Mossbauer1  that  the 
nuclear  recoil  associated  with  gamma  emission 
may  be  absent  when  the  decaying  atom  is  bound  in  a 
crystal  lattice  has  led  to  a  number  of  interesting  ex- 
periments in  nuclear  physics.  It  also  has  considerable 
promise  as  a  tool  in  solid-state  physics,  and  in  particular 
in  magnetism.  The  connection  between  these  usually 
unrelated  fields  arises  from  the  narrowness  of  the  line- 
width  of  the  emitted  gamma  rays,  which  makes  it  pos- 
sible to  resolve  the  hyperfine  splitting  of  the  nuclear 
energy  levels.2-4  These,  of  course,  reflect  the  magnetic 
field  at  the  nucleus  as  well  as  the  electric  field  gradient 
tensor,  both  of  which  are  of  immediate  interest  to  the 
solid-state  physicist. 

The  statement  that  the  nuclear  recoil  is  absent  does 
not  imply  a  violation  of  the  law  of  conservation  of 
momentum.  In  the  recoil-free  emission  process  the 
crystal  containing  the  decaying  atom  recoils  as  a  unit. 

■R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Physik  151,  124  (1958);  Naturwissen- 
schaften  45,  538  (1958);  Z.  Naturforsch.  14a,  211  (1959). 

2  L.  L.  Lee,  L.  Meyer-Schutzmeister,  J.  P.  Schiffer,  and  D. 
Vincent,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3,  223  (1959). 

5R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3, 
554  (1959). 

*  I.  Ya  Barit,  M.  I.  Podgoretskii,  and  F.  L.  Shapiro,  Zhur. 
Eksptl.  i  Teoret.  Fiz.  38,  301  (1960). 


As  a  consequence  of  the  large  mass  of  the  recoiling 
unit,  the  energy  associated  with  the  recoil  is  vanishingly 
small,  and  the  nuclear  gamma  ray  has  an  energy  which 
is  very  closely  equal  to  that  of  the  nuclear  transition. 
It  is  this  fact  (which  we  will  discuss  further  below) 
that  in  turn  makes  possible  the  resonant  reabsorption 
of  the  gamma  ray  by  another  atom  of  the  same  species, 
which  is  an  essential  part  of  all  Mossbauer  experiments. 
The  fraction  of  decays  which  take  place  without 
recoil  depends  on  the  ratio  of  the  free-atom  recoil  energy 
to  the  Debye  energy  kdD,  the  characteristic  energy  of  a 
phonon.  An  atom  in  the  solid  may  be  thought  of  as  being 
free  to  emit  zero,  one,  or  many  phonons,  but  as  being  un- 
able to  recoil  with  an  arbitrary  energy.6  (This  statement 
is  true  only  as  long  as  the  recoil  energy  is  sufficiently 
small  so  that  the  atom  is  not  displaced  from  its  lattice 
site  by  the  recoil.)  When  many  decay  processes  are 
considered  it  is  found  that  the  average  energy  of  the 
emitted  phonons  per  decay  is  still  the  free-atom  recoil 
energy.  From  this  it  is  immediately  apparent  that  when 
the  free-atom  recoil  energy  is  smaller  than  kBo,  there 
will  be  a  high  probability  of  emitting  no  phonon  at  all. 
These  facts  are  contained  in  the  familiar  Debye-Waller 

6  For  a  fuller  discussion  see :  W.  M.  Visscher,  Ann.  Phys.  (N.  Y.) 
9,  194  (1960);  H.  J.  Lipkin,  ibid.  9,  332  (1960);  K.  S.  Singwi  and 
A.  Sjolander  (to  be  published). 


296 


111S 


MOSSBAUER    EFFECT:    APPLICATIONS    TO     MAGNETISM 


factor  expressing  the  fraction  of  recoil-free  events 
3  ErV       2/tT\21 


/=exp 


2keDi     3\eD/]\ 


The  usefulness  of  the  zero-phonon  gamma  rays  arises 
from  their  unusually  narrow  linewidths.  The  natural 
linewidth  of  a  gamma  ray  is  determined  by  the  widths 
of  the  states  involved  in  the  decay  process.  Here  we 
will  consider  only  decays  from  an  excited  state  to  the 
ground  state  of  a  stable  isotope,  in  which  the  width  is 
entirely  determined  by  the  excited  state.  The  natural 
width  of  the  excited  state  is  determined  through  the 
uncertainty  principle  by  the  lifetime  of  the  state;  a 
lifetime  of  10-7  sec,  characteristic  of  the  widely  used 
Mossbauer  isotope  Fe57,  leads  to  a  level  width  of 
4.6X10-9  ev  (equivalent  to  1.13  Mc/sec),  which  is 
smaller  than  characteristic  hyperfine  or  quadrupole 
interaction  energies  in  many  solids. 

Other  sources  of  line  broadening  must  also  be  con- 
sidered. The  thermal  motion  of  the  emitting  atoms  could 
be  a  serious  limitation  in  a  gaseous  or  liquid  source,  but 
since  the  zero-phonon  process  takes  place  to  a  measur- 
able extent  only  in  solids,  we  will  consider  only  this 
case.  Lattice  vibration  frequencies  are  characteristically 
1013  sec-1.  If  an  isotope  is  considered  whose  excited  state 
has  a  lifetime  long  compared  to  the  period  of  the  lattice 
vibration,  there  will  be  no  first-order  Doppler  broadening 
or  shift  from  this  cause.  There  will,  however,  be  a  second- 
order  Doppler  shift*57  which  depends  only  on  the  average 
of  the  square  of  the  velocity,  i.e.,  on  the  kinetic 
energy,  of  the  lattice  atoms.  This  shift  is  small  and  does 
not  affect  the  resolution  since  it  is  of  the  same  magnitude 
and  in  the  same  direction  for  all  emitting  atoms.  Broad- 
ening can  also  arise  if  the  environment  of  the  emitting 
atoms  varies,  as  it  might  in  an  alloy,  or  if  the  crystalline 
fields  at  the  emitting  atoms  have  frequencies  compar- 
able to  the  lifetime  of  the  excited  nuclear  state. 

The  existence  of  recoil-free  emission  and  resonant 
absorption  is  best  demonstrated  in  a  simple  transmission 
experiment  in  which  gamma  rays  from  a  source  pass 
through  an  absorber  to  a  detector.  If  the  resonant 
absorption  is  destroyed,  the  counting  rate  at  the  detector 
will  increase.  This  is  most  simply  accomplished  by  giving 
the  source  a  velocity  sufficient  to  Doppler-shift  the 
energy  of  the  emitted  gamma  rays  by  more  than  their 
natural  linewidth;  velocities  of  the  order  of  a  small 
fraction  of  1  cm/sec  are  required.  A  simple  extension 
of  this  idea  produces  a  "Mossbauer  spectrometer"  with 
which  an  absorption  spectrum  is  obtained  simply  by 
observing  the  counting  rate  at  the  detector  as  a  function 
of  the  Doppler  velocity  of  the  source. 

After  the  original  demonstration  of  resonant  absorp- 
tion by  Mossbauer  using  the  isotope  Ir191,  and  its  sub- 

8  R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  227 
(1960). 
7  B.  D.  Josephson,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  341  (1960). 


sequent  verification  by  a  number  of  other  groups,28 
attention  has  shifted  to  other  suitable  isotopes.  One 
of  the  first  to  be  used,  and  one  which  remains  of  par- 
ticular interest  for  solid-state  work,  is  Fe57.9-12  This 
isotope  offers  a  combination  of  desirable  properties 
which  have  already  made  possible  experiments  ranging 
from  a  verification  of  the  gravitational  red  shift  to  the 
determination  of  magnetic  fields  in  solids.  The  cobalt 
parent  of  Fe87  has  a  270-day  half -life,  convenient  for 
most  work.  The  decay  is  by  electron  capture,  and  the 
neutrino  which  accompanies  this  process  has  an  energy 
of  ~0.6  Mev.  The  iron  is  left  in  a  fairly  low  state  of 
excitation  (134  kev),  from  which  it  makes  a  120-kev 
gamma  transition  to  the  first  excited  state  whose  life- 
time is  10~7  sec.  The  low  energy  (14.4  kev)  of  the  tran- 
sition to  the  ground  state  used  in  the  experiment  leads 
to  a  large  fraction  of  zero-phonon  decays.  In  addition, 
Fe57  has  the  advantage  that  iron  is  a  component  of 
many  interesting  magnetic  materials. 

EXPERIMENTAL 

Experiments  always  involve  a  source  which  contains 
the  radioactive  species,  an  absorber  which  contains  the 
stable  isotope,  and  a  radiation  detector  (Fig.  1).  The 
substance  under  study  may  be  used  as  either  the  source 
or  the  absorber.  If  a  substance  is  naturally  iron-bearing 
there  are  a  number  of  advantages  to  using  it  as  an  ab- 
sorber. One  of  these  is  that  the  iron  is  in  a  normal 
lattice  site,  rather  than  in  a  site  characteristic  of  cobalt ; 
another  is  that  there  is  no  preceding  electron-capture 
decay,  which  could  result  in  a  displaced  or  multiply 
ionized  atom.  The  concentration  or  iron  in  the  material 
should  be  high  enough  so  that  an  absorber  of  areal 
density  0.1  mg/cm2  of  Fe57  can  be  made.  Since  the 
natural  abundance  of  Fe57  is  only  2.14%,  the  use  of 
enriched  isotope  may  be  desirable.  (It  has  also  been 
possible  to  use  as  absorbers  substances  not  normally 
iron-bearing  into  which  Fe57  obtained  as  separated 
isotope  was  introduced  in  amounts  less  than  1  atom- 
percent.) 

Substances  which  do  not  normally  contain  iron  may 
be  studied  by  incorporating  small  amounts  of  Co57  into 
them  and  using  them  as  sources.  Such  studies  yield 
information  on  the  fields  at  isolated  impurity  atoms. 
This  general  approach  is  of  course  also  applicable  to 
iron-bearing  substances.  In  the  case  of  metallic  iron  no 
difference  has  been  found  between  experiments  using  the 
iron  as  an  absorber  in  the  pure  form  and  those  using 
it  as  a  source  containing  trace  amounts  of  Co67.  In 
insulators,  however,  major  differences  between  these 
two  types  of  experiment  have  been  observed. 

8  P.  P.  Craig,  J.  G.  Dash,  A.  D.  McGuire,  D.  Nagle,  and  R.  D. 
Reiswig,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3,  221  (1959). 

9  R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3,  439 
(1960). 

10  J.  P.  Schiffer  and  W.  Marshall,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3,  556 
(1959). 

11  S.  S.  Hanna  et  al.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  28  (1960). 

"  G.  DePasquali,  H.  Frauenfelder,  S.  Margulies,  and  R.  N. 
Peacock,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  71  (1960). 


297 


G.     K.     WERTHEIM 


112S 


-SOURCE 


3""0— -o-ooi' AT. 


Fig.  1.  Experimental  arrangements  used  by  the  author:  (a) 
Stationary  source  and  moving,  unsplit  absorber,  (b)  Moving, 
unsplit  source  and  stationary  absorber. 

One  of  the  components  of  the  experiment,  either  the 
source  or  the  absorber,  should  have  an  unsplit  line  in 
order  for  the  hyperfine  spectrum  of  the  other  to  be  ob- 
served directly.  A  number  'of  substances  have  already- 
been  used  for  this  purpose.  The  first  to  be  proposed  were 
the  ferrocyanides,13  which  are  diamagnetic  and  have 
no  hyperfine  field  at  the  iron  atom.  In  general,  these 
suffer  from  the  disadvantage  that  they  do  not  contain 
much  iron  for  use  as  absorbers.  Considerable  improve- 
ment can  be  obtained  with  a  ferrocyanide  made  with 
separated  Fe67  isotope.14  Even  at  room  temperature  this 
substance,  used  as  an  absorber,  is  by  far  the  most  suc- 
cessful we  have  yet  used,  the  criteria  of  excellence  being 
the  linewidth  and  the  ratio  of  resonant  absorption  to 
photoelectric  absorption.  Unfortunately,  all  attempts  to 
make  sources  by  incorporating  Co57  into  a  ferrocyanide 
have  failed13  because  the  structure  of  the  cobaltocyanide 
is  different  from  that  of  the  ferrocyanide. 

13  S.  L.  Ruby,  L.  M.  Epstein,  and  K.  H.  Sun,  Rev.  Sci.  Instr. 
31,  580  (1960). 

14  The  author  is  indebted  to  J.  D.  Struthers  of  this  laboratory 
or  the  preparation  of  this  material. 


A  second  group  of  substances  that  has  been  widely 
used  is  the  stainless  steels.15  Most  of  the  experiments 
described  in  this  paper  were  done  with  sources  made  by 
incorporating  Co57  into  type  310  stainless.  Here  it  has 
proved  to  be  easy  to  prepare  sources  by  simply  evapo- 
rating Co57Cl2  solution  to  dryness  on  stainless  steel  and 
diffusing  at  950°C  in  a  carefully  evacuated  quartz 
capsule. 

The  linewidth  of  the  absorption  or  emission  line  in 
stainless  steel  has  been  examined  in  some  detail,  and 
has  generally  been  found  to  be  considerably  larger  than 
the  natural  linewidth.  Any  or  all  of  the  following  mech- 
anisms may  contribute. 

(1)  The  environment  of  the  various  iron  atoms  in 
an  alloy  is  necessarily  different.  Since  it  is  known  that 
the  chemical  environment  can  shift  the  energy  of  the 
nuclear  levels,  it  is  possible  that  there  is  inhomogeneous 
broadening  due  to  this  effect. 

(2)  The  existence  of  a  single  line  of  natural  width  is 
predicated  on  an  electron  spin  correlation  time  suf- 
ficiently short  to  destroy  the  hyperfine  interaction.  For 
a  broadening  of  less  than  10%,  a  spin  correlation  time 
less  than  3X  10~12  sec  is  required.  The  actual  correlation 
time  is  not  known,  but  values  of  10~12  or  10~13  sec  do 
not  seem  unreasonable.  Some  indication  of  a  tempera- 
ture-dependent linewidth,  which  would  confirm  that 
this  mechanism  is  operative,  has  been  obtained. 

(3)  Broadening  can  also  arise  from  the  finite  thick- 
ness of  the  source  or  absorber,  and  begins  to  be  ap- 
preciable (30%)  when  the  radiation  traverses  one  ab- 
sorption length  of  material.  The  importance  of  this 
effect  in  stainless  steel  of  the  thickness  generally  used 
as  an  absorber  has  been  investigated.  A  series  of  ex- 
periments have  been  conducted  using  as  a  source  Co57 
diffused  into  chromium  metal,  the  combination  which 
produces  the  narrowest  unsplit  line  found  so  far,  and 
using  as  absorbers  type  310  stainless  in  a  variety  of 
thicknesses.  The  linewidth  was  0.045  cm/sec,  or  more 
than  two  times  the  natural  linewidth.  No  difference 
in  linewidth  was  found  with  absorbers  ranging  from 
0.00025  in.  to  0.0010  in.,  the  latter  being  the  thickness 
usually  used  in  experiments.  It  was  noted  that  the  frac- 


-0.4  -0.2      o      0.2     0.4 
VELOCITY  IN  CM/SEC 

Fig.  2.  The  hyperfine  spectrum  of  Fe"  in  iron  metal,  obtained 
with  a  stainless  steel  source  and  a  natural  iron  absorber  0.001  in. 
thick. 


'  G.  K.  Wertheim,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  403  (I960). 


298 


.13S 


MOSSBAUER    EFFECT:    APPLICATIONS    TO    MAGNETISM 


tional  absorption  in  these  experiments  was  not  propor- 
tional to  absorber  thickness.  This  fact  might  be  con- 
sidered evidence  that  the  absorber  is  thick,  i.e.,  longer 
than  one  absorption  length,  but  the  effect  could  equally- 
well  be  caused  by  the  increase  in  the  degraded  120-kev 
radiation  falling  into  the  energy  selection  channel.  The 
deterioration  of  the  gamma-ray  scintillation  spectrum 
with  increasing  absorber  thickness  is  in  accord  with  the 
latter  interpretation. 

These  difficulties,  inherent  in  the  use  of  an  alloy,  have 
not  prevented  the  widespread  use  of  stainless  steel,  but 
there  is  a  continuing  interest  in  other  substances.  One 
of  the  most  promising  is  KFeF3,  a  cubic  material  with 
perovskite  structure,  used  as  an  absorber  at  room  tem- 
perature where  it  is  paramagnetic.  Its  spin  correlation 
time  at  room  temperature  is  short  enough  to  result 
in  a  relatively  narrow  line,  while  its  cubic  nature  assures 
the  absence  of  quadrupole  interaction.  Its  use  as  a 
source  is  being  studied. 

Experimentally,  two  distinct  methods  for  taking  data 
have  emerged.  The  first  uses  motion  at  a  constant 
velocity,  usually  symmetrical  in  the  forward  and  back- 
ward directions;  different  velocities  are  obtained  by 
changing  frequency  or  amplitude.  As  the  source  of 
motion,  electromechanical  transducers,  cams,  lathes, 
and  constant-velocity  servos  have  been  used.  The  ex- 
periments reported  here  were  done  with  a  system  of 
this  type  employing  a  loudspeaker  voice  coil  driven 
at  constant  velocity  by  dc  coupled  transistors  from  the 
symmetrical  sawtooth  wave  output  of  a  Hewlett- 
Packard  function  generator.  In  the  second  method,  all 
desired  velocities  are  included  in  the  motion,  and  the 
counts  are  sorted  according  to  instantaneous  velocity 
of  the  source  relative  to  the  absorber.  This  is  generally 
done  by  using  a  sinusoidal  motion,  or  more  advantag- 
eously a  double  parabola,  which  has  the  feature  that 
equal  time  is  spent  at  each  velocity  increment.  The 
instantaneous  velocity  is  determined  by  a  pickup  coil 
rigidly  attached  to  the  moving  source  and  placed  in  a 
uniform  magnetic  field.  The  resulting  signal  is  either 
fed  directly  into  the  address  logic  in  a  multichannel 
analyzer  or  else  used  to  modulate  the  amplitude  of  the 
energy-selected  counts,  which  can  then  be  sorted  by  an 
unmodified  multichannel  analyzer. 

The  first  method  places  somewhat  higher  demands  on 
counting  rate  stability  and  requires  a  motion  which  is 
more  difficult  to  obtain,  especially  at  high  velocities. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  more  flexible,  since  part  of  an 
absorption  spectrum  can  be  examined  without  sweeping 
through  the  whole  range.  The  second  method  requires 
a  normalization  of  the  data  if  a  sinusoidal  motion  is 
used,  since  more  time  is  spent  at  high  velocities  than 
near  zero.  However,  this  problem  is  absent  when  a 
double  parabola  is  used,  and  for  many  experiments  this 
may  be  the  most  attractive  approach.  It  might  be 
noted,  however,  that  the  multichannel  analyzer  system 
does  not  collect  data  any  faster  than  the  constant 
velocity  system. 


EFFECTIVE  MAGNETIC  FIELDS  IN  THE 
TRANSITION  METALS 

The  first  substance  in  which  the  field  at  an  iron  atom 
was  determined  by  the  Mossbauer  effect  was  metallic 
iron  itself.16  The  experiment  was  originally  done  with 
an  iron  source  as  well  as  an  iron  absorber.  In  addition 
to  the  field  at  the  nucleus  (3.33X  106  oe  at  300°K), 
the  magnetic  moment  of  the  first  excited  state  was  ob- 
tained. In  subsequent  experiments  in  which  an  external 
magnetic  field  was  superposed,  it  was  shown  that  the 
direction  of  the  field  at  the  nucleus  is  opposite  to  the 
external  magnetization,17  a  result  contrary  to  theoretical 
expectations.18 

The  use  of  an  iron  source  and  absorber  gives  rise  to 
an  extremely  complicated  pattern.  If  a  source  emitting 
an  unsplit  line  is  used  instead,  the  hyperfine  pattern 
of  Fe57  can  be  obtained  directly  (Fig.  2).  This  type  of 
experiment  can  readily  be  adapted  to  determine  the 
field  at  an  iron  impurity  atom  in  the  other  transition 
metals.15  Such  experiments  have  actually  been  done  by 
using  an  unsplit  absorber,  such  as  stainless  steel,  and 
making  a  source  by  diffusing  the  radioactive  species, 
Co67,  into  rolled  foils  of  the  material  under  study.19  Re- 
sults for  cobalt  and  nickel  at  room  temperature  are 
shown  in  Fig.  3.  The  fields  at  room  temperature  are 
found  to  be3.10±0.05X105oe  and  2.65±0.05X106  oe; 
when  these  are  extrapolated  to  0°K  using  the  known 
magnetization  curve,  values  of  3.12±0.05X10B  oe  and 
2.80±0.05X105  oe  for  cobalt  and  nickel,  respectively, 
are  obtained. 


Si 

i 

z 

8 

o 

2  250 


370 
360 

3.S0 

^ 

r 

y 

»v 

V 

*\ 

I 

1 

Fe57  in  Co 

Y 

-O.B       -0.6       -0.4      -0.2  0  0.2         0.4         0.6         0.8 

VELOCITY  IN  CM/SCC 

Fig.  3.  The  hyperfine  structures  of  impurity  Fe57  in  cobalt  and 
nickel  metal,  obtained  with  a  stainless  steel  absorber  0.001  in. 
thick.  Radioactive  Co"  was  diffused  into  thin  cobalt  and  nickel 
foils  which  were  then  used  as  sources. 


16  S.  S.  Hanna  et  al.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  177  (1960). 

17  S.  S.  Hanna  et  al.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  513  (1950). 

18  W.  Marshall,  Phys.  Rev.  110,  1280  (1958). 

18  The  foils  of  type  310  stainless  steel,  high-purity  iron,  and 
nickel  were  supplied  by  K.  M.  Olsen  of  this  laboratory. 


299 


G.     K.     WERTHEIM 


114S 


Table  I.  Magnetic  fields  (in  units  of  106  oe)  at  transition 
metal  nuclei  located  in  transition  metals. 


Nuclei  at  which 
field  is  measured 


Lattice  atoms 
Co 


Ni 


3.42" 
3.20" 


3.12b 
2.20° 
2.134d 


2.80b 
0.80° 


1  See  footnote  20. 


These  values  should  be  compared  with  the  results 
obtained  for  cobalt  and  nickel  atoms  in  the  transition 
metals,  using  a  variety  of  other  techniques.  The  fields  at 
cobalt  in  a  range  of  Fe-Co  and  Ni-Co  alloys  were  deter- 
mined by  Arp,  Edmonds,  and  Petersen20  from  the 
measurement  of  the  nuclear  contribution  to  the  heat 
capacity.  Their  results  gave  a  value  of  3.20X  105  oe  at  a 
cobalt  atom  in  iron  and  2.20X  106  oe  at  a  cobalt  atom  in 
cobalt.  An  independent  measure  of  the  field  at  a  cobalt 
atom  in  cobalt  has  also  been  obtained  by  Gossard  and 
Portis21  using  nuclear  resonance  techniques.  For  fee 
cobalt,  they  found  a  value  of  2.134X  105  oe  at  0°K.  Most 
recently  a  value  for  the  field  at  a  nickel  atom  in  nickel 
has  been  similarly  determined.22  These  results  are  sum- 
marized in  Table  I. 

It  may  be  noted  that  the  field  at  the  iron  nucleus  in 
a  given  metal  is  in  every  case  larger  than  the  field  at 
the  host  lattice  nucleus,  and  that  fields  at  all  the  iron 
nuclei  are  of  similar  magnitude.  This  suggests  that  the 
field  at  an  iron  nucleus  is  due  largely  to  its  own  electrons 
and  depends  only  slightly  on  the  host  lattice  magnetiza- 
tion, an  idea  which  is  borne  out  by  a  recent  experiment 
on  a  CoPd  alloy,23  in  which  isolated  impurity  iron  atoms 
were  found  to  have  fields  similar  to  those  in  other 
metals  studied.  This  property  of  the  iron  atom  indicates 
that  it  is  not  a  good  field  probe,  and  to  some  extent  les- 
sens the  interest  in  impurity  experiments.  However, 
the  present  results  do  help  to  elucidate  the  various 
contributions  to  the  field  at  the  nucleus  in  a  ferromagnet, 
and  for  that  reason  remain  of  interest. 

In  spite  of  this  limitation  on  the  utility  of  iron  atoms, 
some  interesting  results  have  been  obtained  by  the  ex- 
tension of  experiments  of  the  type  described  above  to 
the  antiferromagnetic  transition  metals,  manganese  and 
chromium.  These  experiments  were  quite  analogous  to 
those  for  the  ferromagnetic  case.  The  source  was  made 
by  diffusing  Co57  into  electrolytically  deposited  Cr  and 
Mn ;  the  absorber  was  isotopically  enriched  potassium 
ferrocyanide. 


20  V.  Arp.  D.  Edmonds,  and  R.  Petersen,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters 
3,  212  (1959). 

21  A.  C.  Gossard  and  A.  M.  Portis,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3,  164 
(1959) ;  A.  M.  Portis  and  A.  C.  Gossard,  J.  Appl.  Phys.  31,  205S 
(I960).  See  also  W.  A.  Hardy,  J.  Appl.  Phys.  32,  122  (1960), 
this  issue. 

22  L.  J.  Bruner,  J.  I.  Budnick,  and  R.  J.  Blume,  (to  be  published). 

23  D.  E.  Nagle  et  al.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  5,  364  (1960). 


It  would  not  be  surprising  to  find  that  the  iron  ex- 
hibits a  splitting  characteristic  of  a  field  of  3X108  oe 
when  the  host  lattice  is  below  its  Neel  temperature,  but 
actually,  in  the  case  of  chromium,  data  taken  between 
4°K  and  370°K  show  an  unsplit  line  whose  width  de- 
creases uniformly  with  increasing  temperature  (Fig.  4) 
without  discontinuity  of  any  sort  even  at  308°K,  the 
Neel  temperature.  The  data  for  a-manganese  are  similar, 
except  that  the  change  in  linewidth  is  much  less  pro- 
nounced. These  results  suggest  that  the  exchange 
coupling  between  iron  and  chromium  or  manganese  is 
sufficiently  small  so  that  the  iron  atoms  are  not  aligned 
by  the  host  lattice  atoms.  This  conclusion  is  consistent 
with  the  results  obtained  from  low-temperature  sus- 
ceptibility measurements  in  dilute  iron-chromium  al- 
loys,24 which  also  indicate  that  the  iron  is  not  aligned 
by  the  antiferromagnetic  Cr  system. 

FERROUS  FLUORIDE 

As  an  illustration  of  the  application  of  the  Mossbauer 
effect  to  a  naturally  iron-bearing  antiferromagnet,  let 
us  consider  the  determination  of  the  hyperfine  structure 
of  Fe57  in  ferrous  fluoride.26  This  material  is  antiferro- 
magnetic, with  a  transition  temperature  of  79°K.  It 
has  the  rutile  structure ;  thus  the  symmetry  around  the 
iron  atoms  is  no  higher  than  that  characterized  by 
three  mutually  perpendicular  reflection  planes.  The 
electric  field  gradient  (EFG)  tensor  at  the  iron  atoms 


-0.8  -0.6  -0.4  -0.2      0        0.2      0.4      0.6      0.8 
VELOCITY  IN  CM/SEC 

Fig.  4.  The  line  shape  of  the  14.4-kev  gamma  ray  of  Fe67, 
produced  by  the  decay  of  Co67  diffused  into  chromium  metal. 
The  data  were  taken  with  an  absorber  of  potassium  ferrocyanide 
made  with  enriched  Fe57. 


24  M.  M.  Newman  and  K.  W.  H.  Stevens,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc. 
(London)  74,  290  (1959). 
26  G.  K.  Wertheim,  Phys.  Rev.  121,  63  (1961). 


300 


115S 


MOSSBAUER    EFFECT:    APPLICATIONS    TO     MAGNETISM 


therefore  does  not  have  axial  symmetry  and  may  be 
characterized  by  two  independent  parameters,  usually 
chosen  to  be  the  largest  diagonal  element  of  the  tensor 
and  a  parameter  which  describes  the  deviation  from 
axial  symmetry. 

The  experiment  was  done  using  two  0.005-in.  thick 
single-crystal  slabs  of  the  material  as  absorbers.26  One 
slab  had  the  c  axis  normal  to  its  plane,  the  other  parallel. 
A  radioactive  source,  consisting  of  Co57  diffused  into 
type  310  stainless  steel,  was  mounted  on  a  loudspeaker 
voice  coil  driven  with  a  constant-velocity  sawtooth  wave 
as  described  above. 

In  the  paramagnetic  state,  at  room  temperature,  two 
well-defined  absorption  lines  were  obtained  [Fig.  5(a)]. 
Their  spacing  indicates  a  quadrupole  splitting  of  31.2 
Mc/sec  due  to  the  interaction  of  the  excited  state  quad- 
rupole moment  with  the  crystalline  electric  field  grad- 
ient. A  large  displacement  of  the  centroid  of  the  ab- 
sorption from  zero  velocity,  i.e.,  the  energy  of  the 
gamma  ray  emitted  by  iron  atoms  in  stainless  steel,  is 
also  observed.  Only  a  small  part  of  this  displacement 
can  arise  from  a  difference  in  the  second-order  Doppler 
shift6  in  the  two  materials.  The  major  part  is  due  to  a 
nuclear  isotope  shift27  arising  both  from  the  removal 
of  4s  electrons  in  going  from  metallic  binding  in  stainless 
steel  to  ionic  binding  in  ferrous  fluoride,  and  from  the 
exchange  polarization  of  the  inner  5  electrons  by  the 
d  shell,  which  causes  a  charge  rearrangement  of  the 
.y  electron  wave  function  at  the  nucleus.28  The  effect 
arises  from  the  electrostatic  interaction  of  the  nucleus 
with  the  electronic  wave  functions,27  and  is  observable 
provided  that  the  strength  of  the  interaction  is  different 
for  the  ground  and  the  excited  states  of  the  nucleus, 
so  that  the  corresponding  energy  levels  are  shifted  by 
different  amounts.  This  will  be  the  case  if  the  nuclear 
size  is  different  in  the  two  states. 

In  the  antiferromagnetic  state,  six  hyperfine  compo- 
nents are  resolved  [Fig.  5(b),(c)].  (In  the  case  where 
the  magnetic  c  axis  is  prependicular  to  the  plane  of 
the  absorber  two  lines,  corresponding  to  the  Am  =  Q 
transitions,  are  missing.  This  is  in  accord  with  the  radi- 
ation pattern  for  these  transitions,  which  has  zero  in- 
tensity in  the  direction  of  the  axis  of  quantization.)  The 
spacing  of  these  lines  may  be  analyzed  in  terms  of  ex- 
cited and  ground-state  splitting.  The  energy  levels  of 
the  excited  state  are  given  as  functions  of  three  param- 
eters, the  magnetic  hyperfine  interaction  gf3H,  the  z 
component  of  the  electric  field  gradient  tensor  eq,  and 
an  asymmetry  parameter 


/dw  dW\   /dw 

\dv2     dx2//  dz2 


26  The  oriented  slabs  of  ferrous  fluoride  were  obtained  from 
V.  Jaccarino. 

27  O.  C.  Kistner  and  A.  W.  Sunyar,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  412 
(1960). 

28  V.  Heine,  Phys.  Rev.  107,  1002  (1957);  W.  E.  Blumberg  and 
V.  Jaccarino  (private  communication). 


|  15,000 

m  18,000 


a  1  6,000 

</) 

l- 

|  15,000 

O 


- 

0          o 

\ 

f%t 

^T 

0      0    Otffe 

Y 

f   y 

290°  K 

1       1       1 

V 

V 

1 

1             1             1 

PERPENDICULAR 

-  *lftfc 

^2o          >-  u  o  u  <v    y^ 

1 

1               1               1 

wlf      45°K    ^& 

1       1       1       1 

^^s^X 

f^^xK 

iofl.              *? 

fSc 

17,000 

> 

\T^ 

f?y 

rv^v 

16,000 

v 

PARALLEL 
45°K 

15,000 

i       i 

i     i 

1 

1             1             1 

1 

-0.8      -0.6      -0.4      -0.2  0  0.2        0.4         0.6         0.8 

VELOCITY  IN    CM/SEC 

Fig.  5.  Resonant  absorption  in  0.005-in.  single-crystal  ferrous 
fluoride  absorbers  (a)  above  the  Neel  temperature;  (b)  below 
the  Neel  temperature  with  magnetization  along  the  direction  of 
observation;  and  (c)  below  the  Neel  temperature  with  magneti- 
zation perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  observation. 


as  follows : 

e2Qq[  / 


1+- 


4gffff  \2  ,  ifV 
e2Qq 


HI 


-  /  — [(l- 


4g/3ff\2     iTl* 
e2Qq  )       3  J  ' 


The  analysis  yields  two  independent  measures  of  the 
magnetic  field  at  the  iron  nucleus,  in  terms  of  the  ground 
and  excited  state  moments,  respectively.  The  average 
of  these  measurements  gives  a  value  of  3.13X  105  oe  at 
45°K,  the  temperature  of  the  measurements.  Extra- 
polated to  0°K  this  becomes  3.40X105  oe.  The  quad- 
rupole interaction  deduced  from  the  antiferromagnetic 
state  data  is  consistent  with  that  determined  from  the 
paramagnetic  state,  but  it  is  found  in  addition  that  the 
direction  of  the  major  axis  of  the  EFG  tensor  is  perpen- 
dicular to  the  axis  of  magnetic  alignment  and  that  the 
asymmetry  parameter  is  0.33. 

YTTRIUM-IRON  GARNET 

One  of  the  more  complex  systems  which  has  recently 
been  investigated29  is  yttrium-iron  garnet,  Y3Fe2(Fe04)3. 
The  structure  of  this  material  is  well  known,30  and  for 
the  present  purposes  it  suffices  to  point  out  that  iron 
atoms  are  located  in  two  nonequivalent  sites,  those 
with  tetrahedral  symmetry  and  those  with  octahedral 

29  This  work  was  done  in  collaboration  with  Miss  C.  Alff  of 
Columbia  University,  during  a  summer  appointment  at  this 
laboratory.  A  fuller  account  will  be  published. 

30  S.  Geller  and  M.  A.  Gilleo,  J.  Phys.  Chem.  Solids  3,  30  (1957) ; 
S.  Geller  and  M.  A.  Gilleo,  Acta  Cryst.  10,  239  (1957) ;  F.  Bertaut 
and  F.  Forrat,  Compt.  rend.  242,  382  (1956). 


301 


K.     WERTHEI  M 


116S 


o  127 

w  126 

O  125 
o 
co  124 

z  123 

{2  122 

§  121  - 


xlO* 


MAGNETIC  FIELD  IN 
(III)    DIRECTION 


VI 


TETRAHEDRAL  (0=55°) 


OCTAHEDRAL (e  *  70°) 


Table  II.  Characteristics  of  iron  sites  in  yttrium-iron  garnet 
for  the  two  cases  used  in  the  experiment. 


■1.0  -0.6  -0.6  -0.4  -0.2      0     0.2     0.4    0.6     0.8    1.0 
VELOCITY   IN   CM /SEC 

:rystal 

yttrium-iron  garnet  absorber  with  magnetization  in  the  [111] 
direction.  The  source  was  stainless  steel. 


symmetry.  The  relative  number  of  these  is  3:2.  Both 
sites  have  axes  of  symmetry  sufficiently  high  to  assure 
that  the  electric  field  gradient  tensors  are  axially  sym- 
metric. The  tetrahedral  sites  have  fourfold  rotary  in- 
version axes  in  [100]  directions,  while  the  octahedral 
sites  have  threefold  axes  in  [111]  directions.  The  [111] 
directions  are  the  directions  of  easy  magnetization,  but 
in  a  thin  slab  without  an  externally  applied  field  the 
magnetization  tends  to  be  normal  to  the  surface. 

The  experiments  were  performed  using  as  an  ab- 
sorber a  thin  slab  of  the  material  cut  normal  to  a  [110] 
direction  from  a  single  crystal  grown  by  Nielsen  of  this 
laboratory.31  The  slab  was  cut  and  lapped  to  a  thickness 
of  0.002  in.  according  to  the  process  described  by 
Dillon.32  Data  were  taken  at  room  temperature  with  a 
magnetic  field  applied  in  either  the  [111]  or  the  [100] 


;I0' 


{^   157 
o  '56 

8  |55 

J  154 
«o  153 
|  152 
8  151 
150 


MAGNETIC   FIELD  IN 
(100)  DIRECTION 


TETRAHEDRAL {6 '90') 


OCTAHEDRAL  (©=55°) 


TETRAHEDRAL  (0»O°) 


1.0-0.8    -0.6 


0.4-0.2      0      0.2     Q4 
VELOCITY    IN   CM/SEC 


0.6     0.8    1.0 


Fig.  7.  Resonant  absorption  in  the  absorber  of  Fig.  6  with 
the  magnetization  in  the  [100]  direction. 


31  The  YIG  was  obtained  from  J.  F.  Dillon. 

32  J.  F.  Dillon  and  H.  E.  Earl,  Am.  J.  Phys.  27,  201  (1959). 


Field  direction 
111 
Angle"       Intensity6 


100 
Angle*       Intensityb 


Tetrahedral         54°44' 


Octahedral  70°32' 

0° 


90° 
0° 

54°44' 


■  Angle  between  direction  of  magnetization  and  axis  of  electric  field 
gradient  tensor. 

b  Relative  number  of  iron  atoms  occupying  sites  characterized  by  the 
given  angle. 


direction  in  the  plane  of  the  slab.  It  should  be  pointed 
out  that  when  the  field  is  in  the  [111]  direction  the 
symmetry  axes  of  all  the  tetrahedral  sites  make  the 
same  angle  (54°44')  with  the  applied  field,  while  the 
axes  of  the  octahedral  sites  make  angles  of  either  0° 
or  70°32',  in  the  proportion  of  1  to  3.  Similarly,  when 
the  field  is  in  the  [100]  direction,  the  [111]  symmetry 
axes  of  all  the  octahedra  make  an  angle  of  54°44'  with 
the  field,  while  the  axes  of  the  tetrahedra  make  angles 
of  0°  or  90°  in  the  proportion  of  1  to  2.  (This  informa- 
tion is  summarized  in  Table  II.)  Three  hyperfine  pat- 
terns are  thus  to  be  expected  in  each  experiment. 

The  experimental  results  obtained  at  room  tempera- 
ture are  shown  in  Figs.  6  and  7.  In  the  [100]  case  (Fig. 
7)  all  three  hyperfine  spectra  are  resolved,  while  in  the 
[111]  case  (Fig.  6)  only  the  two  stronger  ones  are  seen. 
The  identification  of  lines  belonging  to  a  given  hyperfine 
spectrum  was  made  partially  on  the  basis  of  the  intensi- 
ties of  the  absorption  lines  and  partially  on  the  basis 
of  some  simple  properties  of  the  hyperfine  patterns. 
The  resulting  groupings  were  in  every  case  unambiguous. 

The  magnetic  fields  at  the  iron  nuclei  in  each  case 
were  obtained  directly  from  the  distance  separating 
the  second  and  fourth  or  third  and  fifth  absorption  lines 
in  the  pertinent  hyperfine  spectrum.  This  distance  de- 
pends only  on  the  ground-state  magnetic  moment,  and 
is  independent  of  the  quadrupole  coupling.  Values  were 
obtained  of  3.92±0.05X105  oe  for  the  tetrahedral  sites 
and  4.74±0.06X105  oe  for  the  octahedral  sites.  The 
agreement  between  the  independent  determinations 
made  for  the  [100]  and  [111]  cases  was  satisfactory. 

Further  analysis  was  based  on  a  direct  comparison 
of  the  experimental  hyperfine  spectrum  with  spectra 
computed  for  the  known  angles  between  the  magnetic 
field  and  the  axis  of  the  EFG  tensor.  The  computations 
were  based  on  the  tabulations  of  Parker,33  which  are 
applicable  to  the  excited  state  and  give  the  hyperfine 
splitting  as  a  function  of  the  parameter  \  =  e2Qq/^y.H 
measuring  the  strength  of  the  quadrupole  coupling  rela- 
tive to  the  magnetic  hf  coupling.  The  best  value  for  X 
was  0.10±0.02  in  each  case.  The  large  uncertainty  arises 
from  a  weak  dependence  of  the  hfs  on  X,  which  is  par- 
ticularly pronounced  in  the  54°44'  case.  The  resulting 

83  P.  M.  Parker,  J.  Chem.  Phys.  24,  1096  (1956). 


302 


117S 


MOSSBAUER    EFFECT:    APPLICATIONS    TO     MAGNETISM 


quadrupole  couplings,  expressed  as  the  quadrupole 
transition  energies  in  the  absence  of  a  magnetic  field, 
are  9  and  11  Mc  for  the  tetrahedral  and  octahedral 
sites  respectively,  with  an  uncertainty  of  20%. 

Further  experiments  are  being  done  to  obtain  the 
temperature  dependence  of  the  field  at  the  iron  nucleus. 

OXIDES  AND  FERRITES 

Of  the  iron  oxides  only  the  simplest,  Fe203,  in  which 
all  the  atoms  are  in  equivalent  sites,  has  so  far  produced 
conclusive  results.  Kistner  and  Sunyar27  have  shown 
that  the  field  at  the  iron  atom  is  5.15X106  oe  at  room 
temperature;  a  small  quadrupole  component  has  also 
been  observed. 

Stoichiometric  FeO  probably  does  not  exist  because 
of  the  strong  tendency  of  iron  to  be  trivalent.  Attempts 
to  prepare  this  compound  by  the  decomposition  of 
ferrous  oxalate  in  an  inert  atmosphere  have  produced 
a  material  which  exhibits  two  absorption  lines  of  un- 
equal intensity  at  room  temperature.  These  may  be 
identified  with  di-  and  trivalent  iron,  since  their  un- 
equal intensity  and  the  fact  that  FeO  is  cubic  rule  out 
quadrupole  splitting  as  a  possible  interpretation. 

In  Fe304  there  exist  both  A  sites,  with  tetrahedral 
oxygen  coordination,  and  B  sites,  with  octahedral  oxy- 
gen coordination.  Moreover,  the  iron  occurs  with  two 
valences  which  are  distributed  over  the  sites  in  such  a 
way  that  three  types  of  iron  are  found  in  equal  concen- 
tration :  trivalent  iron  in  A  sites,  trivalent  iron  in  B  sites, 
and  divalent  iron  in  B  sites.  As  a  result,  three  separate 
six-line  hyperfine  patterns  are  to  be  expected.  In  prac- 
tice these  patterns  appear  superposed  in  such  a  way 
that  analysis  is  at  best  difficult.  However,  it  is  clear 
from  the  data  in  Fig.  8  that  the  field  at  the  nucleus  is 
approximately  5X105  oe  in  every  case. 

Among  the  ferrites  the  simplest  results  should  be 
obtained  from  those  with  a  structure  like  that  of  nickel 
ferrite ;  that  is,  like  FeO  •  Fe203  in  which  all  the  divalent 
iron  atoms  are  replaced  by  divalent  atoms  of  another 
metal  and  all  the  remaining  iron  is  trivalent.  Results 
obtained  with  a  thin  polycrystalline  absorber  of 
NiO-Fe20334  indicate  that  the  field  at  the  iron  nucleus 
is  about  5.1  X105  oe,  but  the  linewidths  are  found  to 
be  broad  compared  to  those  of  the  simple  oxides.  A 
number  of  ferrites  have  also  been  studied  by  Kistner  and 
Sunyar35  with  generally  similar  results. 

CONCLUSIONS 

The  Mossbauer  effect  of  Fe57  has  proved  to  be  a 
useful  tool  for  the  investigation  of  magnetic  fields  and 
electric  field  gradients  at  iron  nuclei  in  ferromagnetic 
and  antiferromagnetic  materials.   The  fact   that   the 


!sVYvrvvw 

Fe.O, 


34  The  nickel  ferrite  was  prepared  by  F.  J.  Schnettler  of  this 
laboratory. 
36  O.  C.  Kistner  and  A.  W.  Sunyar  (unpublished). 


-1.2   -1.0  -0.8  -0.6  -0.4  -0.2       0      0.2    0.4    0.6     0.6     1.0     1.2 
VELOCITY  IN  CM/SEC 

Fig.  8.  Resonant  absorption  at  room  temperature  in  powdered 
iron  oxides  and  polycrystalline  nickel  ferrite.  The  source  is 
stainless  steel. 


field  at  an  iron  atom  depends  largely  on  its  own  elec- 
tronic shell  and  only  weakly  on  its  environment  is 
itself  interesting  but  lessens  the  usefulness  of  isolated 
iron  atoms  as  field  probes.  A  few  generalizations  have 
begun  to  emerge  from  the  results  now  available:  (1)  the 
field  at  iron  nuclei  in  ferromagnetic  metals  is  close  to 
3X105  oe.  (2)  The  field  in  oxides,  ferrites,  and  yttrium 
iron  garnet  at  trivalent  iron  atoms  in  octahedral  co- 
ordinations is  in  the  vicinity  of  5X 105  oe.  These  general- 
izations are  as  yet  tentative  and  subject  to  further 
confirmation. 

While  Fe57  is  without  doubt  the  most  attractive  iso- 
tope for  Mossbauer  effect  studies,  and  the  only  one 
considered  in  this  paper,  there  are  a  number  of  others 
which  will  make  it  possible  to  extend  the  range  of 
materials  which  can  be  investigated.  The  most  useful 
of  these  is  Sn119,  an  isomer  with  a  250-day  half-life  and 
a  linewidth  only  five  times  greater  than  that  of  Fe57. 
Other  possible  isotopes  are  Dy161,  W182,  Ir193,  and  Au197. 
The  maximum  absorption  that  can  be  expected  with 
these  is  very  much  smaller,  because  of  higher  gamma 
energy  or  lower  Debye  temperature  than  Fe57,  and  the 
linewidth  is  larger  by  a  considerable  factor. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Conversations  with  V.  Jaccarino,  J.  F.  Dillon,  W.  E. 
Blumberg,  S.  Geschwind,  and  a  number  of  other  mem- 
bers of  this  laboratory  have  been  of  great  assistance  to 
the  author  by  providing  many  valuable  ideas  and  fruit- 
ful insights  into  the  field  of  magnetism.  The  cooperation 
of  Mrs.  M.  H.  Read  and  W.  M.  Augustyniak  in  specific 
phases  of  the  work,  and  the  general  technical  aid  of 
D.  N.  E.  Buchanan  are  also  gratefully  acknowledged. 


303 


Volume  4,  Number  10 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


May  15,   I960 


DIRECTION  OF  THE  EFFECTIVE  MAGNETIC  FIELD  AT  THE  NUCLEUS  IN  FERROMAGNETIC  IRONt 

S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  G.  J.  Perlow,  R.  S.  Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vincent 

Argonne  National  Laboratory,  Argonne,  Illinois 

(Received  April  28,  1960) 


In  a  recent  experiment1  it  was  shown  that  in 
ferromagnetic  iron  the  effective  magnetic  field 
at  the  iron  nucleus  is  strongly  correlated  with 
the  magnetization.    The  sense  of  the  correlation, 
however,  was  not  determined,  i.e.,  it  was  not 
known  whether  the  effective  field  was  parallel  or 
antiparallel  to  the  magnetization.    The  sense  of 
the  correlation  has  now  been  established  by  ob- 
serving the  change  in  the  hyperfine  splitting  of 
the  nuclear  energy  levels  of  Fe57  on  application 
of  an  external  field  of  17  to  20  koe. 

In  an  earlier  paper2  we  presented  the  hyperfine 


spectrum  obtained  in  the  resonant  Mossbauer3 
absorption  in  Fe57.    The  interpretation  given  to 
the  spectrum  has  since  been  confirmed  in  detail. 
Several  groups  have  shown  the  correctness  of 
the  hyperfine  pattern  by  observing  the  spectrum 
when  different  alloys  and  compounds  of  iron  are 
used.4   Gossard,  Portis,  and  Sandle5  have  ob- 
served the  nuclear  magnetic  resonance  in  the 
ground  state  of  Fe57  at  a  frequency  corresponding 
to  a  value  of  the  effective  field  in  close  agreement 
with  the  value  of  333  koe  deduced  in  reference  2. 
In  addition,  Ewan,  Graham,  and  Geiger6  have 


513 


304 


Volume  4,  Number  10 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


May  15,  I960 


found  that  the  £2  admixture  in  the  M  radiation 
is  less  than  10  "4,  which  confirms  that  the  effect 
of  E2  radiation  in  the  spectrum  is  indeed  negli- 
gible.2 

Experimentally  it  was  feasible  to  apply  a  large 
magnetic  field  only  to  the  source  of  the  resonant 
radiation.    The  absorber  was  either  in  the  fring- 
ing field  of  the  electromagnet  holding  the  source 
or  in  a  small  parallel  magnetic  field  of  its  own, 
applied  to  produce  a  definite  magnetization  in  the 
absorber.    At  the  top  of  Fig.  1  is  shown  the  ve- 
locity spectrum  which  is  applicable  if  the  hyper- 
fine  splittings  in  source  and  absorber  are  identi- 
cal.   The  intensities  are  appropriate  to  the  emis- 
sion of  polarized  radiation  from  the  source  but 
to  an  unpolarized  absorption  process.    If,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  hyperfine  splittings  in  the  emitter 
are  about  10%  greater  (for  example)  than  those 
in  the  absorber,  then  the  complex  spectrum  at 
the  bottom  of  Fig.  1  is  obtained.    It  is  clear  that 
a  study  of  the  singlet  line  6  affords  the  best  means 
of  determining  the  change  that  an  external  field 
produces  in  the  hyperfine  splitting. 

For  the  effective  field  at  the  nucleus  we  write 


H«=#noMo  +  Hext> 


(1) 


where  M0  is  a  unit  vector  along  the  direction  of 
magnetization  in  a  ferromagnetic  domain,  and 
Hno  is  the  magnitude  of  the  effective  field  in  the 
absence  of  the  external  field  Hext-    The  latter 
quantity  includes  the  demagnetizing  field  which 
is  negligible  for  the  planar  samples  used.    Since 
Hext/^no<<  *  in  tne  present  experiment,  it  is 


0 

Speed  -* 

II 

1 

6 

s     4      : 

> 

> 

'I  '"'  T    li    f 


FIG.  1.    Theoretical  absorption  spectra  of  14.4-kev 
resonance  radiation  from  Fe5T.    Top:  metallic  source 
and  absorber  with  identical  hyperfine  splittings.    Bot- 
tom: same  source  and  absorber  but  with  the  splitting 
in  the  source  increased  by  10%. 


assumed  in  Eq^  (1)  that  Hno  is  not  appreciably 
influenced  by  Hext.    The  quantity  of  interest  is 
the  sign  of  Hno.    Since  M,,  and  Hext  are  parallel 
under  saturation  conditions,  the  sign  can  be  de- 
termined by  observing  whether  the  hyperfine 
splitting  increases  or  decreases  on  application 
of  a  field.   With  a  field  of  17.6  koe  a  shift  of 
±2.65%  is  expected  in  line  6. 

The  experimental  technique  was  similar  to  that 
in  our  earlier  work.1*2.7   The  carriage  of  a  lathe 
was  used  to  provide  velocities  by  means  of  which 
the  spectrum  was  scanned.   The  source  was 
mounted  in  the  narrow  gap  of  an  electromagnet 
capable  of  producing  fields  up  to  20  koe.    The 
magnet  was  attached  rigidly  to  the  end  of  the  lathe 
and  the  absorber  was  mounted  on  the  carriage. 
The  result  obtained  for  line  6  is  shown  in  Fig.  2. 
On  application  of  the  field  to  the  source,  a  shift 
to  lower  energy  is  unmistakable.    The  correlation 


10  II 

SPEED  (mm/sec) 

FIG.  2.    Line  6  observed  with#ext  =  0  and  #ext=  17.6 
koe,  where  #ext  is  the  external  field  applied  to  the 
source  of  resonance  radiation .    The  ordinate  is  in  units 
of  103  counts . 


514 


305 


Volume  4,  Number  10 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


May  15,   1960 


is  therefore  negative.    The  magnitude  of  the  ob- 
served shift  is  (2.7±0.4)%  which  is  compatible 
with  the  linear  relation  Hn  =Hno-Hext-    A  negative 
shift  of  about  the  correct  magnitude  was  also  ob- 
served in  line  4.    The  multiplet  structure  in  line 
4  is  symmetrical  (Fig.  1)  and  so  does  not  seriously 
interfere  with  the  observation  of  a  shift  of  its 
central  member. 

The  effective  field  at  the  iron  nucleus  has  now 
been  determined  both  in  sign  and  magnitude.    The 
existence  of  such  a  large  negative  field  (-333  koe) 
was  unexpected.    Marshall8  has  discussed  a  num- 
ber of  sources  of  the  effective  nuclear  field.    These 
consist  mainly  of  direct  effects  of  the  3d  electrons 
and  indirect  effects  of  polarization  of  the  various 
s  electrons,  which  then  contribute  to  the  field  via 
the  Fermi  contact  interaction.    The  polarization 
of  inner  shells  of  electrons  results  in  negative 
contributions  to  the  field.    In  view  of  the  experi- 
mental result  these  negative  terms  must  completely 
dominate  the  other  contributions. 

We  are  grateful  to  S.  Raboy  for  loan  of  the  mag- 
net .   We  wish  also  to  thank  M.  R.  Perlow  for  pre- 
paration of  the  source;  F.  J.  Karasek  for  contin- 
uing to  supply  us  with  thin  rolled  iron  foils;  and 


E.  Kowalski  for  assistance  in  taking  the  data.  We 
have  profited  from  a  stimulating  discussion  with 
W.  Marshall. 


This  work  was  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the 
U.  S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission. 

JG.  J.  Perlow,  S.  S.  Hanna,  M.  Hamermesh,  C. 
Littlejohn,  D.  H.  Vincent,  R.  S.  Preston,  and  J. 
Heberle,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  74  (1960). 

2S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J. 
Perlow,  R.  S.  Preston,  andD.  H.  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  4,  177  (1960). 

3R.  L.  Mdssbauer,  Z.  Physik  151,  124  (1958). 

4(Ferrocyanide)  S.  L.  Ruby,  L.  M.  Epstein,  and 
K.  H.  Sun  (to  be  published);  (ferrocyanide,  stainless 
steel)  G.  K.  Wertheim,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  403 
(1960);  (Fe203)  O.  C.  Kistner  and  A.  W.  Sunyar,  Phys. 
Rev.  Letters  4,  412  (1960). 

5  A.  C.  Gossard,  A.M.  Portis,  and  W.  J.  Sandle 
(to  be  published) . 

6G.  T.  Ewan,  R.  L.  Graham,  and  J.  S.  Geiger  (to 
be  published) . 

7S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J. 
Perlow,  R.  S.  Preston,  andD.  H.  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  4,  28  (1960). 

8W.  Marshall,  Phys.  Rev.  110,  1280  (1958),   and 
private  communication. 


306 

a^a  a^a  a^fa  a^a  a^a  a^a  a^a  a^a  a^a  Jm  M  Ml  <^fc-  W  a^a  a^U  a^a  «*Jfc-  a^a  a^a  Ji  a^a  a^>  a^a  a^a  a^a  a^e  a^a  a^a  a^a  a^a  a^a  a^a  a^a  a^a  *^a  a^a  a^a  a^a  a^a  a^a  a^a  a^a  a^a  ^i^l  J|  Ji^i^ll^l  J|J|  AJlU 

Volume  5,  Number  8  PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS  October  15,  I960 


TEMPERATURE  DEPENDENCE  OF  THE  INTERNAL  FIELD  IN  FERROMAGNETS* 

D.  E.  Nagle,  H.  Frauenf elder,  +  R.  D.  Tayloi,  D.  R.  F.  Cochran,  and  B.  T.  Matthias* 

Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory,  University  of  California,   Los  Alamos,  New  Mexico 

(Received  September  22,  1960) 


The  saturation  magnetization  of  a  ferromagnet 
varies  with  temperature  in  a  characteristic  and 
well-investigated  manner;   it  reaches  a  limiting 
value  at  temperatures  well  below  the  Curie  tem- 
perature Tq  and  vanishes  at  and  above  Tq.    The 
behavior  of  the  internal  magnetic  field,  however, 
is  much  less  well  known.    Because  the  theories 
of  internal  fields  in  ferromagnets  are  still  far 
from  satisfactory,1  accurate  and  detailed  meas- 
urements of  these  internal  fields  over  a  wide 
temperature  range  are  important;  the  effects 
near  the  Curie  point  are  particularly  revealing. 
Preliminary  work  on  such  problems  has  been 
discussed  by  the  Argonne  group.1    In  the  present 
Letter,  we  report  a  determination  of  the  temper- 
ature variation  of  the  internal  magnetic  field  in 
Fe  (Tc  =  1043°K)  and  in  a  CoPd  alloy  (Tc  =  275°K) 
by  means  of  the  Mossbauer  effect. 

That  the  MSssbauer  effect  is  well  suited  for  the 
investigation  of  internal  fields  no  longer  needs 
any  justification.1    The  radioisotope  Fe57  is  very 
convenient  for  such  experiments,   since  Fe  itself 
is  a  ferromagnet  and  since  the  MOssbauer  spec- 
trum of  its  14.4-kev  gamma  ray  is  well  known.2 
The  emission  spectrum  of  an  Fe  source  at  room 
temperature  consists  of  six  lines,  well  separated 
by  the  Zeeman  effect  due  to  the  internal  magnetic 
field.    With  an  Fe  absorber  of  identical  internal 
field,  these  lines  give  rise  to  a  MSssbauer  spec- 
trum consisting  of  a  prominent  central  absorp- 
tion line  and  five  strong  satellites  on  either  side, 
two  of  them  doublets.    The  internal  field  has  been 
deduced  from  the  splitting  of  these  lines.2 

Complications  arise  when  the  source  and  the 
absorber  have  different  internal  fields.    The  six 
emission  and  six  absorption  lines  of  different 
spacing  then  give  rise  to  as  many  as  36  lines; 
the  MOssbauer  spectrum  becomes  harder  to  find 
and  harder  to  identify.    There  are  three  ways  to 
circumvent  this  difficulty.    One  can  employ  a 
source  having  no  effective  internal  field  where 
the  six  emission  lines  are  collapsed  into  one,3 
one  can  utilize  a  single  line  absorber,4'5  or  one 
can  reduce  the  number  of  lines  by  selecting 
plane2  or  circularly6  polarized  gamma  rays.    The 
best  method  will  depend  on  the  particular  prob- 
lem.   We  have  chosen  the  first  approach  for  Fe 
and  the  third  one,  with  selection  of  circularly 
polarized  gamma  rays,  for  CoPd. 


A  CoPd  source  was  prepared  by  electroplating 
Co"  onto  a  CoPd  alloy  (92%  Pd,  8%  Co)  and 
heating  the  CoPd  foil  in  a  vacuum  furnace  at 
1000°C  for  two  hours.    The  source  was  then 
placed  in  a  cryostat  which  allowed  the  source 
temperature  to  be  varied  from  88CK  to  room  tem- 
perature.   The  MSssbauer  spectrum  was  observed 
with  an  Fe  absorber,  enriched  to  75%  Fe57  and  of 
equivalent  thickness  2.2  mg/cm2.    This  absorber 
was  mounted  on  a  Jensen  8 -inch  Flexair  woofer 
and  moved  sinusoidally  at  a  frequency  of  11  sec"1. 
The  output  pulses  from  a  scintillation  counter 
were  energy  selected  by  a  single-channel  analy- 
zer and  modulated  with  a  saw  tooth  voltage,  which 
was  locked  in  with  the  speaker  drive.    The  mod- 
ulated pulses  were  displayed  on  a  400-channel 
RIDL  analyzer  and  thus  yielded  directly  the  de- 
sired MOssbauer  spectrum,4  as  shown  in  Fig.  1. 
Due  to  the  sinusoidal  drive  and  linear  display, 
the  velocity  scale  in  Fig.  1  is  sinusoidal.    The 
slight  drop  to  the  right  in  each  spectrum  is 
caused  by  dead-time  effect  in  the  400-channel 
analyzer. 

A  series  of  measurements  was  taken  in  which 
the  temperature  of  the  CoPd  source  was  varied 
and  the  temperature  of  the  Fe  absorber  was  24°C. 


•**■**.-  -  (  _,                                 5xlOS  COUNTS  /CHANNEL 

- -^^                           *\     /"■*W^"'V'*""*"*"**"W**—- »773*C 

v"Wsv"l"^.»»<,        "**' 

♦—*•-.                                 \        /'~~                *"        ~"'%~  753#C 

UJ 

z 
z 
< 

**"*-H«V,        ^»^-^/"^S 738*C 

X 

o 

•-— ^.^               +S\/**\>\j+^'**m*~,~**~  722«C 

•^ 

— «. 

(f) 

».    r\.      '. 

z 

.- —           •*•"   v  v-Saf^/^y'*  ■•«■"•• — .693.c 

z> 

o 
o 

\       *""->        .—V      -                      ^ 

■s       v.v— .      "  1MS      •«'        •..'            \    /          -•%         W-~2I5*C 

r  y  rrs^v-- 

»5.32  mm /tec 

FIG.  1.    Mossbauer  spectra  of  a  CoPd  source  at 
24CC  and  an  Fe  absorber  as  functions  of  the  absorber 
temperature.    Positive  velocity  is  taken  to  mean  source 
moving  away  from  absorber. 


364 


307 


Volume  5,  Number  8 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


October   15,  I960 


When  the  CoPd  was  above  its  Curie  point  of 
275°K,  the  six-line  spectrum  was  obtained,  sim- 
ilar to  the  lowest  curve  of  Fig.  1;  such  a  spec- 
trum is  typical  of  a  single-line  source  with  an  Fe 
absorber.    Thus  CoPd  above  its  Curie  point  pos- 
sesses only  a  very  small  effective  magnetic  field: 
From  the  position  of  the  lines  and  from  the  line 
widths,  an  upper  limit  of  2000  oersteds  is  ob- 
tained.   Below  the  Curie  point,  the  splitting  pat- 
tern changes  rapidly,  indicating  the  appearance 
of  an  internal  magnetic  field.    At  88°K,  astonish- 
ingly enough,  the  pattern  is  typical  of  source  and 
absorber  with  identical  fields.    Hence  at  88°K, 
the  field  at  the  Fe57  nucleus  in  CoPd  is  3.3  xlO5 
oersteds,2  the  same  as  that  of  Fe57  in  Fe  at  tem- 
peratures well  below  the  Curie  point.    Details  of 
these  measurements  will  be  published  elsewhere.7 

The  single  emission  line  of  the  CoPd  source 
above  its  Curie  point  now  offers  a  convenient  tool 
for  the  investigation  of  the  internal  field  in  Fe. 
For  this  experiment,  an  absorber  (5  mg/cm2  Fe57, 
75%  enriched)  was  placed  in  a  furnace  equipped 
with  thin  entrance  and  exit  windows  and  contain- 
ing an  atmosphere  of  hydrogen.    The  CoPd  source 
was  mounted  on  the  speaker  and  the  transmission 
spectrum  recorded  as  a  function  of  the  absorber 
temperature.    Some  typical  spectra  obtained  in 
this  way  are  shown  in  Fig.  1. 

The  curves  in  Fig.  1  show  the  decrease  in  the 
internal  magnetic  field,  the  temperature  shift8'9 
of  the  center  of  the  spectrum,  the  decrease  in 
Mo'ssbauer  absorption  due  to  the  Debye -Waller 
factor,  and  finally  the  disappearance  of  the  effec- 
tive magnetic  field  in  the  Fe  absorber  at  the  Curie 
point. 

The  relative  magnetic  field  at  the  Fe57  nucleus, 
as  deduced  from  the  curves  in  Fig.  1  and  some 
additional  data,  is  plotted  in  Fig.  2  as  a  function 
of  T/Tq.    For  comparison,  the  relative  satura- 
tion magnetization10  is  indicated  by  the  solid  line. 

We  thank  Dr.  R.  M.  Bozorth  for  determining 
the  Curie  point  of  our  CoPd  alloy,  Dr.  C.  E. 
Olsen  for  the  preparation  of  the  CoPd  alloy  and 
the  annealing  of  the  source,  and  Dr.  W.  E.  Keller 
for  the  loan  of  his  DYNA  amplifier.   We  are  grate- 
ful to  Dr.  P.  P.  Craig  and  Dr.  J.  G.  Dash  for 
stimulating  discussions  and  to  Mr.  R.  Hanft  for 
his  tireless  efforts  during  the  experiment. 


1 

i      i      i 

T 

1          ' 

!             1             1 

1.0 

:       ■ 

- 

I> 

^V 

- 

03 

\l 

»     RUN  1 

0.6 

•     RUN  2 

0.4 

\             - 

0.2 

1            !            1 

1 

X- 

FIG.  2.    Relative  internal  magnetic  field  H(T)/H(2$TK) 
at  the  Fe67  nuclei  in  an  Fe  absorber,  as  deduced  by 
Mossbauer  effect.    The  solid  line  indicates  the  relative 
saturation  magnetization,  cr(T)/o-(297°K),  of  Fe. 


*Work  done  under  the  auspices  of  the  U.  S.  Atomic 
Energy  Commission. 

tConsultant,  University  of  Illinois,  Urbana,  Illinois. 

%  Consultant,  Bell  Telephone  Laboratories,  Murray 
Hill,  New  Jersey. 

'Mossbauer  Effect,  Allerton  House  Conference, 
edited  by  H.  Frauenfelder  and  H.  Lustig  (University 
of  Illinois,  Urbana,  1960). 

2S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J. 
Perlow,   R.  S.  Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  4_,   177  (1960). 

30.  C.  Kistner  and  A.  W.  Sunyar,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  4,  412  (1960). 

4S.  L.  Ruby,  L.  M.  Epstein,  and  K.  H.  Sun,  Rev. 
Sci.  Instr.  31,  580  (1960). 

5G.  K.  Wertheim,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  403  (1960). 

6H.  Frauenfelder,  D.  E.  Nagle,  R.  D.  Taylor, 
D.  R.  F.  Cochran,  and  W.  M.  Visscher  (to  be  pub- 
lished). 

7R.  D.  Taylor,  D.  E.  Nagle,  H.  Frauenfelder,  and 
D.  R.  F.  Cochran  (to  be  published). 

8R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  4,  274  (1960). 

9B.  D.  Josephson,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  341  (1960). 

10American  Institute  of  Physics  Handbook  (McGraw- 
Hill  Book  Company,  New  York,   1957),  p.  5-208. 


365 


308 

Volume  5,  Number  12  PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS  December  15,  1960 


POLARIZATION  OF  THE  CONDUCTION  ELECTRONS  IN  THE  FERROMAGNETIC  METALS* 

A.  J.  F.  Boyle,  D.  St.  P.  Bunbury,  and  C.  Edwards 

The  Physical  Laboratories,   University  of  Manchester,  Manchester,   England 

(Received  November  15,   1960) 


It  has  recently  been  proposed1  that  the  polar- 
ization of  the  4s  conduction  electrons  in  Fe,  Co, 
and  Ni  is  antiparallel  to  that  of  the  electrons  in 
the  unfilled  3d  shell;  this  is  the  reverse  of  the 
usual  assumption.    There  are  few  ways  in  which 
this  polarization  is  manifested.    One,  however, 
is  in  the  effective  magnetic  field  at  a  nucleus, 
which  acts  through  the  contact  interaction  with 
the  4s  electrons.    The  magnitude  of  this  field  has 
been  given  by  Marshall2  as 


Hc  =  (8n/3)is\lp(0)\A' 


\i.np, 


(1) 


where  \i  is  the  Bohr  magneton,    £s  I  ip{0)  l^2  is 
the  average  probability  density  of  a  4s  conduc- 
tion electron  evaluated  at  the  nucleus  [I^O)!^2 
being  the  free  atom  value],  n  is  the  number  of 
conduction  electrons  per  atom,  and/)  is  their 
polarization.    The  sign  of  the  field  is  positive, 
i.e.,  parallel  to  the  direction  of  magnetization, 
if  the  polarization  of  the  4s  electrons  is  parallel 
to  the  3d  polarization. 


Hanna  et  aL3>4  have  measured  the  magnitude 
and  sign  of  the  field  at  the  Fe  nucleus  in  iron  by 
observing  the  Zeeman  splitting  of  the  14-kev 
transition  in  Fe57  and  obtain  the  value  -3  xlO5  koe. 
In  this  case,  however,  there  are  other  contri- 
butions to  the  field  beside  H c;  mainly  those  due 
to  the  electrons  of  the  same  atom,   i.e.,  the 
polarized  3d  electrons.    These  other  contribu- 
tions almost  certainly  outweigh  the  effect  of  the 
field  Hc  alone  (Hc  is  probably  of  the  order  of  50 
to  100  koe),  and  it  is  therefore  difficult  to  draw 
any  conclusion  concerning  its  sign. 

In  an  attempt  to  measure  H c  directly,  dilute 
(1%)  solid  solutions  of  Sn  in  the  ferromagnetic 
metals  (Fe,  Co,  and  Ni)  have  been  prepared. 
Since  Sn  is  basically  diamagnetic,  we  expect 
that  there  will  be  no  contribution  to  the  field  at 
the  Sn  nucleus  from  its  own  inner  electrons  and 
that  the  field  will  be  given  simply  by 


H    =(4tt/3)M+//   , 
s  c 


(2) 
553 


309 


Volume  5,  Number  12 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


Decembei 


I960 


where  l^(0)l^2  in  (1)  is  the  appropriate  value  for 
a  Sn  atom.    Since  Hc  is  due  to  an  over -all  polar- 
ization of  the  conduction  electrons,  the  other 
terms  should  remain  those  appropriate  to  the 
solvent  atoms.5 

The  Zeeman  splitting  of  the  24-kev  transition 
in  Sn119  was  observed8  using  the  MCssbauer 
effect.7'8   The  transmission  through  the  absorber 
(the  alloy)  of  the  radiation  emitted  by  a  moving 
source  was  measured  as  a  function  of  the  velocity 
of  the  source.    The  velocity  spectrometer  has 
been  described  in  detail  elsewhere.6   The  tem- 
perature of  both  the  source  and  absorber  were 
maintained  around  100°K.    Figures  1,  2,  and  3 
show  the  transmission  spectra  obtained  for  Fe 
and  Ni  and  Co.    Each  member  of  the  doublet  is 
an  unresolved  triplet  caused  by  the  splitting  of 
the  excited  \    state,  while  the  doublet  separa- 
tion is  due  mainly  to  the  splitting  of  the  ground 
£+  state.    The  field  strengths  Hs  listed  in  Table  I 
were  derived  using  the  known  values  of  the  mag- 
netic moments.    (The  excited  state  moment  has 
been  measured  as  0.83  ±0.03  nuclear  magneton.9) 

The  shifts  listed  in  the  table  refer  to  the  dis- 
placement of  the  spectra  towards  negative  vel- 
ocity and  are  almost  entirely  due  to  the  chemical 


Table  I.  Results  derived  from  the  velocity  spectra 
of  the  absorption  of  24-kev  y  rays  from  Sn119m  in  ab- 
sorbers containing  1  %  of  Sn119  dissolved  in  Fe ,  Co, 
and  Ni.  The  shift  is  the  displacement  of  the  spectra 
towards  negative  velocity  due  to  chemical  effects,  Hs 
is  the  field  at  the  Sn  nucleus,  and  (4ti/3)M  is  the  usuaJ 
Lorentz  field. 


Solvent 

Shift 

(mm/sec) 

(koe) 

(4tt/3)M 

Hs  -  (4tt/3)M 

Fe 

1.1 

-81  ±4 

7.5 

-88 

Co 

1.1 

-20.5  ±1 

5 

6.1 

-26.5  ±1.5 

Ni 

1.1 

+  18.5±1 

2.0 

+  16.5  ±1 

shift.10   In  this  case,  where  the  source  was 
metallic  tin,  the  magnitude  of  the  shift  should  be 
proportional  to  (|s  -  £Sn)  10(0)  lSn2;   £Sn  and  £s 
refer  to  metallic  tin  and  the  solvent  metal, 
respectively. 

The  sign  of  Hg  was  determined  by  placing  each 
absorber  in  a  transverse  magnetic  field  of  about 
7  koe;  the  magnetization  direction  is  now  parallel 
to  the  external  field.    A  positive  field  was  ob- 
served only  in  the  case  of  Ni.    The  final  values 


190    — 


188 


o    magnetized,  zero  field 
•    transverse    field,    7  koe 

J I I I I L 


FIG.  1.    The  absorption 
spectra  obtained  with  1%  Sn119 
in  Fe.    Left  scale,  o  ;  right 
scale,  •  . 


94 


554 


310 

Volume  5,  Number  12  PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS  December  15,  1960 


velocity    mm/sec 


FIG.  2.    The  absorption  c 

spectra  obtained  with  1%  Sn119  o 

in  Ni.    Left  scale,  o  ;  right 
scale,  •  . 


-3 

-2 

-1 

O 

1            2            3 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1             1              1    • 

•            _ 

40 

• 

•     On 

•  •  - 

cP«* 

•    ^ 

• 

39 

"%      \ 

o 

• 

\\ 

T       • 

38 

••X 

* 

< 

/      • 
P  • 

•  • 

» 

37 

o 

• 

•                   nickel 

unmagnetized 
transverse  field,    6  koe 

36 

1 

1 

1 

1             1             1 

-    75 


-    73 


-    71 


69 


67 


-4 


40 


FIG.  3.  The  absorption 
spectrum  obtained  with  1  % 
Sn119  in  Co. 


39    — 


of  [Hs  -  (4tt/3)M]  are  listed  in  the  table,  where 
the  values  of  M  have  been  corrected  for  the 
quenching  of  the  atomic  moments  by  the  added 
valence  electrons  of  Sn.    This  is  most  significant 
in  Ni,  and,  since  it  will  occur  predominantly 
amongst  the  nearest  neighbors,  will  undoubtedly 
result  in  a  lowered  value  of  the  observed  field. 


velocity    mm/sec 
2-1  O  I  2  3 


1 

1             1 

1             1             1 

1          1 

1 

CD£Tc9 

— 

jff        — 

o 

QiO 

<0 

1 

1             1 

unmagnetized 
1          1          1 

cobalt 

1          1 

1 

The  results  are  obviously  inconsistent  with  the 
existence  of  the  single  field  H  •  firstly  because 
of  the  different  signs  and  secondly  because  of 
the  relative  magnitudes  of  the  fields.    Since  p  is 
very  closely  proportional  to  A/,2  the  expression 
(1)  for  H c  can  be  written  simply,  H c  =  const  £$M. 
Further,  we  can  conclude  from  the  chemical 


555 


311 


Volume  5,  Number  12 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


December   15,   I960 


shifts  that  |s  is  practically  constant  for  Fe,  Co, 
and  Ni,  and  therefore  H c  will  be  roughly  pro- 
portional to  M. 

There  is  another  mechanism11  by  which  an 
effective  field  might  be  produced  at  the  Sn  nucleus 
in  this  situation.    The  wave  function  for  the  4s 
electrons  of  the  Sn  atom  will  overlap  with  those 
of  the  3d  electrons  of  the  surrounding  solvent 
atoms,  and  the  polarization  of  the  latter  will  re- 
sult in  a  change  in  the  relative  spatial  distribu- 
tion of  the  4s  electrons  in  respect  of  their  spin 
orientation.    In  the  region  of  the  Sn  nucleus, 
electrons  with  spin  antiparallel  to  the  3d  polar- 
ization will  predominate,  producing  a  negative 
effective  field  Hp. 

Evidence  for  the  existence  of  such  a  field  is 
provided  by  the  results  for  Co  (Fig.  3)  which 
indicate  the  presence  of  a  second  field  of  -50  koe 
with  the  same  chemical  shift.    X-ray  analysis  of 
the  sample  showed  that  both  cubic  and  hexagonal 
structures  were  present  in  the  rough  proportion 
40:60.    Since  neither  £s  nor  p  depends  on  the 
structure,  the  two  values  of  the  field  cannot  be 
associated  with  H c;  however,  since  the  distri- 
bution of  the  3d  orbitals  will  probably  differ  for 
the  two  structures,12  Hp  would  also  differ. 

We  have  no  estimate  of  Hp,  but  its  magnitude 
should  depend  not  only  on  M  but  also  on  the  mean 
radius  of  the  3d  shell  and  thus  will  decrease 
more  rapidly  from  Fe  to  Ni  than  does  the  field 
Hc  which  depends  only  on  M.    In  the  absence  of 
any  further  contributions,  combination  of  such  a 
field  Hp  with  a  positive  value  of  H c  would  there- 
fore provide  a  qualitative  interpretation  of  the 
present  results. 

It  is  interesting  to  compare  the  present  results 
for  the  field  at  a  Sn  nucleus  in  Fe  with  those  of 
Samoilov  et  al.13    From  measurements  of  the 
nuclear  polarization  these  authors  obtain  values 


of  250  koe  and  280  koe,  respectively,  for  the 
field  at  In114  and  Sb122  dissolved  in  Fe. 

We  are  indebted  to  Dr.  C.  Johnson  for  drawing 
our  attention  to  the  results  of  Samoilov  et  al. 
and  we  are  grateful  to  many  people  for  valuable 
discussion,  particularly  Dr.  Lomer,  Dr.  W. 
Marshall,  Dr.  S.  F.  Edwards,  and  Dr.  H.  E. 
Hall.    Much  helpful  advice  in  the  preparation  of 
the  alloys  has  been  given  by  Dr.  J.  Stubbles. 
We  would  also  like  to  thank  Dr.  J.  Zussman  for 
performing  the  x-ray  analysis. 


*Supported  financially  by  the  Department  of  Scientific 
and  Industrial  Research. 

'For  a  review  article  see  C.  Herring,  Suppl.  J.  Appl. 
Phys.  31,  3S  (1960). 

2W.  Marshall,   Phys.  Rev.  110,   1280(1958). 

3S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J.  Per- 
low,  R.  S.  Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  4,   177  (1960). 

4S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  G.  J.  Perlow,  R.  S. 
Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4, 
513  (1960). 

5D.  R.  Teeters,  thesis,  University  of  California, 
Berkeley,  1955  (unpublished). 

Separated  Sn119  used  in  the  preparation  of  the  alloys 
was  supplied  by  the  Chemistry  Division,  Atomic  Energy 
Research  Establishment,  Harwell. 

7R„  L.  Mossbauer,   Z.  Physik  151,   125(1959). 

8A.  J.  F.  Boyle,  D.  St.  P.  Bunbury,  C.  Edwards, 
and  H.  E.  Hall,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc.  (London)  (to  be  pub- 
lished). 

9A.  J.  F.  Boyle,  D.  St.  P.  Bunbury,  and  C.  Edwards 
(to  be  published). 

,0O.  C.  Kistner  and  A.  W.  Sunyar,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  4,  412  (1960). 

nD.  A.  Goodings  and  V.  Heine,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters 
5,  370  (1960). 

12J.  B.  Goodenough,  Phys.  Rev.  120,  67  (1960). 

13V.  N.  Samoilov,  V.  V.  Skliarevsky,  and  E.  P. 
Stepanov,  Soviet  Phys.  -JETP  11(38),  261  (1960). 


556 


312 


Volume  6,  Number  9 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


May  1,  1961 


HYPERFINE  FIELD  AND  ATOMIC  MOMENT  OF  IRON  IN  FERROMAGNETIC  ALLOYS 

C.  E.  Johnson,  M.  S.  Ridout,  T.  E.  Cranshaw,  and  P.  E.  Madsen 

Atomic  Energy  Research  Establishment,  Harwell,  England 
(Received  February  1,  1961;  revised  manuscript  received  April  10,  1961) 


Mott  and  Stevens1  and  Lomer  and  Marshall2 
have  proposed  models  of  the  ferromagnetic  alloys 
of  the  iron  group  metals,  based  on  the  assumption 
that  for  dilute  alloys  a  rearrangement  of  electrons 
occurs  around  solute  atoms  only,  while  to  a  first 
approximation  the  electronic  structure  of  the  ma- 
trix atoms  remains  unaltered  from  that  in  the 
pure  metal.    Each  atom  carries  a  localized  mag- 
netic moment  which  contributes  directly  to  the 
total  saturation  moment  and  to  the  magnetic  part 
of  the  neutron  scattering  cross  section,  and  in- 
directly to  the  hyperfine  field  Hn.    Marshall3  has 
shown  that  the  hyperfine  field  in  a  pure  ferromag- 
netic metal  should  be  proportional  to  the  magne- 
tization.   This  has  been  confirmed  experimentally 
for  cobalt4  and  for  iron5  by  varying  the  tempera- 
ture, but  the  absolute  agreement  between  theory 
and  measurement  is  poor.6   The  Mo'ssbauer  effect7 
provides  a  method  for  measuring  Hn  for  iron  in 
alloys  which  may  be  used  to  test  the  localized 
models  and  to  investigate  the  relation  between 
hyperfine  field  and  atomic  moment. 

We  have  measured  the  Mo'ssbauer  absorption 
spectrum  at  room  temperature  over  the  whole 
range  of  Fe-Co  and  Fe-Ni  alloys  for  the  14.4- 
key  y  radiation  of  Fe57.   The  source  was  pre- 
pared by  electroplating  Co57  onto  copper  foil, 
followed  by  diffusion  by  annealing.   Rapid  elec- 
tron spin  exchange  resulted  in  a  single  line  which 
had  the  natural  width  associated  with  the  lifetime 
of  the  emitting  state:    The  line  was  shifted  by  0.20 
mm/sec  with  respect  to  the  center  of  the  iron 
spectrum.    The  alloys  were  prepared  by  arc- 
casting  spectroscopically  standardized  materials 
supplied  by  Johnson  Matthey,  Ltd. ,  and  were  cold 
rolled  into  foils  about  1  mil  thick.   Alloys  contain- 
ing 30%  or  less  iron  were  enriched  in  Fe57  by 
plating  and  annealing.   Data  for  pure  cobalt  and 
nickel  were  obtained  with  Co57  sources  plated 
onto  foils  of  each  metal,  using  stainless  steel  as 
a  monoenergetic  absorber.8   Motion  of  the  source 
was  provided  by  a  moving  coil  vibrator  driven  by 
an  amplifier  and  a  triangular  wave  generator.   A 
moving  iron  transducer  gave  a  voltage  propor- 
tional to  the  source  velocity,  and  this  waveform 
was  fed  back  to  the  input  of  the  amplifier,  so  that 
the  velocity  of  the  source  closely  followed  the  in- 
put waveform.    Counts  were  fed  into  a  single- 


channel  pulse-height  analyzer  to  select  the  14.4- 
kev  radiation,  and  the  output  pulses  were  modu- 
lated with  the  velocity  waveform  and  fed  into  a 
100-channel  kicksorter.   The  resulting  spectrum9 
showed  six  lines  arising  from  the  Zeeman  split- 
ting of  the  nuclear  levels  of  Fe57,  and  the  hyper- 
fine field  was  computed  from  their  separations. 
The  spectra  for  the  alloys  showed  no  appreciable 
line  broadening  or  shifts  compared  with  the  pure 
iron  spectrum.    Hence,  the  variations  in  hyper- 
fine field  due  to  local  inhomogeneities  are  small 
(less  than  3%),  and  there  is  no  large  change  in 
s- electron  density  at  the  iron  nuclei  due  to  al- 
loying. 

The  variation  of  the  magnetic  field  at  iron  nu- 
clei in  the  alloys,  expressed  as  a  fraction  of  the 
field  in  metallic  iron,  is  shown  in  Fig.  1,  where 
Hn{x)/Hn{0)  is  plotted  against  the  excess  electron 
number  x  over  that  of  iron.   A  remarkable  feature 
is  the  general  similarity  in  form  with  the  corre- 
sponding region  of  the  Slater -Pauling  curve10  for 
the  saturation  moments:    For  both  alloy  systems 
Hn  and  the  saturation  moment  show  a  maximum 
near  x  =  0.3.    Even  for  small  additions  of  solute 
it  seems  that  large  changes  in  the  hyperfine  field 
of  the  iron  atoms  result,  in  contrast  to  the  local- 
ized theories. 

If  it  is  assumed  that  the  hyperfine  field  is  pro- 
portional to  the  atomic  moment  in  the  alloys,  then 
the  moment  on  iron  is  given  by  fi(Fe)  =2.22#w(x)/ 
Hn(0)  Bohr  magnetons.    The  field  on  cobalt  nuclei 
in  Fe-Co  alloys  has  been  determined  from  low- 
temperature  specific  heat  measurements  by  Arp, 
Edmonds,  and  Petersen,11  and  in  contrast  to  the 
field  on  iron  nuclei  it  shows  no  maximum  but 
increases  steadily  from  217  xlO3  gauss  in  pure 
cobalt  to  about  320 xlO3  gauss  in  iron.    From 
these  data  a  curve  for  m(Co)  may  be  derived, 
taking  the  moment  in  pure  cobalt  to  be  1.71  Bohr 
magnetons.    If  these  moments  are  averaged  so 
that  Ji  =(l-c)u(Fe)  +  cju(Co),  where  c  is  the  cobalt 
concentration,  /i  is  found  to  lie  on  a  curve  which 
is  close  to  the  Slater -Pauling  curve. 

There  are  no  data  on  the  hfs  of  nickel  in  Fe-Ni 
alloys,  but  Shull  and  Wilkinson13  have  measured 
the  atomic  moments  in  some  of  these  alloys  by 
neutron  diffraction.    For  ordered  Ni3Fe  they  find 
pt(Fe)  =2.8,  whereas  our  data,  combined  with  the 


450 


313 


Volume  6,  Number  9 


PHYSICAL    REVIEW    LETTERS 


May   1,  1961 


I.IO 

-      r^°Q 

/   A 

o  Fe  -  Co 

/               » 

•  Fe-Ni 

\r          A 

I.OO 

\ 

0.90 

0.80 

Co 


FIG.  1.    The  magnetic  field  at  iron  nuclei  in  Fe-Co 
and  Fe-Ni  alloys  relative  to  the  field  in  metallic  iron, 
plotted  as  a  function  of  electron  number.    The  data  in 
the  range  Fe0=8Ni0o2  to  Fe0.5Ni0#5  where  the  Curie 
points  are  low  have  been  corrected  to  take  account  of 
incomplete  saturation  at  room  temperature.    Points 
for  Co  and  Ni  agree  well  with  the  results  given  by 
Wertheim.8    Alloys  near  Fe0,5Co0.5  are  very  brittle 
and  difficult  to  roll  and  the  points  on  the  dashed  curve 
were  taken  with  small  and  cracked  specimens.    Alloys 
were  also  prepared  in  this  range  by  electroplating  and 
they  gave  higher  values  for  Hn  which  lie  on  the  continu- 
ous curve. 


assumption  that  atomic  moment  is  proportional 
to  Hn,  give  about  1.8.    This  implies  that  the  pro- 
portionality between  atomic  moment  and  Hn  is 
not  strictly  valid  in  alloys.   The  discrepancy 
could  be  explained  by  a  contribution  to  Hn  which 
depends  on  the  nickel  as  well  as  the  iron  moments, 


e.g.,  if  the  component  due  to  the  conduction  elec- 
tron polarization  were  a  function  of  the  average 
moment  JL.    Since  p  for  NL,Fe  is  smaller  than  that 
for  iron  and#n  is  negative,13  this  explanation  re- 
quires the  polarization  to  be  negative  in  accord 
with  a  suggestion  of  Anderson  and  Clogston14  and 
with  measurements  of  the  field  at  tin  nuclei  in  al- 
loys with  iron.15  An  estimate  of  the  effect  of  such 
a  term  in  the  Fe-Co  alloys  shows  that,  owing  to 
the  smaller  variation  of  ju  throughout  the  series, 
it  would  not  destroy  the  agreement  between  /I 
derived  from  hfs  and  saturation  magnetization 
data. 

We  thank  Dr.  W.  Marshall  and  Dr.  W.  M.  Lomer 
for  many  valuable  discussions,  Dr.  J.  H.  Stephen 
for  performing  the  electroplating,  and  Dr.  E. 
Bretscher  for  his  generous  support. 


*N.  F.  Mott  and  K.  W.  H.  Stevens,  Phil.  Mag.  2, 
1364  (1957). 

2W.  M.  Lomer  and  W.  Marshall,  Phil.  Mag.  3,  185 
(1958) . 

3W.  Marshall,  Phys.  Rev.  110,  1280  (1958). 

4A.  M.  Portis  and  A.  C.  Gossard,  J.  Appl.  Phys. 
31,  205S  (1960). 

5D.  E.  Nagle,  H.  Frauenf elder ,  R.  D.  Taylor, 
D.  R.  F.  Cochran,  and  B.  T.  Matthias,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  5,  364  (1960). 

8S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  G.  J.  Perlow,  R.  S. 
Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4, 
513  (1960). 

7R.  L.  Mdssbauer,  Z.  Physik  151 ,  124  (1958). 

8G.  K.  Wertheim,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  403  (1960). 

9S.  L.  Ruby,  L.  M.  Epstein,  and  K.  H.  Sun,  Rev. 
Sci.  Instr.  31,  580  (1960). 

10See,  e.g.,  C.  Kittel,  Introduction  to  Solid-State 
Physics  (John  Wiley  &  Sons,  Inc. ,  New  York,  1953), 
Chap.  XII. 

UV.  Arp,  D.  Edmonds,  and  R.  Petersen,  Phys.  Rev. 
Letters  3,  212  (1960). 

12C.  G.  Shull  andM.  K.  Wilkinson,  Phys.  Rev.  97, 
304  (1955). 

13In  collaboration  with  Dr.  G.  J.  Perlow  we  have  shown 
that  the  sign  of  the  field  is  negative  for  Fe02Ni0#8  as 
well  as  for  iron. 

14P.  W.  Anderson  and  A.  M.  Clogston,  Bull.  Am. 
Phys.  Soc.  6,  124  (1961). 

16A.  J.  F.  Boyle,  D.  St.  P.  Bunbury,  andC.  Edwards, 
Phys.  Rev.  Letters  5,  553  (1960). 


451 


314 


PHYSICAL     REVIEW 


VOLUME     122.     NU: 


Internal  Magnetic  Fields  in  Manganese-Tin  Alloys* 

Luise  Meyer-Schutzmeister,  R.  S.  Preston,  and  S.  S.  Hanna 

Argonne  National  Laboratory,  Argonne,  Illinois 

(Received  February  13,  1961) 

The  hyperfine  fields  at  the  tin  sites  in  two  manganese-tin  alloys  have  been  studied  as  a  function  of  tem- 
perature to  above  the  Curie  points.  In  addition  to  the  Zeeman  splittings,  observed  and  analyzed  previously, 
a  possible  quadrupole  interaction  of  about  27  Mc/sec  is  observed  in  Mn2Sn.  In  Mn4Sn  the  hyperfine  field 
is  small  and  negative,  about  —45  koe;  in  Mn2Sn  it  is  large  and  positive,  about  +200  koe.  As  in  the  case 
of  the  pure  ferromagnetic  transition  elements,  it  seems  necessary  to  invoke  a  positive  term  associated  with 
conduction-electron  polarization  and  a  negative  one  arising  from  core  polarization  to  explain  these  results. 


THE  ferromagnetic  alloys  of  manganese  and  tin, 
which  were  used  previously1  in  observing  the 
Zeeman  splitting  of  the  nuclear  levels  of  Sn119  by  means 
of  resonant  absorption,2  have  now  been  studied  more 
extensively  to  determine  the  nature  of  the  internal 
magnetic  field  at  the  tin  nucleus.  The  magnitude  of 
the  field  has  been  measured  as  a  function  of  tempera- 
ture, and  the  measurements  have  been  carried  above  the 
Curie  point  in  order  to  observe  possible  quadrupole 
or  other  interactions  in  the  absence  of  complications 
produced  by  magnetic  splitting.  In  addition,  the  sign 
of  the  field  in  each  alloy  was  established  by  observing 


Mn4  Sn 

39  mg/cm2 

1.00 

,l,il 

\ 

9^165°  C 

0.99 

1   /       /o-^e 

0.99 

\ 

y    /l35°  C 

— 

1.00 

-^         1 

J  r*- 

0.99 

f   130°  C 

— 

"°5\      V 

0.99 
1.00 

- 

V 

Jz: 

- 

"  \ 

0.99 

- 

X 

^/oo°c 

- 

1.00 

"  "s 

^o         tyo        - 

0.99 

- 

V 

"\A°°  c 

- 

0.98 

1 

1    1    1 

i       i 

i 

-8-4  0  4  8 

SPEED  (mm/sec) 

Fig.  1.  Resonant  absorption  in  Mn4Sn,  with  a  metallic  Sn119 
source  at  77°K,  for  various  absorber  temperatures  above  and 
below  the  Curie  point.  Absorber  thickness  is  39  mg/cm2. 


*  Work  performed   under  the  auspices  of  the  U.   S.   Atomic 
Energy  Commission. 

1  S.  S.  Hanna,  L.  Meyer-Schutzmeister,  R.  S.  Preston,  and  D. 
H.  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev.  120,  2211  (1960),  hereafter  referred  to  as  I. 

2  R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Physik  151,  124  (1958). 


the  change  in  the  hyperfine  structure  on  application 
of  a  large  external  magnetic  field,  as  in  our  earlier  work 
with  iron.3 

Except  as  noted  below,  the  experimental  technique 
was  the  same  as  used  in  I.  In  Fig.  1  are  shown  measure- 
ments on  Mn4Sn  at  several  temperatures  from  room 
temperature  to  above  the  Curie  point  at  about  150°C.4 
For  these  observations  the  Mn4Sn  absorbing  sample 
was  clamped  in  vacuum  in  a  frame  which  was  warmed 
by  an  electrically  heated  coil  of  tungsten  wire.  The 
temperature  was  measured  by  a  thermocouple  in  con- 
tact with  the  absorber.  The  Sn119  source,  which  emits 
an  unsplit  line,  was  maintained  at  the  temperature  of 
liquid  nitrogen.  It  will  be  recalled  from  I  that  the  basic 
resonant  absorption  spectrum  for  Mn4Sn  (with  unsplit 
Sn  source)  consists  of  a  doublet,  each  member  of  which 
is  an  unresolved  triplet.  The  doublet  separation  is 
approximately  equal  to  the  magnetic  splitting  of  the 
ground  state.  In  Fig.  1  we  can  see  this  splitting  decrease 


Fig.  2.  Temperature  variation  of  the  internal  field  at  the  tin 
nucleus  in  Mn4Sn.  A  Curie  temperature  Tc  of  423°K  has  been 
assumed.  Data  taken  from  Fig.  1. 


3  S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  G.  J.  Perlow,  R.  S.  Preston,  and  D. 
H.  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  513  (1960). 

<H.  H.  Potter,  Phil.  Mag.  12,  261  (1931).  The  Curie  tempera- 
ture is  given  as  178°C  by  Ochsenfeld  (reference  5).  We  continue 
to  call  this  alloy  Mn4Sn  in  accordance  with  much  of  the  literature. 
However,  the  structure  is  close-packed  hexagonal  of  the  NisSn 
type  (DO19).  Actually,  single  phase  samples  appear  to  have  a 
composition  intermediate  between  Mn3Sn  and  Mn4Sn.  We  are 
greatly  indebted  to  M.  V.  Nevitt  for  this  information. 


1717 


315 


1718 


MEYER-SCHUTZMEISTER,     PRESTON,     AND     HANNA 


400 


o 

v>  750 


744 


732 


•20 


0  10 

SPEED  (mm/sec) 


Fig.  3.  Resonant  absorption  in  Mn2Sn,  with  a  metallic  Sn119 
source  at  77°K,  at  absorber  temperatures  below  and  above  the 
Curie  point.  At  370°K  the  absorber  thickness  is  54  mg/cm2;  at 
80°K  it  is  91  mg/cm2. 


and  then  vanish  as  the  temperature  is  raised  to  the 
Curie  point.  At  these  relatively  high  temperatures  the 
absorption  is  very  small  and  high  precision  has  not  been 
achieved  in  the  data.  The  temperature  variation  of 
the  internal  field,  as  obtained  from  these  and  similar 
measurements,  is  displayed  in  Fig.  2.  The  data  are 
normalized  to  the  point  obtained  in  I  at  the  temperature 
of  liquid  nitrogen.  The  solid  curve  in  the  figure  is  a 
theoretical  Weiss  curve  which  is  in  rather  good  qualita- 
tive agreement  with  the  experimental  points.  The  value 
of  the  field  at  0°K  is  estimated  to  be  roughly  45  koe. 
In  Fig.  3  the  absorption  spectrum  of  Mn2Sn  is  shown 
at  two  temperatures,  one  well  below  and  the  other 
well  above  the  Curie  point  at  —  11°C.S  At  the  lower 
temperature  one  observes  the  Zeeman  spectrum  an- 
alyzed in  I.  The  value  of  the  internal  field  at  0°K  is 
estimated  to  be  about  200  koe.  Above  the  Curie  point 

6  C.  Guillaud,  thesis,  Strasbourg,  1943;  quoted  in  R.  M. 
Bozorth,  Ferromagnetism  (D.  Van  Nostrand  Company,  Inc., 
Princeton,  New  Jersey),  p.  340;  R.  Ochsenfeld,  Z.  Metallkunde 
49,  472  (1958).  This  alloy  is  reported  to  have  a  structure  of  the 
filled  NiAs  type,  W.  Hume-Rothery  and  G.  V.  Raynor,  The  Struc- 
ture of  Metals  and  Alloys  (The  Institute  of  Metals,  London, 
England). 


the  spectrum  collapses  into  a  strong  central  absorption. 
Actually  there  is  possibly  a  doublet  structure  in  this 
central  line  as  shown  on  an  expanded  velocity  scale 
in  Fig.  4.  This  structure  is  not  strongly  temperature 
dependent  and  would  correspond  to  a  quadrupole 
splitting  of  about  10-7  ev  or  27  Mc/sec. 

To  obtain  the  sign  of  the  internal  field  in  these  alloys, 
the  powder  sample,  deposited  on  beryllium  (0.010  in. 
thick),  was  clamped  between  two  pieces  of  Lucite  (each 
Y6  in.  thick)  and  mounted  in  the  gap  (j  in.)  of  an  elec- 
tromagnet capable  of  producing  fields  up  to  20  koe. 
A  0.001-in.  foil  of  Pd  was  also  inserted  to  reduce  the 
25-kev  x  ray  from  tin.  The  magnetic  splittings  in  the 
absorption  spectrum  were  then  compared  with  the  field 
off  and  on.  Because  of  the  small  aperture  provided  by 
the  absorber  in  the  gap  it  was  desirable  in  obtaining 
the  absorption  spectra  to  have  the  source  oscillate  as 
close  as  possible  to  the  absorber  in  order  to  increase 
the  counting  rate.  Since  it  was  essential  to  keep  the 
source  cold,  it  was  mounted  in  vacuum  on  a  horizontal 
copper  bar  attached  to  a  horizontal  reservoir  of  liquid 
nitrogen.  With  this  arrangement  it  was  possible  to  bring 
the  source  to  within  about  1  in.  of  the  absorber  mounted 
vertically  in  the  gap.  The  value  of  the  fringing  field  at 
the  average  position  of  the  source  was  about  one  sixth 
the  field  in  the  gap. 

In  the  case  of  Mn4Sn  the  measurements  could  be 
carried  out  with  the  absorber  at  room  temperature, 
at  which  temperature  the  internal  field  at  the  tin  nucleus 
has  a  value  of  about  40  koe.1  Relative  to  this  field  the 


-2  0  2 

SPEED    (mm /sec) 

Fig.  4.  Resonant  absorption  in  Mn2Sn,  with  a  metallic  Sn119 
source  at  77°K,  at  two  absorber  temperatures  above  the  Curie 
point.  The  velocity  scale  is  expanded  over  that  in  Fig.  3.  Absorber 
thickness  is  54  mg/cm2. 


316 


INTERNAL    MAGNETIC    FIELDS    IN     MnSn    ALLOYS 


1719 


applied  external  field  of  about  17  koe  should  produce 
an  easily  detectible  shift.  The  observations  are  shown 
in  Fig.  5.  On  application  of  the  external  field  the  doublet 
separation  is  seen  to  decrease.  Hence  the  internal  field 
at  the  nucleus  in  Mn4Sn  is  negative.  The  amount  of 
the  shift  is  compatible  with  the  linear  relation, 

Hn  —  HnQ  —  He^ty 

where  Hn  and  Hn0  are  the  hyperfine  fields  with  and 
without  the  external  field  Z7ext- 

In  the  case  of  Mn2Sn  it  was  necessary  to  cool  the 
absorber  below  the  Curie  point  (— 11°C)  while  keeping 
it  in  the  gap  of  the  electromagnet.  To  produce  a  con- 
venient internal  field  of  about  40  koe  the  absorber  was 
maintained  at  a  temperature  of  about  —  23  °C.  This 
was  accomplished  by  allowing  a  stream  of  nitrogen  gas, 
cooled  by  passage  through  a  coil  immersed  in  liquid 
nitrogen,  to  strike  each  side  of  the  Lucite  holder  con- 
taining the  absorber.  It  was  found  that  the  temperature, 
measured  with  a  thermocouple,  could  be  held  constant 
to  within  about  1°  by  carefully  regulating  the  stream 
of  cold  nitrogen  gas.  It  was  necessary,  however,  to 
enclose  the  complete  assembly  (source,  absorber,  and 
pole  pieces)  in  a  plastic  sheet  in  order  to  prevent  mois- 
ture from  condensing  on  the  cold  surfaces.  The  measure- 
ments were  made  by  alternating  many  runs  with  field 
on  and  field  off.  The  final  averages  are  shown  in  Fig.  6. 
In  this  case  the  doublet  separation  is  seen  to  increase 
on  application  of  the  field.  Hence  the  hyperfine  field 
at  the  tin  nucleus  in  Mn2Sn  is  positive.  The  amount 


806- 


240 


w234 

O 


-4-2       0       2       4 
SPEED  (mm/sec) 

Fig.  5.  Resonant  absorption  in  Mn4Sn  at  room  temperature 
(~300°K)  without  an  external  magnetic  field  (above)  and  with 
an  applied  field  of  17.5  koe  (below).  The  splitting  is  decreased  by 
application  of  the  field.  Absorber  thickness  is  42  mg/cm2.  Source 
temperature  is  77  °K. 


I     '     I    '    I    '    I     '    I    '     I    '     I    '     I    '    I 


676 


JLJL 


1.1,1,1,1 


-8-6-4-202468 
SPEED  (mm/sec) 

Fig.  6.  Resonant  absorption  in  Mn2Sn  at  approximately  250°K 
without  an  external  magnetic  field  (above)  and  with  an  applied 
field  of  17.5  koe  (below).  The  splitting  is  increased  by  application 
of  the  field.  Absorber  thickness  is  45  mg/cm2.  Source  temperature 
is  77°K. 


of  shift  is  compatible  with  the  relation, 
Hn=Hno-\-HeXf 

•Thus,  a  possible  demagnetizing  effect  of  the  applied 
field  in  the  sample  is  not  noticeable  in  the  above 
measurements. 

Since  the  hyperfine  field  is  large  and  negative 
(~—  300  koe)  in  the  pure  ferromagnetic  transition 
elements,3,6'7  it  is  of  considerable  interest  to  find  such  a 
large  positive  field  (+200  koe)  at  the  tin  site  in  the  case 
of  Mn2Sn.  Moreover,  this  field  is  very  sensitive  to  the 
Mn :  Sn  ratio,  since  it  changes  sign  in  going  to  Mn4Sn. 
It  is  significant,  perhaps,  that  the  saturation  magneti- 
zation is  some  four  times  as  great  in  Mn2Sn  as  in  Mi^Sn.4 
The  hyperfine  field  produced  by  the  conduction  electrons 
is  given  by  Marshall8  in  the  form 


ff.-(&r/3)»|*(0)|V, 


6  A.  C.  Gossard  and  A.  M.  Portis,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3,  164 
(1959). 

7  S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J.  Perlow,  R.  S. 
Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  177  (1960). 

8  W.  Marshall,  Phys.  Rev.  110,  1280  (1958). 


317 


1720 


ME  YER-SCHt)TZMEISTER,     PRESTON,    AND     HANNA 


where  n  is  the  number  of  conduction  electrons  per  atom, 
|^(0)  |2  is  the  probability  density  of  a  conduction  elec- 
tron at  the  nucleus,  n  is  the  Bohr  magneton,  and  p  is 
the  polarization  of  the  conduction  electrons.  It  would 
appear  that  «|^(0)|2  is  roughly  the  same  in  the  two 
alloys,  since  they  show  about  the  same  isomer  shift9 
(see  Figs.  1  and  3).9a  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  polariza- 
tion of  conduction  electrons  (produced  by  the  adjacent 
magnetic  electrons)  increases  with  saturation  magneti- 
zation, then  the  polarization  and  so  also  Hc  is  greater 
numerically  in  Mn2Sn  than  in  Mn4Sn.  The  simplest 
explanation  of  the  large  positive  field  in  Mn2Sn  is 
that  Hc  is  a  positive  field. 


9  O.  C.  Kistner  and  A.  W.  Sunyar,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  412 
(1960). 

9s  Note  added  in  proof.  We  are  indebted  to  V.  Jaccarino  for  point- 
ing out  that  equality  of  the  isomer  shifts  does  not  necessarily 
insure  the  above  argument,  since  the  polarization  effect  is  localized 
at  the  top  of  the  conduction  band. 


As  for  the  pure  transition  elements,3'10'11  it  is  neces- 
sary to  postulate,  in  addition  to  Hc,  the  presence  of  a 
negative  field,  presumably  associated  with  polarization 
of  the  core  electrons  of  tin.  In  Mn4Sn  this  field  pre- 
dominates. That  this  field  is  smaller,  if  different  at  all, 
in  Mn2Sn  is  consistent  with  the  fact  that  the  Weiss 
field  is  smaller,  since  the  Curie  temperature  is  lower 
and  the  magnetization  larger  in  Mn2Sn  than  in  Mn4Sn. 

These  effects  observed  in  the  manganese-tin  alloys 
are  somewhat  analogous  to  those  obtained  by  Boyle 
et  al.n  in  dilute  solutions  of  tin  in  the  ferromagnetic 
transition  elements.  It  is  gratifying  that  essentially  the 
same  mechanisms12  can  be  invoked  to  explain  qualita- 
tively the  observations  on  all  these  tin  alloys. 

10  D.  A.  Goodings  and  V.  Heine,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  5,  370 
(1960). 

11  A.  J.  Freeman  and  R.  E.  Watson,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  5,  498 
(1960). 

12  A.  J.  F.  Boyle,  D.  St.  P.  Bunbury,  and  C.  Edwards,  Phys. 
Rev.  Letters  5,  553  (1960). 


318 


PHYSICAL     REVIEW- 


VOLUME     T2  2,     NUMBER     3 


Study  of  the  Internal  Fields  Acting  on  Iron  Nuclei  in  Iron  Garnets,  Using  the  Recoil-Free 
Absorption  in  Fe67  of  the  14.4-kev  Gamma  Radiation  from  Fe57mf 

R.  Bauminger,  S.  G.  Cohen,  A.  Marinov,  and  S.  Ofer 

Department  of  Physics,  The  Hebrew  University,  Jerusalem,  Israel 

(Received  December  22,  1960) 

The  shape  of  the  recoil-free  absorption  spectrum  obtained  in  iron  garnet  absorbers  has  been  investigated, 
using,  as  a  source,  a  Co57  source  embedded  in  stainless  steel.  The  results  confirm  the  existence  of  two  iron 
sublattices  each  showing  a  Zeeman  structure  characterized  by  different  parameters.  No  significant  differ- 
ences have  been  detected  between  the  Zeeman  structure  in  yttrium  iron  garnet  and  dysprosium  iron  garnet. 
The  values  obtained  for  the  effective  magnetic  field  at  the  Fe57  nuclei  at  room  temperature  are  3.90X105  oe 
and  4.85  X105  oe  for  the  d  and  a  iron  lattice  sites,  respectively.  At  liquid  air  temperature  the  corresponding 
fields  are  4.6X105  oe  and  5.4X105  oe,  respectively.  The  mean  value  of  the  chemical  shift  for  the  d  sites  rela- 
tive to  stainless  steel  is  about  0.04±0.005  cm/sec  and  about  0.06±0.005  cm/sec  for  the  a  sites. 


INTRODUCTION 

THE  phenomenon  of  recoil-free  resonance  absorp- 
tion (Mossbauer  effect)1  of  nuclear  gamma  rays 
has  already  been  shown  to  constitute  a  powerful  tool 
for  investigating  the  properties  of  the  internal  fields 
acting  on  nuclei  in  solids.  In  particular,  the  14.4-kev 
gamma  rays  of  Fe57m  have  been  employed  in  a  striking 
way  to  study  the  internal  fields  at  iron  nuclei  in  ferro 
and  antiferromagnetic  materials.2-4 

In  these  cases  the  Zeeman  splitting  patterns  obtained 
in  the  absorption  spectra  can  be  simply  interpreted.5 
From  a  knowledge  of  the  nuclear  magnetic  moment  of 
the  nuclear  ground  state,  values  for  the  effective  mag- 
netic fields  at  the  iron  nucleus  can  be  obtained  and 
also  in  some  cases  the  magnitude  of  the  quadrupole 
interactions. 

In  the  magnetic  materials  investigated  so  far,  the 
iron  atoms  occupy  equivalent  lattice  positions  and  the 
local  fields  at  the  iron  nuclei  are  characterized  by  a 
single  set  of  parameters.  In  the  present  investigation, 
a  study  has  been  made  of  the  local  fields  in  a  ferri- 
magnetic  material  in  which  the  iron  atoms  occupy 
two  nonequivalent  sets  of  positions.  It  was  thought 
that  this  might  result  in  a  difference  in  the  effective 
magnetic  fields  at  the  iron  nuclei  in  the  two  sites.  The 
ferrimagnetic  materials  studied  were  the  iron  garnets 
(stoichiometric  formula  5  Fe203-3M203,  where  M  in- 
dicates a  rare  earth  ion  or  yttrium).  The  magnetic 
properties  of  these  materials  have  been  studied  inten- 
sively in  recent  years.6  Pauthenet  has  shown  that  in 
order  to  explain  these  properties  it  is  necessary  to 
assume  that  the  two  iron  sublattices  in  this  structure 
have  opposite  and  unequal  magnetizations.  The  garnets 


f  Supported  in  part  by  the  U.  S.  Air  Force,  Air  Research  and 
Development  Command  through  its  European  Office. 

1  R.  L.  Mossbauer,  Z.  Phvsik,  151,  124  (1958). 

2  S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J.  Perlow,  R.  S. 
Preston,  and  D.  H.  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  177  (1960). 

3  G.  K.  Wertheim,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  403  (1960). 

40.  C.  Kistner  and  A.  W.  Sunyar,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  412 
(1960). 

6  G.  DePasquali,  H.  Frauenfelder,  S.  Margulies,  and  R.  N. 
Peacock,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  71  (1960). 

6  R.  Pauthenet,  Ann.  Phys.  3,  424  (1958). 


have  a  body-centered  cubic  structure,  space  group  Oh10, 
the  unit  cell  containing  96  oxygen  ions  in  the  general 
lattice  positions,  with  16  Fe3+  ions  in  the  a  special 
positions  (octahedral  sites)  and  24  Fe3+  ions  situated 
in  the  d  special  positions  (tetrahedral  sites).  These 
constitute  the  two  iron  sublattices.  The  yttrium  or 
rare  earth  ions  occupy  the  24  c  dodecahedral  sites. 
The  unit  cell  edge  is  about  12  A. 

Two  representative  garnets  of  the  above  type  were 
studied,  yttrium  iron  garnet  and  dysprosium  iron 
garnet.  The  yttrium  ion  is  diamagnetic,  whereas  the 
dysprosium  ion  is  strongly  paramagnetic.  It  is  known 
that  in  these  garnets  there  is  an  exchange  field  which 
tends  to  align  the  rare  earth  ions  relative  to  the  mag- 
netization of  the  iron  ions.  Although  this  exchange 
interaction  is  known  to  be  small  relative  to  the  domi- 
nant exchange  interaction,  which  occurs  between  the 
two  iron  sublattices  (105  oe  compared  to  6X106  oe),7 
it  was  thought  of  interest  to  see  whether  this  could 
give  rise  to  a  difference  in  the  effective  field  at  corre- 
sponding iron  nuclei  for  the  yttrium  and  dysprosium 
garnets,  respectively,  at  a  given  temperature. 

Since  the  magnetization  of  the  garnets  is  a  function 
of  temperature6  it  was  also  considered  interesting  to 
try  to  correlate  the  effective  fields  at  the  nucleus  with 
temperature. 

EXPERIMENTAL 

In  these  experiments  the  absorption  of  the  14.4-kev 
gamma  ray  of  Fe57m  bound  in  stainless  steel  was  meas- 
ured in  polycrystalline  garnet  absorbers,  containing 
iron  enriched  in  Fe57,  as  a  function  of  the  relative 
velocity  between  source  and  absorber.  A  stainless  steel 
source  containing  Co57  has  already  been  shown  to  give 
a  relatively  narrow  unsplit  emission  line.34  Such  a 
source  can  be  used  very  effectively  to  explore  the  ab- 
sorption spectrum  of  an  absorber  containing  Fe57.  A 
large  argon-filled  proportional  counter  was  used  to  de- 
tect the  14.4-kev  radiation  and  provided  a  better  reso- 
lution of  this  radiation  against  background  than  a  thin 


7P.-G  de  Gennes,  C.  Kittel,  and  A.  M.  Portis,  Phys.  Rev. 
116,  323  (1959). 


743 


319 


744 


BAUMINGER,     COHEN,     MARINOV,     AND    OFER 


Fig.  1.  The  absorption  by  stainless  steel  of  the  14.4-kev  gamma 
ray  emitted  in  the  decay  of  Fe67m  embedded  in  stainless  steel,  as 
a  function  of  relative  velocity  between  source  and  absorber. 

Nal(Tl)  scintillation  counter.  As  absorbers,  two  types 
of  garnets  were  used  in  this  work,  yttrium  iron  garnet 
and  dysprosium  iron  garnet.  These  were  synthesized 
from  Y2O3  or  Dy203  and  Fe203,  containing  iron  en- 
riched in  Fe57  (70%)  in  order  to  maximize  the  Moss- 
bauer  absorption  relative  to  competing  processes.  X-ray 
photographs  taken  by  Mr.  Kallman  of  this  laboratory 
showed  a  unique  crystal  structure  for  the  samples. 
The  samples  were  ground  fine,  spread  out  to  an  average 
thickness  of  about  10  mg/cm2  and  held  rigidly  be- 
tween thin  Lucite  disks,  and  in  this  form  used  as 
absorbers. 

At  first,  the  Doppler  shift  between  source  and  ab- 
sorber was  provided  by  a  mechanical  device8  consisting 
of  a  uniformly  rotating  eccentric  wheel  driving  a 
carriage  bearing  the  source,  whose  speed  could  be 
varied  via  a  coupling.  Later  an  instrument  was  de- 
veloped which  enabled  the  counting  rate  to  be  auto- 
matically recorded  as  a  function  of  the  relative  velocity,9 
and  the  final  results  presented  here  were  carried  out  in 
this  way.  The  source  was  mounted  on  a  loudspeaker 
membrane  and  vibrated  sinusoidally  at  65  cycles/sec. 
The  amplitude  of  the  output  of  the  pulse-height  se- 
lector, channelled  on  the  14.4-kev  peak  recorded  in  the 
proportional  counter,  was  modulated  in  appropriate 
phase  with  the  sinusoidal  motion,  so  that  the  modu- 
lated part  of  the  amplitude  would  be  proportional  to 
the  source  velocity  at  the  time  of  emission  of  the  corre- 
sponding photon.  The  spectrum  of  modulated  pulses 
was  displayed  on  the  first  128  channels  of  a  256-channel 
pulse-height  analyzer.  As  a  consequence  of  the  har- 

8S.  Ofer,  P.  Avivi,  R.  Bauminger,  A.  Marinov,  and  S.  G. 
Cohen,  Phys.  Rev.  120,  406  (1960). 

•The  instrument  used  was  similar  to  a  device  constructed 
recently  by  Dr.  E.  Sunyar  of  Brookhaven  National  Laboratory. 
We  are  indebted  to  him  for  information  concerning  his  instru- 
ment, particularly  the  electronic  circuits. 


monic  motion,  the  time  the  source  spends  in  each 
velocity  channel  is  itself  a  function  of  velocity.  In  order 
to  obtain  the  true  spectrum  of  counting  .rate  as  a 
function  of  velocity,  the  spectrum  recorded  on  the 
analyzer  was  normalized  in  the  following  way.  The 
output  pulses  from  an  independent  scintillation  counter 
and  radioactive  source  were  treated  in  an  identical 
fashion  as  described  above  for  the  pulses  from  the 
proportional  counter  and  displayed  on  the  second  half 
of  the  multichannel  analyzer.  The  output  of  the  two 
counters  were  alternately  switched  every  half-minute 
into  the  single-channel  analyzer  equipped  with  modu- 
lated output  and  the  two  spectra  stored  in  the  two 
halves  of  the  analyzer.  Identical  counting  rates  were 
arranged  in  order  to  insure  similar  counting  losses  in 
the  two  halves  of  the  multichannel  analyzer.  The 
normalized  spectrum  was  obtained  by  dividing  the 
number  in  a  given  channel  of  the  first  half  of  the 
analyzer  by  the  number  in  the  corresponding  channel 
in  the  second  half.  This  method  of  normalization  en- 
sured good  stability  over  long  periods  of  time  against 
drift  in  the  electronic  instrumentation.  In  practice,  a 
scale  of  velocities  was  established  by  using  as  a  calibra- 
tion the  absorption  spectrum  of  antiferromagnetic 
Fe203  and  relying  on  the  velocity  assignments  to  the 
peaks  in  the  Zeeman  pattern  obtained  by  Kistner  and 
Sunyar4  and  as  confirmed,  also,  by  measurements  in 
this  laboratory,  using  the  mechanical  device  providing 
uniform  relative  velocity  mentioned  at  the  beginning 
of  this  section.  In  both  the  latter  measurements  the 
relative  velocities  were  measured  directly.  A  typical 
absorption  spectrum  of  Fe203,  using  Co57  embedded  in 
stainless  steel,  is  shown  in  Fig.  2.  Figure  1  shows  the 
results  obtained  using  a  stainless  steel  absorber  with 
the  same  source  and  confirms  that  an  unsplit  emission 
line  is  indeed  obtained.  The  width  of  the  absorption 
line  is  about  four  times  the  natural  linewidth.  Assuming 
an  emission  and  absorption  line  of  the  same  shape  in 
the  stainless  steel  source  and  stainless  steel  absorber, 
respectively,  one  concludes  that  the  width  of  the 
emission  line  is  about  twice  the  natural  width. 

Measurements  were  carried  out  for  both  types  of 
garnet  absorbers  at  room  temperature  and  also  at  the 
temperature  of  liquid  air.  The  latter  experiments  were 
carried  out  with  the  garnet  absorbers  immersed  in 
liquid  air  contained  in  a  Styrofoam  container. 

RESULTS  AND  DISCUSSION 

Figures  3  and  4  show  the  results  obtained  with  the 
yttrium  garnet  absorber  at  room  and  liquid  air  tem- 
peratures, respectively.  These  spectra  should  be  com- 
pared with  the  spectrum  obtained  with  antiferromag- 
netic Fe203  shown  in  Fig.  2.  The  latter  spectrum  has 
already  been  investigated  by  Kistner  and  Sunyar4  and 
analyzed  in  terms  of  a  Zeeman  splitting  of  the  nuclear 
levels  produced  by  a  single  magnetic  field  at  the  iron 
nucleus  (5.15X105  oe)  somewhat  modified  by  a  quad- 


320 

INTERNAL     FIELDS    ACTING    ON     Fe     NUCLEI     IN     Fe    GARNETS  745 


8  mm/see 


Fig.  2.  The  absorption  at  room  temperature  by  Fe2Oj  of  the  14.4-kev  gamma  ray  emitted  in  the  decay  of  Fe"" 
embedded  in  stainless  steel,  as  a  function  of  relative  velocity  between  source  and  absorber. 


rupole  interaction  of  the  Fe87  nucleus  with  a  finite 
electric  field  gradient  at  the  nucleus. 

It  is  seen  that  there  is  an  essential  difference  between 
the  garnet  spectra  and  the  Fe203  spectrum,  the  garnet 
spectra  consisting  of  a  series  of  doublets,  but  otherwise 
resembling  the  Fe2C>3  spectrum.  An  actual  splitting  is  not 
apparent  in  the  lines  close  to  zero  velocity  (i.e.,  for  the 
two  "3"  and  "4"  lines  in  Fig.  3  and  for  the  three  "2", 
"3"  and  "4"  lines  in  Fig.  4)  but  these  lines  are  wider 
than  would  be  expected  assuming  a  single  field.  This 
pattern  in  the  garnets  is  in  fact  exactly  that  to  be  ex- 
pected if  the  conjecture  mentioned  in  the  Introduction 
is  correct,  namely,  that  the  iron  nuclei  situated  in  the 
two  different  lattice  sites  experience  local  fields  which 
are  appreciably  different.  One  would  then  expect  to 


obtain  a  superposition  of  two  patterns,  whose  intensi- 
ties are  in  the  ratio  of  3:2  (ratio  of  iron  atoms  in  the 
two  nonequivalent  sites)  and  each  resembling  in  shape 
that  of  Fe203  to  a  first  approximation,  but  character- 
ized by  spacings  determined  by  different  parameters. 
The  spectra  have  been  analyzed  in  accordance  with 
this  interpretation. 

In  the  cases  when  the  doublets  are  resolved,  the 
stronger  component  is  assigned  to  the  d  sites  (which 
are  more  numerous  than  the  a  sites  in  the  ratio  3:2) 
and  are  labeled  d  in  the  figures,  and  the  weaker  com- 
ponent is  assigned  to  the  a  sites.  For  the  spectrum 
taken  at  room  temperatures  (Fig.  3)  the  positions  of 
the  four  resolved  lines  "Id,"  "2d"  "5d,"  and  "6d" 
were  used  to  calculate  the  four  parameters  determining 


o 

o 

1.00 

o 

IS 

1  0.96 

z 

3 

9         °o\ 

A° 

01 

y°\            /• 
/I          /° 

°\° 

o                                  o 
6         \°             6°      ° 

F     °\        / 
°\°    / 

a.         /   °\ 

°f\         / 

8  0.94 

\°  / 

RELATIVE 

1                 1 

10 

uV 

2«  la 

i    i    i 

3 

1 

o\      J 

sd    5a 

1     1     1 

j        6a 

-8       -7 


-5 


-3      -2-10       1 
VELOCITY 


8    mm/sec 


Fig.  3.  The  absorption  at  room  temperature  by  yttrium  iron  garnet  of  the  14.4-kev  gamma  ray  emitted  in  the  decay  of 
Fe67m  embedded  in  stainless  steel,  as  a  function  of  relative  velocity  between  source  and  absorber. 


321 


746 


BA.UMINGER,     COHEN,     MARINOV,    AND     OFER 


1.00 

-a° 

0 

0     o 

o          ° 

,0     o 

o 
o  o 

o 

• 

£ 

o  o  A  o 

\                      fa 

*7"^      <a    f 

£0.98 

- 

°\ 

/      o    o 

\         7 

'         o 

0  1                    /   1            / 

pO.<J6 

z 

of 

\            °i 

po 

\      7° 

°\       / 

10      H 

°  V    / 

1° 

\     /      6d 

3 

0  0.94 

3 

4- 

sa 

°lol 

Ul 

>0.<?2 

10 

2 

5dV 

od 

< 

id 

cJo.po 

i 

l 

r 

I     I 

I      I 

I      I      I 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1      1     1 

-6 


-2 


0  2 

VELOCITY 


8       mm/sec 


Fig.  4.  The  absorption  at  liquid  air  temperature  by  yttrium  iron  garnet  of  the  14.4-kev  gamma  ray  emitted  in  the  decay 
of  Fe57m  embedded  in  stainless  steel,  as  a  function  of  relative  velocity  between  source  and  absorber. 


the  Zeeman  pattern  of  the  iron  nuclei  in  the  d  sites, 
and  the  positions  of  the  four  corresponding  a  lines  to 
calculate  the  parameters  of  the  nuclei  at  the  a  sites.  As 
described  in  the  work  of  Kistner  and  Sunyar,4  the 
Zeeman  spectrum  is  characterized  by  four  parameters 
and  these  are  uniquely  determined  by  the  position  of 
four  peaks.  The  parameters  are,  in  the  notation  of 
Kistner  and  Sunyar:  g0  and  gi,  the  magnetic  splitting 
parameters  for  the  \  and  f  nuclear  levels,  respectively ; 
AE,  the  shift  between  the  center  of  gravity  of  the  ab- 
sorption lines  and  the  emission  lines  of  Fe67  in  stainless 
steel;  and  e,  the  quadrupole  interaction  parameter, 
shifting  only  the  substates  belonging  to  the  upper  f 
level.  When  the  parameters  were  found  in  this  way,  the 
expected  positions  of  the  lines  "3a"  and  "3d,"  "4a" 
and  "Ad"  were  calculated,  and  found  to  be  in  very 
good  agreement  with  the  position  of  the  experimentally 
unresolved  lines  "3"  and  "4,"  thus  demonstrating  the 
consistency  of  the  analysis.  Moreover,  the  values  of 
go/gi  (equal  to  the  ratio  of  the  nuclear  g  factors  in  the 
J  and  f  states)  obtained  are  in  satisfactory  agreement 
with  the  value  obtained  by  Hanna  et  al?  and  Kistner 
and  Sunyar.4 

In  the  analysis  of  the  spectrum  taken  at  liquid  air 
temperature  (Fig.  4)  in  which  only  three  clearly  re- 
solved doublets  are  seen,  the  four  characteristic  pa- 
rameters for  each  site  were  calculated,  assuming  a 


value  of  1.77  for  go/gi  and  using  the  position  of  the 
three  resolved  lines  appropriate  to  each  lattice  site, 
i.e.,  "Id,"  "5d,"  and  "6d"  for  the  d  sites,  and  "la," 
"5a,"  and  "6a"  for  the  a  sites.  As  in  the  previous 
example,  the  expected  positions  of  the  remaining  lines 
were  calculated  from  these  parameters  thus  obtained 
and  found  to  be  in  good  agreement  with  the  position 
of  the  observed  unresolved  peaks  "2,"  "3,"  and  "4." 

The  spectra  obtained  with  the  dysprosium  garnet 
absorber  are  not  shown  since  they  so  closely  resemble 
those  obtained  with  yttrium  garnet  at  the  same  tem- 
perature. They  were  analyzed  in  a  similar  way.  The 
final  values  of  the  characteristic  parameters  go,  g\,  AE, 
and  e  for  the  two  sites  in  the  various  experiments  are 
given  in  Tables  I  and  II.  Table  I,  showing  the  results 
obtained  at  room  temperatures,  also  shows  the  values 
01  go/gi  obtained  directly  from  the  experiments  in  each 
case.  The  value  of  the  effective  magnetic  field  at  the 
nucleus,  Heu,  in  each  case  was  calculated  from  the 
value  obtained  for  g0  using  a  value10  of  +(0.0903 
±0.0007)  nm  for  the  magnetic  moment  of  the  nuclear 
ground  state  of  Fe57.  The  values  of  Z7eff,  determined  in 
this  way,  are  given  in  Tables  I  and  II. 

The  results  demonstrate  that  the  a  and  d  sites  are 
indeed  characterized  by  considerably  different  values 
of  Hea.  Thus  the  values  obtained  for  Heff  at  room  tem- 
perature are  3.9X106  oe  at  the  d  sites  and  4.85  X106 


Table  I.  Results  of  analysis  of  measurements  on  yttrium  and  dysprosium  iron  garnets  at  room  temperature. 


Y3Fe50i2  (yttrium  iror 

garnet)  at  300°K 

Dy3Fe50i2  (dysprosium 

iron  garnet)  at  300CK 

Strong  spectrum 

Weak  spectrum 

Strong  spectrum 

Weak  spectrum 

d  sites 

a  sites 

d  sites 

a  sites 

go  (cm/sec) 

0.46±0.02 

0.58±0.02 

0.460±0.025 

0.580±0.025 

gi  (cm/sec) 

0.270±0.015 

0.325±0.015 

0.275±0.020 

0.325±0.020 

AE  (cm/sec) 

0.035±0.010 

0.055±0.010 

0.05±0.01 

0.06±0.01 

e  (cm/sec) 

0.00±0.01 

0.00±0.01 

0.00±0.01 

0.00±0.01 

go/gi 

1.7±0.1 

1.8±0.1 

1.7±0.1 

1.75±0.1 

UM  (oe) 

(3.90±0.1)X105 

(4.85±0.15)X106 

(3.95±0.15)X106 

(4.85±0.20)X106 

G.  W.  Ludwig  and  H.  H.  Woodbury,  Phys.  Rev.  117,  1286  (1960). 


322 

INTERNAL    FIELDS    ACTING    ON     Fe    NUCLEI     IN     Fe    GARNETS  747 

Table  II.  Results  of  analysis  of  measurements  on  yttrium  and  dysprosium  garnets  at  liquid  air  temperature. 


Y3Fe50i2  (yttrium  iron  garnet)  at  85°K 
Strong  spectrum  Weak  spectrum 


Dy3Fe60i2  (dysprosium  iron  garnet)  at  85°K 


d  sites 


a  sites 


Strong  spectrum 
d  sites 


Weak  spectrum 
a  sites 


go  (cm/sec) 
g,  (cm/sec) 
AE  (cm/sec) 
«  (cm/sec) 
#ett  (oe) 


0.550±0.015 

0.31±0.01 

0.04±0.01 

0.00±0.01 
(4.60±0.15)X105 


0.635±0.015 
0.36±0.01 
0.06±0.01 
-0.010±0.01 
(5.35±0.15)X106 


0.545±0.020 

0.310±0.015 

0.030±0.015 

0.00±0.015 

(4.6±0.2)X106 


0.64±0.02 

0.360±0.015 

0.060±0.015 

-0.010±0.015 

(5.4±0.2)X106 


oe  at  the  a  sites.  The  results  at  liquid  air  temperature 
give  higher  values  for  Heu,  but  still  different  for  the 
two  sites  —  4.6X105  oe  and  5.35  oe  for  the  d  and  a 
sites,  respectively. 

Nagle  et  al.n  have  recently  shown  that  in  ferromag- 
netic iron,  Heu,  which  has  a  well-defined  value  for 
temperatures  below  the  Curie  temperature,  shows  the 
same  functional  dependence  on  the  temperature  as  the 
relative  saturation  magnetization  M„  from  tempera- 
tures at  which  the  magnetization  is  almost  saturated 
up  to  the  Curie  temperature.  This  remarkably  simple 
result  seems  to  demand  that  the  fluctuations  in  the 
value  of  the  nuclear  field  at  a  particular  iron  nucleus 
must  take  place  in  a  time  short  compared  to  the 
Larmor  precession  period  of  the  nucleus  in  the  magnetic 
field  produced  by  the  extranuclear  electrons. 

These  fluctuations  may  be  expected  to  follow  the 
fluctuations  of  the  magnetic  moment  of  the  extra- 
nuclear  electrons.  The  temperature  dependence  of  the 
expectation  value  of  the  extranuclear  moment  in  the 
direction  of  magnetization  will  then  determine  the  tem- 
perature dependence  of  both  the  microscopic  Hea  at 
the  nucleus  and  the  macroscopic  magnetization.  It  is 
of  interest  to  test  these  ideas  in  the  case  of  the  garnets 
and  to  see  whether  the  values  of  Hea  at  different 
temperatures  are  proportional  to  the  values  of  the 
partial  spontaneous  magnetizations  of  the  appropriate 
sublattice.  The  partial  magnetizations  cannot  of  course 
be  directly  measured  for  ferrimagnetic  materials. 
Pauthenet,  however,  starting  from  the  experimental 
results  for  the  relative  saturation  magnetization  of  the 
garnets  as  a  function  of  temperature,  and  using  the 
Neel  two-sublattice  model,12  has  calculated  the  partial 
spontaneous  magnetization  for  yttrium  ion  garnet  as 
a  function  of  temperature  for  the  two  iron  sublattices.13 

Table  III  shows  a  comparison  between  the  ratio  of 
the  values  of  Hea  at  85 °K  and  300°K  in  yttrium  iron 
garnet  for  the  a  and  d  sites  and  the  corresponding  ratio 
of  the  spontaneous  magnetization  per  ion  (m)  as  calcu- 
lated by  Pauthenet.6 

The  agreement  is  seen  to  be  quite  good  and  suggests 
that  in  this  case,  also,  Heu  follows  the  variation  in 
magnetization.  It  should  be  pointed  out  that  the  calcu- 


lations of  Pauthenet,  based  on  the  Neel  model,  indicate 
that  at  liquid  air  temperatures  the  partial  magnetiza- 
tions of  the  a  and  d  lattices  should  both  be  very  close 
indeed  to  saturation,  corresponding  to  a  value  of  5  hb 
per  ferric  ion.  Nevertheless,  the  values  of  Heu  remain 
different  for  the  a  and  d  sites.  Assuming  saturation 
really  occurs  at  liquid  air  temperature,  this  behavior 
implies  a  difference  in  the  extranuclear  electronic  con- 
figurations determining  the  nuclear  field  in  the  two  sites. 

As  seen  from  the  results  in  Tables  I  and  II,  no 
significant  difference  in  the  values  of  Hea  and  the  other 
parameters  between  the  corresponding  sites  in  yttrium 
and  dysprosium  garnets  has  been  detected.  The  local 
fields  at  the  corresponding  sites  in  the  two  garnets 
cannot  differ  by  more  than  a  few  percent.  This  is  not 
unreasonable  in  view  of  the  relatively  small  value  of 
the  exchange  interaction  acting  between  the  rare  earth 
ions  and  the  ferric  ions. 

It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  a  reliable  value  of  the 
quadrupole  interaction  can  be  obtained  from  measure- 
ments on  polycrystalline  materials,  since  the  shift  in 
the  sublevels  due  to  the  quadrupole  interaction  is  a 
function  of  the  angle  between  the  magnetic  field  and 
the  direction  of  the  field  gradients  which  are  well 
defined  with  respect  to  the  crystallographic  axis.  In 
fact,  for  the  case  of  an  axially  symmetric  field  gradient 
and  completely  random  orientation  between  the  direc- 
tion of  magnetic  field  and  the  field  gradient,  the  average 
quadrupole  shift,  to  first  order,  would  be  zero,  and  only 
a  line  broadening  would  be  produced.  In  ferromagnetic 
and  ferrimagnetic  materials  the  correlation  which  in 
general  will  exist  between  the  orientation  of  a  crystallite 
and  the  orientations  of  the  domains  within  this  crystal- 
lite may  very  well  lead  to  an  average  value  of  the 
quadrupole  shift  different  from  zero.  The  present  re- 
sults show  no  evidence  of  an  appreciable  quadrupole 
Shift,  but  in  view  of  the  above,  little  can  be  deduced 


Table  III.  Comparison  of  ratio  of  value  of  Heu  at  85°K  and 
at  300°K,  with  ratio  of  partial  magnetizations  at  these  tempera- 
tures as  calculated  by  Pauthenet,  for  yttrium  iron  garnet. 


d  sites 


11  D.  E.  Nagle,  H.  Fraunfelder,  R.  D.  Taylor,  D.  R.  F.  Cochran, 
and  B.  T.  Matthias,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  5,  364  (1960). 

12  L.  Neel,  Ann.  Phys.  3,  137  (1948). 

13  See  reference  6,  Fig.  12  and  p.  454. 


tfeff(85oK)/tfeff(300°K) 
w(85°K)/w(300°K) 


1.16 
1.17 


1.11 
1.08 


323 

748  BAUMINGER,     COHEN,  MARINOV,     AND     OFER 

concerning  an  upper  limit  for  the  quadrupole  interac-  isotope  shift  should  certainly  be  influenced  by  changes 

tion  at  the  iron  nucleus.  in  the  value  of  s  wave  functions  at  the  nucleus  and  it  is 

Concerning  the  chemical  shifts,  there  is  no  evidence  possible   that  He!{  will  also   be   influenced  by   these 

of  any  temperature  dependence.   The  values  of  the  changes. 

chemical  shift  however,  do  seem  to  be  consistently  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

greater  at  the  a  sites  than  the  value  at  the  d  sites.  The  authors  would  like  to  thank  M.  Schieber  of  the 

Noting  that  Het(  is  greater  at  the  a  sites  than  at  the  department  of  electronics,  the  Weizmann  Institute,  for 

d  sites,  one  might  speculate  on  a  possible  correlation  preparing    the    garnets,    E.    Sunyar    of    Brookhaven 

between  chemical  shift  and  the  saturation  value  of  National  Laboratory  for  information  concerning  elec- 

Hen.  If  an  appreciable  part  of  the  chemical  shift  is  due  tronic  circuits,  E.  Segal  for  help  in  constructing  the 

to  an  isotope  shift,  as  has  been  suggested  by  Kistner  apparatus,    and   A.    Mustachi   for   help    in   chemical 

and  Sunyar,4  such  a  correlation  may  arise  since  the  problems. 


324 


ON  THE  USE  OF  THE  MOSSBAUER  EFFECT 
FOR  STUDYING  LOCALIZED  OSCILLATIONS 
OF  A  TOMS  IN  SOLIDS 

S.  V.  MALEEV 

Leningrad  Physico- Technical  Institute, 
Academy  of  Sciences,  U.S.S.R. 

Submitted  to  JETP  editor  June  29,  1960 

J.  Exptl.  Theoret.  Phys.  (U.S.S.R.)  39,  891-892 
(September,  1960) 

1HE  Mossbauer  effect  consists  in  the  emission 
(or  resonant  absorption)  by  a  nucleus  in  a  solid 
of  a  y  quantum  with  an  energy  which  is  precisely 
equal  to  the  energy  of  the  transition,  because  of 
the  fact  that  the  recoil  momentum  is  transferred 
to  the  crystal  as  a  whole. 

Usually  the  nucleus  which  radiates  the  y  quan- 
tum is  formed  by  the  decay  of  some  other  nucleus. 
As  a  result  of  this  process,  the  nucleus  can  with 
a  very  high  probability  leave  its  place  in  the  lat- 
tice and  get  stuck  somewhere  at  an  interstitial 
position.    But,  even  if  the  nucleus  does  not  move 
about,  if  it  should  change  its  atomic  number  as 
a  result  of  the  decay  the  forces  holding  it  in  the 
lattice  will  change.    Thus  the  nucleus  emitting  the 
Mossbauer  quantum  must  be  a  lattice  defect. 

On  the  other  hand  it  is  well  known  (cf.  refer- 
ence 1)  that  the  spectrum  of  oscillations  of  a  de- 
fect atom  in  a  lattice  consists  of  a  continuous 
spectrum,  coinciding  with  the  spectrum  of  oscil- 
lations of  the  ideal  lattice,  and  of  discrete  fre- 
quencies which  do  not  coincide  with  any  of  the 
frequencies  of  normal  vibrations  of  the  atoms  of 
the  ideal  lattice.    Vibrations  with  such  frequen- 
cies ( localized  oscillations )  cannot  propagate 
through  the  lattice  over  any  sizeable  distance. 

At  the  same  time  there  is  a  finite  probability 
that  in  the  emission  of  a  y  quantum  there  is  si- 
multaneously emitted  or  absorbed  (the  latter, 
naturally,  only  for  sufficiently  high  temperatures, 
T  Z  Ho)l,  where  u>l  is  the  frequency  of  the  local- 


ized oscillation)  a  quantum  of  the  localized  oscil- 
lation.   Thus,  the  spectrum  of  emitted  y  quanta 
will  consist  of  an  unshifted  line  corresponding  to 
the  energy  of  the  transition  and  of  a  continuous 
background  corresponding  to  the  emission  and 
absorption  simultaneously  with  the  y  quantum  of 
phonons  from  the  continuous  part  of  the  spectrum 
of  oscillations  of  the  atom;  on  this  background, 
there  will  be  individual  discrete  peaks  due  to  the 
emission  and  absorption  of  quanta  of  the  localized 
oscillations. 

These  peaks  can  be  observed  in  almost  the 
same  way  as  the  unshifted  line  is  observed. 
Namely,  an  absorber  containing  atoms  in  the 
ground  state  should  be  moved  with  such  a  veloc- 
ity that  the  Doppler  shift  of  its  undisplaced  ab- 
sorption line  will  be  equal  to  the  frequency  of  the 
localized  oscillation.    One  then  will  observe  a 
stronger  absorption  than  for  neighboring  frequen- 
cies.   The  velocity  needed  for  this  is  obviously 
determined  by  the  condition  col  =  vw/c,  where 
u>  is  the  frequency  of  the  y  line.    If  the  energy 
of  the  transition  is  of  the  order  of  tens  of  kev, 
and  hcoL  ~  0.01  ev,  v  ~  103  — 104  cm/sec.    Such 
a  velocity  is  not  difficult  to  obtain  by  placing  the 
absorber  on  the  rim  of  a  rotating  disk. 


^aradudin,  Mazur,  Montroll,  and  Weiss,  Revs. 
Modern  Phys.  30,  175  (1958). 

Translated  by  M.  Hamermesh 


325 


Polarization  of  Co"  in  Fe  Metal* 

J.  G.  DASH.t  R.  D.  Taylor,  D.  E.  Nagle,  P.  P.  Craig,  and  W.  M.  Visscher 

Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory,  University  of  California,  Los  Alamos,  New  Mexico 

(Received  December  16,  1960) 

A  study  has  been  made  of  the  effect  of  low  temperatures  on  the  resonant  emission  and  absorption  of 
14.4-kev  Mossbauer  radiation  from  Fe57  in  Fe  metal.  Analysis  of  intensity  changes  in  the  hyperfine  spectrum 
is  made  in  terms  of  the  Zeeman  level  splittings  of  the  ground  states  of  Fe57  absorbing  nuclei  and  of  the 
ground  states  of  Co57  parent  nuclei.  The  theory  for  the  temperature  dependence  is  developed  in  terms  of 
the  properties  of  the  Co67  decay  and  of  the  subsequent  gamma  transitions.  Experiments  were  carried  out 
with  a  source  of  Co67  nuclei  in  Fe  metal  at  temperatures  between  4.5°  and  0.85°K.  The  experimental  results, 
analyzed  in  terms  of  the  theory,  yield  a  value  of  the  hyperfine  magnetic  field  at  the  Co67  nuclei.  Compar- 
ison of  the  result  with  other  pertinent  experimental  values  indicates  that  depolarization  of  the  nuclei  by  the 
/sT-capture  decay  of  Co67  is  not  evident  in  the  present  material. 


I.  INTRODUCTION 

THE  14.4-kev  gamma  rays  of  Fe67  nuclei  are  known 
to  have,  in  suitable  crystals,  a  high  proportion  / 
of  recoil-free,  or  "Mossbauer"  radiation.1-4  Interest  in 
the  Fe67  system  is  enhanced  by  the  relatively  narrow 
linewidths  characteristic  of  the  excited  state  (lifetime 
10~7  sec)  and  the  clearly  resolvable  hyperfine  com- 
ponents of  the  Mossbauer  pattern.  Experiments  with 
Fe  crystal  sources  and  absorbers  are  facilitated  by  the 
large  value  of  /  even  at  room  temperature  as  a  conse- 
quence of  the  high  Debye  characteristic  temperature 
(0~42O°K)  and  the  low  nuclear  recoil  temperature 
(rR^40°K).  A  source  of  Co67  nuclei  dissolved  in  a  Fe 
lattice  at  room  temperature  has  /c^O.71;  cooling  the 
source  to  0°K  increases  /  to  0.92.  This  limit  is  achieved 
to  within  0.1%  by  20°K,  and  similar  "saturation"  ob- 

*Work  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the  U.  S.  Atomic 
Energy  Commission. 

t  Present  address,  University  of  Washington,  Seattle,  Wash- 
ington. 

1  R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3,  554 
(1959). 

*J.  P.  Schiffer  and  W.  Marshall,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3,  556 
(1959). 

*G.  de  Pasquali,  H.  Frauenfelder,  S.  Margulies,  and  R.  N. 
Peacock,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  71  (1960). 

*  S.  S.  Hanna,  J.  Heberle,  C.  Littlejohn,  G.  J.  Perlow,  R.  S. 
Preston,  and  and  D.  H.  Vincent,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4, 177  (1960). 


tains  for  the  fraction  /'  of  recoil-free  absorption  by  an 
absorber  of  Fe67  in  Fe  metal.  Further  cooling  will 
result  in  a  negligible  increase  of  /  and  /';  cryogenic 
studies  of  the  system  might  appear  unprofitable. 

At  sufficiently  low  temperatures,  however,  a  re- 
distribution of  the  populations  of  the  Zeeman  sublevels 
takes  place,  and  the  nuclei  become  polarized.5  This 
polarization  can  be  quantitively  studied  through  the 
effect  upon  the  hyperfine  Mossbauer  spectrum.  While 
nuclear  polarization  in  ferromagnets  has  been  observed 
before,6  the  present  technique  offers  certain  advantages. 
In  this  type  of  experiment  the  magnitude  and  sign  of 
the  magnetic  field  at  the  Co  nucleus  may  be  determined. 
The  effects  of  the  nuclear  polarization  are  the  concern 
of  this  paper. 

II.  Fe"  IN  Fe  METAL 

The  ground  state  of  Co57,  with  a  half -life  of  270  days, 
decays  by  -fiT-electron  capture  and  neutrino  emission  to 
the  second  excited  state  of  Fe57.  The  decay  is  probably 
an  allowed  transition,  since  its  value  of  log// =6  lies 

6  J.  G.  Dash,  R.  D.  Taylor,  P.  P.  Craig,  D.  E.  Nagle,  D.  R.  F. 
Cochran,  and  W.  E.  Keller,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  5,  152  (1960). 

6M.  J.  Steenland  and  H.  A.  Tolhoek,  Progress  in  Low-Tem- 
perature Physics,  edited  by  C.  J.  Gorter  (Interscience  Publishers, 
Inc.,  New  York,  1957),  Vol.  II,  Chap.  X,  p.  292. 


326 


1117 


POLARIZATION     OF     Co67     IN     Fe     METAL 


within  the  limits  of  log//  for  known  allowed  transi- 
tions,7 and  this  agrees  with  accepted  spin  assignments 
and  considerations  based  on  the  shell  model.  The 
nuclear  spin  73  of  Co57  is  7/2,  and  its  magnetic  moment 
H3  is  4.65  nm.8  The  second  excited  state  of  Fe57  has 
spin  1 2  of  5/2  and  a  mean  lifetime  of  about  9X 10-9  sec.9 
This  state  decays,  by  emission  of  a  123-kev  gamma  ray, 
to  the  first  excited  state  of  Fe57.  A  minor  fraction  (9%) 
of  the  decays  involve  a  transition  from  the  second  ex- 
cited state  directly  to  the  ground  state,  with  the 
emission  of  a  137-kev  gamma  ray.10  The  multipolarity 
of  the  123-kev  radiation  is  96%  Ml,  4%  £2.911  The 
first  excited  state  has  spin  Ii  =  3/2,  and  moment  ^i  of 
0.153  nm.4  This  state  has  a  half-life  of  1.1X10-7  sec, 
and  decays  by  pure  Ml  emission  of  a  14.4-kev  gamma 
ray,  to  the  ground  state  of  Fe57.  The  spin  of  the  ground 
state,  Jo,  is  1/2,  and  it  has  a  moment  mo  of  0.0903  nm.12 
Experiments  on  the  Mossbauer  effect  have  been  used 
to  obtain  a  detailed  description  of  the  first  excited  and 
ground  states  of  Fe57  in  Fe  metal.4  Results  of  this  study, 
together  with  the  properties  of  the  higher  states,  are 
shown  in  Fig.  1.  We  also  show  the  normal  order  of  sub- 
levels  of  Co57,  deduced  from  preliminary  results5  of  the 
study  reported  here. 

The  hyperfine  magnetic  field  H  acting  on  equivalent 
nuclei  in  a  ferromagnetic  crystal  has  a  single  direction 
in  space  over  the  region  of  a  ferromagnetic  domain. 
Coupling  between  the  nuclear  magnetic  moments  and 
the  hyperfine  field  removes  the  degeneracy  of  nuclear 
spin  orientation  and  produces  a  set  of  equally  spaced 
spin  sublevels  of  energies  &.Eus=ingnnH,  —I<m<I, 
where  m  is  the  magnetic  quantum  number,  g  is  the 
nuclear  gyromagnetic  ratio,  and  n„  is  the  nuclear 
magneton.  In  cubic  Fe  metal,  all  nuclei  occupy  equiva- 
lent lattice  positions ;  hence,  there  'is  a  single  preferred 
direction  in  space  and  a  single  set  of  energy  sublevels 
for  the  Fe  nuclei  in  each  ferromagnetic  domain.  An 
unmagnetized  sample  has  its  domains  oriented  in 
several  directions,  such  that  there  is  no  net  spatial 
polarization  of  the  entire  sample,  but  all  of  the  nuclei 
(excepting  those  in  the  neighborhood  of  imperfections 
and  impurities,  and  possibly  those  near  domain  walls) 
have  the  same  hyperfine  level  splittings.  The  splittings 
of  the  first  excited  and  ground  states  of  Fe57  are  greater 
than  the  linewidth  of  the  14.4-kev  resonance  radiation. 
Gamma-ray  transitions  between  the  14.4-kev  sublevels 
of  magnetic  quantum  number  m}-  to  the  ground-state 


Co= 


7  B.  L.  Robinson  and  R.  W.  Fink,  Revs.  Modern  Phys.  32,  117 
(1960). 

8  J.  M.  Baker,  B.  Bleaney,  P.  M.  Llewellyn,  and  P.  F.  D.  Shaw, 
Proc.  Phys.  Soc.  (London)  A69,  353  (1956). 

9  G.  F.  Pieper  and  N.  P.  Heydenburg,  Phys.  Rev.  107,  1300 
(1957). 

10  D.  E.  Alburger  and  M.  A.  Grace,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc.  (London) 
A67,  280  (1954). 

11  G.  R.  Bishop,  M.  A.  Grace,  C.  E.  Johnson,  A.  C.  Knipper, 
H.  R.  Lemmer,  J.  Perez  y  Torba,  and  R.  G.  Scurlock,  Phil.  Mag. 
46,  951  (1955). 

a  G.  W.  Ludwig  and  H.  H.  Woodbury,  Phys.  Rev.  117,  1286 
(1960). 


:28  ■*.■*'* 

-  3/2   fi  =+4.65 nm 
--I/2     3 

--3/2 


,-9-»j-°; 


EC   (ALLOWED) 


-1/2 
+1/2 
+3/2 


Ml 

...1. 

-,| 

-AE0] 

I,  =  3/2 
/i,»-O.I53nm 
AE=l.07xlO"7ev 


V  l/2 

fj.  =+0.0903  n  m 
AE„*  1.90  x  I0"7ev 


»57 


Fig.  1.  Energy  level  diagram  of  Co67  and  daughter  nuclei. 

sublevels  mk  (mk  =  mj,nij±l),  therefore  result  in  a 
gamma-ray  spectrum  of  six  hyperfine  components.  The 
relative  intensity  of  the  transition  (ntj  —>  mk)  is  pro- 
portional to  the  probability  Wjk  specified  by  the  rules 
governing  magnetic  dipole  radiation.  Figure  2  is  a 
schematic  diagram  of  the  radiation,  similar  to  a  diagram 
given  by  Hanna  et  al}  The  radiation  widths  are  sup- 
pressed, and  relative  intensities  are  appropriate  to  the 
case  of  unpolarized  radiation  from  a  source  having  no 
net  magnetization. 12a  Positions  of  the  line  centers  are 
given  in  terms  of  Doppler  velocity  shifts  (positive  ve- 
locity taken  as  increasing  separation  between  source 
and  detector)  equivalent  to  shifts  from  the  energy 
difference  between  degenerate  excited  and  ground 
states.  The  m  values  of  the  upper  and  lower  state  sub- 
levels  are  shown  at  the  top  and  bottom  of  each  line. 


>- 
1- 

i  "« 

-    -3/2 

3/2 

- 

1 

§"    1/6 

- 

-1/2 

1/2 

- 

z 
o 

H 

to  1/12 

z 
< 
<r 

1/2       -1/2 

-1/2 

-1/2 

4/2, 

1/2 

1/2 

1/2 

w 

\z        -i.( 

9         -Q« 

6   0  0.« 

)6 

3.( 

te        5.: 

2 

DOPPLER  VELOCITY  v  mm /SEC 

Fig.  2.  Schematic  diagram  of  the  recoil-free  14.4-kev  radiation 
from  Fe67  in  Fe  metal.  Individual  linewidths  are  not  shown. 
Relative  transition  probabilities  are  appropriate  to  the  case  of 
domains  oriented  at  random.  Energy  displacements  are  in  terms  of 
Doppler  velocity,  positive  velocity  being  taken  as  increasing  sepa- 
ration between  source  and  observer.  Magnetic  sublevel  quantum 
numbers  for  the  first  exxited  and  ground  states  are  shown  at  top 
and  bottom,  respectively,  of  each  line. 


See  "note  added  in  proof.' 


327 


DASH,     TAYLOR,     NAGLE,     CRAIG,     AND     VISSCHER 


1118 


An  absorber  of  Fe67  in  Fe  metal  has  a  similar  hyperfine 
pattern  of  resonant  cross  sections.  If  Fig.  2  is  translated 
over  an  identical  pattern,  the  overlaps  at  velocity  dif- 
ferences v= v  (source)  —  v  (absorber)  represent  the  ab- 
sorption dips  obtained  when  a  source  is  moved  relative 
to  an  absorber,  resulting  in  a  Mossbauer-type  intensity 
pattern.  As  a  result  of  chemical  or  temperature  differ- 
ences between  source  and  absorber,  the  emission  and 
absorption  spectra  are  shifted  relative  to  each  other 
by  a  small  Doppler  velocity  8v.13M  This  shift  is  not 
essential  to  the  present  study,  and  the  relative  velocities 
v  will  be  understood  to  represent  the  displacements 
from  8v. 

m.  THEORY 

Polarization  and  Depolarization 

The  intensity  of  the  emission  line  (mj  — >  mk)  is  pro- 
portional to  the  transition  probability  Wjk  and  to  the 
population  pj  of  the  sublevel  at  which  the  transition 
originates.  We  define  Wjk  as  the  normalized  relative 
intensity 

Wjk = pfOjk/H  pju>jk.  ( 1 ) 

In  thermal  equilibrium  the  populations  Pj  are  propor- 
tional to  the  Boltzmann  factors  of  the  nuclear  sublevels. 
The  nuclear  spins  of  the  first  excited  state  of  Fe", 
however,  are  not  in  thermal  equilibrium.  Gossard  and 
Portis16  have  measured  a  spin  relaxation  time  of  10-4 
sec  for  Co69  nuclei  in  Co  metal,  and  one  may  expect  the 
relaxation  time  to  increase  as  T~l  at  lower  tempera- 
tures.16 The  relaxation  mechanisms  for  Co  and  Fe 
nuclei  in  Fe  metal  should  be  quite  similar  to  those  in 
the  Co  metal,  and  we  may  therefore  treat  the  spin 
populations  of  the  14.4-kev  state  of  Fe"  as  unchanged 
during  the  10-7  sec  state  lifetime.  Since  the  lifetime  of 
the  second  excited  state  is  even  shorter  than  10~7  sec, 
the  pj  of  a  source  of  14.4-kev  radiation  are  functions  of 
the  populations  of  sublevels  in  the  270-day  Co57  parent. 
The  equilibrium  population  pi  of  the  Co57  sublevel,  in 
the  case  of  pure  magnetic  hfs,  is  given  by  the  Boltz- 
mann factor : 


Pi=C  expimtfT-1),    where    £=gnnHkr 


(2) 


mi  is  the  magnetic  quantum  member  of  the  sublevel, 
T  is  the  temperature,  g/z»  is  the  moment  of  the  Co57 
nucleus,  H  is  the  hyperfine  magnetic  field  at  the 
nucleus,  k  is  Boltzmann's  constant,  and  C  is  a  constant. 
A  Co67  nucleus  in  the  mi  sublevel  decays  to  the  mj  sub- 
level  of  the  14.4-kev  state  of  Fe"  with  a  probability 
Qij.  The  matrix  Q  is  the  product  of  Clebsch-Gordan 

u  R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Jr.,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  274 
(1960). 

14  B.  D.  Josephson,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  341  (I960). 

16  A.  C.  Gossard  and  A.  M.  Portis,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3,  164 
(1959). 

16  G.  E.  Pake,  in  Solid  State  Physics,  edited  by  F.  Seitz  and 
D.  Turnbull  (Academic  Press,  Inc.,  New  York,  1956),  Vol.  2, 


matrices  for  the  two  transitions  preceding  the  arrival  at 
the  14.4-kev  state,  and  is  presented  in  the  Appendix. 
We  can  therefore  obtain  the  pj  of  the  14.4-kev  state  by 
summing  contributions  from  the  parent  sublevels : 


p j=  const  Y,  i  piQu- 


(3) 


Substituting  Eqs.  (2)  and  (3)  in  Eq.  (1),  we  obtain  the 
relative  intensity  of  an  emission  line  (m;  —*  mk)  of  a 
source, 

Wjk=wjk  £  em'«'W(£  ™>«  L  em«'TQij).       (4) 

l  jk  I 

We  have  assumed  that  spin  lattice  relaxation  causes 
negligible  depolarization  of  the  spins  during  the  K 
capture  and  subsequent  gamma  emissions.  A  second 
possible  mechanism  for  depolarization  is  due  to  per- 
turbations by  extranuclear  fields  resulting  from  K 
capture.  A  study  of  the  angular  distribution  of  the  123- 
kev  radiation  from  partially  aligned  Co67  nuclei  in  a 
Tutton  salt11  indicated  considerable  depolarization  of 
the  second  excited  state,  presumably  as  a  result  of  the 
AT-capture  process.  Depolarization  to  the  extent  ob- 
served in  the  Tutton  salt  would  cause  a  marked  de- 
crease in  the  population  asymmetries.  We  believe  at  the 
outset,  however,  that  the  large  electron  mobilities  in 
the  Fe  metal  provide  a  rapid  extinction  of  the  per- 
turbing fields,  making  depolarization  much  smaller 
than  in  the  salt. 

Transmitted  Intensities 

We  consider  a  resonance  emission  spectrum  com- 
posed of  several  lines  of  Lorentzian  shape,  each  line 
having  the  width  T.  The  relative  intensity  of  a  line 
centered  at  energy  Ejk  is  Wjk.  When  the  source  of 
radiation  is  moving  away  from  the  observer  at  speed  v, 
the  intensity  distribution  of  the  (mj—^mk)  line  is 
given  by 

/r/27r 

*>*(»)  = .  (5) 

(E-E}k+Ejkv/c¥+r>/4 


where  /  is  the  total  intensity, 

I=T.Wjkf  $jk(v)dE. 
ik        J0 


(6) 


The  hyperfine  emission  spectrum  of  a  source  can  be 
analyzed  by  filtering  the  radiation  through  an  absorber 
containing  ground-state  nuclei:  in  the  present  case, 
Fe67.  Absorbing  nuclei  are  excited  from  ground-state 
sublevels  to  sublevels  of  the  first  excited  state,  and  the 
transitions  {mk>  — >  trig)  have  relative  "intensities"  Wk'y, 
where  the  primed  symbols  represent  the  absorber.  The 
hyperfine  resonant  absorption  cross  section  is  composed 
of  lines  of  cross  section  Wk'j>(Xk'j',  where 


rr2/4 


(£-£*T)2+r2/4 


(7) 


328 


1119 


POLARIZATION    OF     Co67     IN     Fe    METAL 


and  a  is  the  total  resonant  absorption  cross  section. 
If  such  an  absorber  is  placed  between  a  source  of  radia- 
tion as  is  represented  by  Eq.  (5),  the  intensity  trans- 
mitted at  relative  Doppler  speed  v  is 


It(v)  =  ZW, 


Xexpl-naf  £  Wvr*vr¥Et     (8) 

k'y 


where  n  is  the  total  number  of  atoms/ cm2  in  the  ab- 
sorber, a  is  the  abundance  of  the  isotope  which  absorbs 
resonantly,  and  /'  is  the  fraction  of  recoil-free  resonant 
absorptions.17 

The  overlap  integral  of  Eq.  (8)  is  implicitly  limited 
to  the  case  of  unpolarized  spectra  obtained  with  un- 
magnetized  sources  and  absorbers.  In  the  event  of  a 
net  magnetization  it  is  necessary  to  take  account  of  the 
relative  orientations  of  the  magnetic  fields  acting  on 
the  source  and  absorber  nuclei.  We  will,  however,  limit 
this  treatment  to  the  case  of  unpolarized  radiation, 
such  as  is  represented  in  Fig.  2.  The  integral  in  Eq.  (8) 
can  be  solved  in  closed  form  for  two  special  cases: 
either  perfect  overlap  of  emission  and  absorption  lines, 
or  for  no  overlap.  The  latter  case  is  equivalent  to  no 
resonant  absorption,  the  transmitted  intensity  then 
being  given  by  Eq.  (6).  In  the  case  of  perfect  overlap, 
when  an  emission  line  energy  Ejk  is  Doppler  shifted  so 
that  Ejk(l  —  v/c)  =  Ek'j>,  the  transmitted  jk  line  in- 
tensity It(jk)  can  be  written 


Itijk)- 


where  y=2(E- 
Eq.  (9)  is 


I         r<°    dy  r-Wk.?x-l 

-Wjk\     exp 

7T       J-ool+y2        L    1+y2   J 


(9) 


It(jk)=IWjkJ0(iWk^x/2)  exp(-Wk.rx/2),    (10) 

where  J0  is  the  Bessel  function  of  zeroth  order.  We  shall 
assume  that  the  14.4-kev  spectrum  given  in  Fig.  2 
represents  both  the  emission  spectrum  of  the  source 
and  the  absorption  pattern  of  the  absorber.  The  over- 
lap, or  Mossbauer,  pattern  of  such  a  source-absorber 
combination  has  several  discrete  Doppler  speeds  V  at 
which  the  transmitted  intensity  due  to  all  emission 
lines  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  the  two  special  cases 
given  above.  Although  the  Lorentzian  form  of  the  lines 
vanishes  only  at  infinity,  a  separation  of  5r  between 
source  and  absorption  line  energies  is  sufficient  to 
reduce  the  resonant  absorption  to  less  than  1%  of  that 
at  perfect  overlap.  We  shall  adopt  this  separation  as 
a  practical  criterion  for  the  absence  of  overlap.  There 
are  then  four  speeds  V  at  which  we  can  evaluate  the 
transmitted  intensity  with  good  accuracy :  These  speeds 
are  2.23,  6.18,  8.41,  and  10.46  mm/sec.  The  overlap  and 

17  P.  P.  Craig,  J.  G.  Dash,  A.  D.  McGuire,  D.  Nagle,  and  R.  D. 
Reiswig,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3,  221  (1959). 


no-overlap  contributions  can  be  distinguished  by  a  func 
tion  Av  having  the  properties : 

Av=  1,    when    Ejk{\  -  V/c)  =  Ek>y, 


Av=0,    when     \Ejk(l-V/c)-Ek>j>\>5T. 


(ID 


The  intensity  transmitted  at  one  of  these  discrete 
speeds  can  then  be  obtained  by  summing  the  con- 
tributions of  overlapping  and  nonoverlapping  lines : 

It(V)  =  I  £    Wjk 

jkk'i' 

X{l-AK[l-/o(i^fc'W2)exp(-^rx/2)]>. 

(12) 

The  hyperfine  radiation  is,  in  practice,  associated  with 
a  broad  background  of  nonresonant  gamma  rays,  and 
the  absorber  has  a  certain  amount  of  nonresonant  ab- 
sorption. The  nonresonant  background  to  the  Moss- 
bauer pattern  can  be  formally  eliminated  by  comparing 
transmitted  intensities  at  speed  V  with  the  intensity 
transmitted  at  high  speed.  The  results  of  our  experi- 
ment are  expressed  as  a  ratio, 

R(v)=u~-i<(vn/u~-i<(-vn     (i3) 

where  /«,  is  the  intensity  transmitted  at  speeds  high 
enough  so  that  no  lines  overlap,  and  h(V)  and  It(—  V) 
are  the  intensities  transmitted  at  +V  and  —V,  re- 
spectively. The  explicit  dependence  of  R(V)  on  the 
relative  intensities  of  source  and  absorber  lines  is 
obtained  by  substituting  Eq.  (12)  in  Eq.  (13) : 

R(V)=  Z  AvWikKk.r{x)/  Z   A-vWjkKk.j.(x),    (14) 

jkk'i'  jkk'j' 


Ek.y)/Y,  and  x=naf'a.  The  solution  of     where 


tf*v(*)  =  l-J0(iWk^x/2)  exp(-Wk>i>x/2). 

We  wish  to  obtain  the  explicit  dependence  of  R(V)  on 
the  temperature  of  the  source  or  of  the  absorber.  Each 
case  will  be  treated  separately  in  the  following  sections. 

Cold  Source 

We  assume  the  absorber  to  be  sufficiently  warm  so 
that  we  can  neglect  differences  between  sublevel  popu- 
lations in  the  absorber:  Wvy  =  Wk'j'/2~lk'j'Wk'i'.  The 
temperature  dependence  of  R(V)  then  arises  from  the 
differences  in  Boltzmann  factors  of  the  Co67  sublevels 
and  their  influence  on  relative  line  intensities,  Eq.  (4). 
Before  making  the  indicated  substitution  for  W}k  in 
Eq.  (14),  we  note  a  symmetry  property  of  the  hyperfine 
spectrum,  Fig.  2 :  If  emission  line  (j,k)  overlaps  absorp- 
tion line  (k',f)  at  relative  velocity  V,  then  (— j,  —k) 
overlaps  (— k',  — /)  at  velocity  —V.  Furthermore,  the 
transition  probabilities  of  symmetric  lines  are  equal : 

Wjk  =  w-j-k,     and    wk'}'  =  W-k--y. 

Making  use  of  these  relations,  substituting  Eq.  (4)  in 


329 


DASH,    TAYLOR,     N  A  G  L  E  ,  -  C  R  A  I  G  ,    AND    VISSCHER 


1120 


-5    5 
>" 


O      4 


10.64  mm/  seo 

■    '1                    1 

_ 

9.40 

3.60 

8.41  mm/see 

5.90 

" 

_ 

_ 

6. 1 8  mm  /sec 

■  2.79 

1.80 

««*'     2^23  mm/ sec 

- 

" 

1                      1 

" 

20  30  40  50 

ABSORBER  THICKNESS  IN  UNITS  OF    x 

Fig.  3.  Calculated  temperature  coefficients  of  several  relative 
absorption-emission  velocities  as  a  function  of  the  thickness  pa- 
rameter x. 


Eq.  (14)  yields 


R(V)  = 


E  AvKk>Ax)wjkj:  em«>TQij 

jkk'j'  i 

E   AvKk'Ax)u>jkZem^TQi-j 
jkk'j'  i 

£  v  AvKk>Ax)wjk  £  em«'TQii 

E  LyKvr{x)wik  E  e—f'Qti' 

jkk'j'  i 


(15) 


since  @y=()_i_y.  Equation  (15)  takes  a  simple  form  at 
relatively  high  temperatures,  when  I-/T<K1.  Expanding 
the  Boltzmann  factors  to  first  order  in  %/T,  we  obtain 
the  high-temperature  approximation, 


where 


R(V)=l+a(V,x)!;T-\ 


(16) 


2   E   Ar£*'j' (*)»,*  E  fnjQi/ 

a(P»  = .         (17) 

E  &vKk>i'(x)wjkT,Qij 
jkk'j'  i 

The  decay  from  the  first  excited  state  to  the  ground 
state  of  Fe67  is  pure  Ml.  There  is,  however,  a  mixture 
of  M 1  and  E2  gamma  rays  in  the  decay  from  the  second 
to  first  excited  states.  If  we  assume  that  the  mixture 
is  incoherent,  as  for  the  unpolarized  spectra  from  un- 
magnetized  sources,  the  temperature  coefficient  will 
have  a  similar  mixture : 

R(V)=l+[p.96a1n(V,t)+0.04aE*(.Vj)lST-\    (18) 

where  ajif  i  and  a^2  are  the  coefficients  corresponding  to 
Eq.  (17)  with  the  proper  matrix  elements  Qv  for  Ml 
and  E2  radiation,  respectively. 


The  temperature  coefficient  aM\{V,x)  for  each  speed 
V  is  shown  as  a  function  of  the  thickness  parameter  in 
Fig.  3.  Coefficients  aEi(V,x)  are  approximately  one- 
half  to  one-third  of  the  corresponding  factor  for  the 
Ml  radiation:  The  coefficient  representing  all  of  the 
transitions  can  therefore  be  estimated  as  98%  of  the 
am(V,x). 

Cold  Absorber 

The  temperature  dependence  of  R(V)  for  a  warm 
source  and  a  cold  absorber  is  related  to  the  splitting 
of  the  ground-state  levels  of  Fe67  in  the  absorber,  and 
is  independent  of  the  hfs  of  the  ground  state  of  Co67. 
Therefore,  this  case  does  not  depend  on  the  matrix 
elements  Qi,,  and  the  analysis  is  accordingly  simpler. 
Also,  no  depolarization  or  coherence  effects  are  present 
as  considered  above.  Since  we  have  not  investigated 
this  arrangement  experimentally,  we  will  only  approxi- 
mate the  temperature  dependence.  The  approximation 
considered  is  that  of  a  thin  absorber,  %Wwj'/2<£i.  Ex- 
panding Kk>j>{x)  to  first  order  in  x,  and  expressing  the 
relative  strength  Wk>j>  of  an  absorption  line  in  terms 
of  the  population  pk>  of  the  ground-state  sublevel, 


KvA%y=*xWvt./2-- 


The  most  convenient  overlap  speeds  for  exploring  the 
dependence  of  R(V)  on  absorber  temperature  are  those 
at  7=6.18,  8.41,  and  10.46  mm/sec.  At  these  moder- 
ately strong  absorption  dips,  all  overlaps  at  +  V  are  due 
to  absorption  lines  arising  from  the  + 1/2  ground-state 
sublevel,  and  all  at  —  V  originate  from  the  — 1/2  sub- 
level.  Equation  (14)  reduces,  for  these  cases,  to  the 
particularly  simple  form : 


R(V)  =  pi/p.i=exI>aoT-^, 


(20) 


where  £0&  is  the  energy  splitting  of  the  ground-state 
sublevels. 

TO  He  TRANSFER         Hts  MANOMETERS 
GAS  AND  VACUUM  /  AND  PUMPS 


KEL-F  SPRINGS 


SOURCE 
-SUPPORT  TUBE 
(COPPER) 


MOTION 
.001'  ALUMINIZED  MYLAR 
Fig.  4.  Schematic  diagram  of  the  experimental  arrangement. 


330 


1121 


POLARIZATION    OF    Co"     IN     Fe     METAL 


IV.  EXPERIMENTAL  APPARATUS 

A  schematic  diagram  of  the  experimental  arrange- 
ment is  shown  in  Fig.  4.  The  cryostat  has  a  somewhat 
unconventional  design  in  that  no  liquid  extends  down 
to  the  height  of  the  sample.  The  source  is  thermally 
protected  by  three  concentric  copper  shields,  the  tops 
of  which  are  maintained  at  liquid  N2,  liquid  He4,  and 
liquid  He3  temperatures.  These  features  permit  the 
14-kev  radiation  to  leave  the  cryostat  with  an  attenua- 
tion due  only  to  thin  windows  in  the  shields;  namely, 
0.001-in.  Al  at  He3  temperatures,  0.001-in.  aluminized 
Mylar  plastic  at  1.4°K  and  80°K,  and  0.020-in.  Be  at 
room  temperature.  The  source  was  connected  directly 
to  the  He3  reservoir  via  a  heavy  copper  tube  held 
rigidly  in  place  within  the  He4  shield  by  means  of  com- 
pressed leaf  springs  made  of  Kel-F  plastic.  The  flange 
at  the  top  of  the  He4  shield  was  sealed  to  the  He4 
reservoir  by  means  of  a  Sn-In  O-ring. 

The  desired  temperature  was  reached  and  main- 
tained by  controlling  the  pumping  rate  on  the  He3 
bath.  Temperatures  were  determined  from  the  observed 
He3  bath  vapor  pressures  and  a  carbon  resistance 
thermometer  attached  to  the  source  holder. 

The  10-millicurie  source  was  prepared  in  the  manner 
described  by  Pound  and  Rebka.1  Co67  was  plated  from 
a  Co57Cl2  solution  on  a  0.007-in.  thick  of  Armco  iron 
which  was  then  annealed  in  vacuum  for  approximately 
one  hour  at  900°C  to  cause  diffusion  of  the  Co67  into 
the  Fe  lattice.  The  thin  sheet  was  soft  soldered  to  a 
copper  holder  for  rigidity  and  good  thermal  contact. 

Absorbing  foils  of  Fe67  metal  were  prepared  either  by 
plating  the  enriched  isotope  on  0.1-mil  Ni  foil  or  by 
rolling  sheets  of  the  enriched  Fe  metal.  The  rolled  foils 
were  made  by  a  technique  used  by  Karasek  of  the 
Argonne  National  Laboratory.18  A  button  of  78%  Fe67, 
22%  Fe66,  was  rolled  to  approximately  1-mil  thickness 
in  successive  stages  during  which  the  sheets  were 
annealed  several  times.  The  1-mil  sheet  was  further 
reduced  by  "pack  rolling"  between  ferrotype  plates,  to 
approximately  0.1  mil.  The  foil  was  clamped  between 
thin  sheets  of  Mylar  plastic  by  a  soft  iron  frame  holder. 

The  detector  consisted  of  a  1-mm  thick  Nal(Tl) 
crystal  sealed  to  an  RCA  6342  photomultiplier  tube. 
Scintillation  pulses  corresponding  to  energies  in  the 
neighborhood  of  14  kev  were  counted  by  means  of  a 
Franklin  Model  358  amplifier  and  single-channel  ana- 
lyzer, a  modified  Berkeley  Model  7161-3  counter  and  a 
digital  recorder. 

The  absorber  foils  were  mounted  on  a  sliding  carriage 
whose  mean  position  was  20  cm  in  front  of  the  scintil- 
lator crystal.  A  cable  system  drove  the  carriage  at  fixed 
linear  speeds  over  a  6-cm  horizontal  path.  This  drive 
consisted  of  a  1/25-hp  synchronous  motor,  worm  gear 
speed  reducers,  and  a  40-speed  lathe  gear  box.  Micro- 
switches  at  each  end  of  the  carriage  path  reversed  the 
motor,  and  after  an  initial  absorber  travel  of  about  1 


S.  S.  Hanna  (private  communication). 


cm,  the  microswitches  automatically  reset  and  started 
the  counter.  The  timing  interval  on  the  counter  could 
be  preset  to  four  significant  figures,  so  that  counting 
could  be  made  over  almost  the  same  absorber  path  at 
any  given  speed.  This  procedure  averaged  the  measured 
intensities  over  nearly  the  same  path  length  for  positive 
and  negative  velocities,  and  was  found  to  be  necessary 
because  of  a  1%  difference  in  counting  rates  between 
the  extremes  of  absorber  travel.  The  gear  box  and  three 
interchangeable  worm  gear  reducers  allowed  a  choice  of 
120  Doppler  speeds,  ranging  from  0.0143  to  14.94 
mm/sec  at  a  motor  speed  of  1800  rpm.  Intervals  be- 
tween the  speed  settings  were  adequate  to  explore  the 
shape  of  the  central  absorption  peak,  but  were  in  some 
cases  too  coarse  to  examine  the  details  of  other  lines. 
We  therefore  used  a  vernier  control  on  the  speed  by 
running  the  synchronous  motor  at  power  frequencies 
between  50  and  70  cps.  The  variable  frequency  power 
was  generated  by  two  audio  oscillators  and  a  power 
amplifier;  the  two  oscillators  were  used  alternately  for 
positive  and  negative  absorber  velocities.  This  scheme 
made  compensation  possible  for  the  small  temperature 
and  chemical  shifts  of  the  resonance  patterns  by  setting 
the  oscillators  to  different  frequencies.  The  oscillator 
frequencies  were  measured  and  found  to  be  stable  to 
better  than  0.1%.  A  100-kc/sec  crystal  driven  chrono- 
graph and  optical  gating  system  showed  the  absorber 
speeds  to  be  uniform  and  stable  to  better  than  0.03% 
over  the  whole  length  of  travel  when  the  motor  was 
driven  by  the  60-cps  power  line.  When  two  frequencies 
were  used  to  drive  the  motor,  the  path  length  for  the 
velocity  corresponding  to  the  lower  drive  frequency  was 
slightly  shorter  because  the  preset  timer  on  the  counter 
was  not  alternated :  The  effect  on  the  data  is  discussed 
in  the  next  section.  Unwanted  relative  motion  of  the 
source  with  respect  to  the  absorber  due  to  lateral 
vibration  of  the  source  within  the  cryostat  was  reduced 
by  means  of  the  Kel-F  spacers.  With  this  internal 
bracing,  the  assembly  approached  the  rigidity  of  the 
outer  casing  of  the  cryostat;  this  in  turn  was  fixed  to 
the  platform  which  supported  the  absorber  carriage. 
Rigidity  and  good  thermal  isolation  of  the  colder  re- 
gions of  the  cryostat  are  somewhat  incompatible;  it 
was  necessary  to  reach  a  compromise  between  the  two 
extremes. 

Experimental  Results 

The  absorbers  used  were  a  plated  foil  of  2  mg/cm2  Fe57 
and  a  rolled  foil  of  1.73  mg/cm2  Fe67.  Although  both 
foils  had  comparable  resonance  absorptions,  the  rolled 
foil  was  better  in  two  respects;  it  had  a  narrower  line 
and  a  smaller  resonance  pattern  shift  when  both  source 
and  absorber  were  at  room  temperature.  This  shift  was 
approximately  1.2X10-2  mm/ sec,  equivalent  to  a  frac- 
tional resonant  frequency  difference  between  source  and 
absorber  of  Av/v=4XlO~l&,  and  could  be  accounted 
for  by  a  difference  between  the  characteristic  Debye 


331 


DASH,     TAYLOR,     NAGLE,   .CRAIG,     AND     VISSCHER 


1122 


Fig.  5.  Experimental  overlap  pattern  of  Fe67  in  Fe  metal,  for 
Doppler  speeds  between  0  and  3  mm/sec.  The  source  is  Co67  in 
Fe  metal  at  4.5°K,  and  the  resonant  absorber  is  a  1.7-mg/cm2  Fe67 
rolled  foil  at  room  temperature.  Intensities  correspond  to  total 
counting  rates  of  gamma  rays  having  energies  between  10  and 
18  kev. 


temperatures  of  source  and  absorber  of  6°K.19  The 
central  absorption  peak  of  the  rolled  foil  had  a  width 
at  half  height  of  0.42  mm/sec  and  a  depth  53%  (un- 
corrected for  background)  below  the  intensity  at  high 
velocities.  This  width  is  approximately  two  times  that 
expected  for  a  thin  absorber,  and  corresponds  closely 
to  the  width  expected  for  the  thick  foil  used.  The  first 
strong  satellite  absorption  lines  at  2.23  mm/sec  were 
well  resolved,  and  had  the  theoretical  ratio,  0.57,  of 
depth  compared  to  the  central  peak.  Upon  cooling  the 
source  to  low  temperatures,  the  central  resonance  peak 
broadened  to  0.60  mm/sec.  The  shift  is  in  close  agree- 
ment with  that  observed  previously  for  an  absorber  at 
room  temperature  and  a  source  at  the  temperature 
of  liquid  air.13  The  increased  resonance  width  can  be 
attributed  to  differences  between  the  hfs  of  the  source 
and  absorber,  due  to  the  variation  of  hfs  with  tempera- 
ture; this  effect  has  been  studied  in  more  detail  at 
higher  temperatures,2021  and  will  not  be  discussed  here. 
The  resonance  pattern  obtained  with  the  rolled  foil 
and  with  the  source  at  4.5  °K  is  shown  in  Fig.  5.  Vibra- 
tion associated  with  the  accelerations  at  the  ends  of  the 
absorber  travel  became  excessive  at  higher  speeds; 
consequently,  the  first  strong  satellite  lines  were  judged 
most  suitable  for  examining  the  intensity  asymmetry 
at  low  temperatures. 

Preliminary  experiments6  conducted  with  the  present 
source  required  the  application  of  a  large  external  mag- 
netic field  in  the  plane  of  the  source  foil.  An  appreciable 
remanent  magnetization  of  the  source  could  possibly 
lead  to  errors  in  the  present  work  if,  in  addition,  the 

19  R.  V.  Pound  and  G.  A.  Rebka,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  4,  335 
(1960). 

20  S.  S.  Hanna,  Proceedings  of  the  Allerton  Park  Conference  on 
the  Mossbauer  Effect,  University  of  Illinois,  1960  (unpublished), 
pp.  39-40;  D.  H.  Vincent,  R.  S.  Preston,  J.  Heberle,  and  S.  S. 
Hanna,  Bull.  Am.  Phys.  Soc.  5,  428  (1960). 

21  D.  E.  Nagle,  H.  Frauenfelder,  R.  D.  Taylor,  D.  R.  F.  Cochran, 
and  B.  T.  Matthias,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  5,  364  (1960). 


absorber  were  magnetized.  The  latter  condition  could 
result  from  the  method  of  preparation  of  the  absorber. 
A  combination  of  the  two  circumstances  would  change 
the  relative  intensities  of  the  absorption  dips  at  the 
several  source-absorber  speeds  V,  as  a  result  of  the  net 
polarization  of  individual  spectral  components.4  To  a 
first-order  approximation,  a  net  polarization  does  not 
influence  the  relative  contributions  of  individual  lines, 
and  hence,  the  temperature  dependence  of  R(V). 
Nevertheless,  an  experimental  check  of  the  net  polariza- 
tion of  the  spectra  was  made;  the  absorber  orientation 
was  rotated  by  90  degrees  about  an  axis  normal  to  its 
plane.  This  rotation  caused  no  perceptible  changes  in 
transmitted  intensities,  ensuring  that  the  spectrum  of 
Fig.  2  was  appropriate  to  the  experiment. 

Experimental  values  of  R  (2.23  mm/ sec)  for  tempera- 
tures between  4.5°  and  0.85°K  are  shown  in  Fig.  6. 
Data  points  were  taken  over  a  period  of  several  hours 
for  each  temperature,  in  order  to  accumulate  the  neces- 
sary number  of  counts,  ~107,  for  adequate  statistics. 
That  the  line  does  not  pass  through  1.00  at  1/T=0  is 
probably  due  to  a  geometry  effect.  The  counting  rate 
with  the  absorber  placed  at  the  extremes  of  the  normal 
travel  was  shown  to  be  slightly  different ;  as  also  noted 
earlier  the  absorber  path  length  was  slightly  different 
for  positive  and  negative  velocities  in  this  particular 
experiment.  A  systematic  0.3%  change  in  the  counting 
rate  at  one  of  the  satellites  used  in  obtaining  the  ratio 
would  shift  the  ordinate  in  Fig.  6  by  0.015. 

The  experimental  slope,  dft/dr-^  0.03 13±0.0021 
obtained  by  a  least  squares  analysis  is  directly  propor- 
tional to  the  magnitude  of  the  field  H  at  the  Co57 
nuclei.  In  order  to  deduce  H,  it  is  necessary  to  evaluate 
the  coefficients  in  Eq.  (18)  for  the  actual  foil  thickness. 

The  total  resonance  cross  section  is  given  by  the 
formula17 

2I{+1 

<t=2ttX2 ( )  =  1.48X10-I8cm2,      (21) 

2/o+lVl+c 


■lVl+a/ 


Fig.  6.  Intensity  ratio  R  for  the  2.23-mm/sec  resonant  absorption 
dip  at  several  temperatures  between  4.5°K  and  0.85°K. 


332 


1123 


POLARIZATION    OF    Co67     IN     Fe    METAL 


where  X  is  (27r)_1  times  the  wavelength  of  the  14.4-kev 
radiation,  I\  and  I0  are  the  spins  of  the  excited  and 
ground  states,  respectively,  and22  a  =15  is  the  internal 
conversion  coefficient.  The  calculated  thickness  pa- 
rameter for  the  1.73-mg/cm2  foil  is  x=  27.  The  effective 
thickness  for  the  absorption  lines  having  the  intensity 
factors  w*'.,-'=l/12,  1/6,  and  1/4  which  overlap  in  the 
2.23-mm/sec  resonance  are  therefore  xwk'}'/2=1.13, 
2.26,  and  3.39,.  respectively.  The  temperature  coeffi- 
cients are  calculated  to  be 

aM1(V=2.23  mm/sec,  *=  27)  =  2.19, 
a£2(F=2.23  mm/sec,  z=27)=1.13. 

The  resulting  formula  for  the  ratio  of  intensities  is, 
by  Eq.  (18), 

R(V)=l+2.15ZT-\  (22) 

Comparison  of  Eq.  (22)  and  the  experimental  value  of 
R(V)  leads  to  the  measured  value  of  the  Co67  level 
splitting, 

£=(14.6±  1.0)  X  lO-^K. 

The  hyperfine  magnetic  field  H  corresponding  to  this 
splitting  is  300±20  kilogauss.12* 

V.  DISCUSSION 

The  hfs  magnetic  field  H  acting  on  Co  nuclei  at  low 
concentrations  in  Fe  metal  has  been  measured  previ- 
ously by  other  methods.  Table  I  lists  the  values  obtained 
to  date.  All  measurements  were  made  at  low  tempera- 
tures. The  experimental  uncertainties  in  all  of  the 
determinations  are  probably  within  a  factor  of  2  of  the 
7%  estimated  for  the  present  work.  There  is  no  evident 
disagreement  among  the  several  measurements.  Since 
the  earlier  studies  could  not  be  subject  to  the  depolari- 
zation mechanisms  discussed  earlier  in  this  paper,  it  is 
apparent  that  depolarization  does  not  play  an  important 
role  in  the  present  technique.  It  is  clear  that  we  have 
observed  no  major  depolarization  such  as  occurs  for 
Co67  in  a  Tutton  salt.11  We  can  conclude  that  the  per- 
turbing fields  which  are  considered  to  be  responsible 

Table  I.  Hyperfine  field  H  at  Co  nuclei  in  Fe  metal. 

H 
Reference  Method  (kilogauss) 

Present  work  300 

(23)  Specific  heat  320 

(24)  Specific  heat  315 

(25)  Gamma-ray  (Co60)  anisotropy        350 


22  H.  R.  Lemmer,  O.  J.  A.  Segaert,  and  M.  A.  Grace,  Proc.  Phys. 
Soc.  (London)  A68,  701  (1955). 

23  V.  Arp,  D.  Edmonds,  and  R.  Petersen,  Phys.  Rev.  Letters  3, 
212  (1959). 

24  N.  Kurti,  Suppl.  J.  Appl.  Phys.  30,  2155  (1960). 

26  A.  V.  Kogan,  V.  D.  Kul'kov,  L.  P.  Nikitin,  N.  M.  Reinov, 
I.  A.  Sokolov,  and  M.  F.  Stel'makh,  J.  Exptl.  Theoret.  Phys. 
(U.S.S.R.)  39, 47  (1960)  [translation :  Soviet  Phys.— JETP  12(39), 
34  (1961)]. 


for  the  Tutton  salt  results  arise  after  the  -fiT-capture 
decay  of  the  Co87,  and  are  probably  due,  in  the  Tutton 
salt,  to  long-lived  holes  in  the  outer  electron  shells. 
These  holes  are  filled  rapidly  by  the  conduction  elec- 
trons of  the  metal,  in  times  that  are  short  compared  to 
the  10~8-sec  lifetime  of  the  136-kev  state  of  Fe57. 

Finally,  we  note  that  the  magnitude  of  H  for  Co  in 
Fe  metal  is  much  closer  to  the  field  value  of  333  kilo- 
gauss  for  Fe  in  Fe  metal4  than  to  the  value  219  kilo- 
gauss  for  Co  in  Co  metal.15  It  is  not  surprising  that  for 
these  materials  the  effect  of  environment  appears  to 
dominate  those  interactions  which  may  be  ascribed  to 
the  individual  atoms.  Co  differs  from  Fe  in  that  it  has 
one  additional  3d  electron,  which  is  probably  accepted 
into  the  unfilled  3d  band  of  the  Fe  metal,  thus  leaving 
the  Co  nucleus  in  an  environment  characteristic  of  the 
surrounding  Fe. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We  gratefully  acknowledge  the  contributions  of 
several  people.  L.  Wilets  of  the  University  of  Washing- 
ton helped  us  to  clarify  our  understanding  of  details 
of  the  decay  scheme.  R.  Keil  provided  the  thin  rolled 
absorbers,  and  J.  M.  Dickinson  assisted  in  the  prepara- 
tion of  samples.  W.  E.  Keller  and  D.  R.  F.  Cochran,  who 
collaborated  on  the  initial  experiments,  encouraged  and 
assisted  us  in  the  present  work.  R.  R.  Rylander  con- 
structed portions  of  the  apparatus,  and  R.  Hanft 
assisted  in  many  of  the  measurements. 

APPENDK 

Here  we  calculate  the  coefficients  Qu  which  were 
introduced  in  Eq.  (3).  Qij  is  the  probability  that,  if  the 
Co67  nucleus  initially  has  magnetic  quantum  number 
mi,  the  decay  will  proceed  to  the  Fe67  first  excited  state 
with  magnetic  quantum  number  tn::  It  depends,  in 
addition  to  the  spins  of  the  nuclear  states  involved, 
upon  the  character  of  the  K  capture,  and  on  the  multi- 
polarity  of  the  7  ray  emitted  in  the  transition  between 
the  second  and  first  excited  states.26  As  has  been  dis- 
cussed in  the  text,  the  K  capture  is  almost  certainly 
Gamow-Teller  allowed,  and  we  will  calculate  the  co- 
efficients for  both  of  the  possible  multipolarities, 
namely,  Ml  and  E2.  In  case  the  radiation  is  not  pure, 
but,  as  is  realized  for  this  y  ray,  is  a  mixture  of  Ml  and 
E2,  there  will  in  general  be  interference  between  the 
two  components.  However,  the  interference  term  van- 
ishes when  averaged  over  angle,  so  that  if  the  source  is 
unmagnetized  it  will  have  no  effect,  and  the  result  ob- 
tained by  adding  the  two  contributions  [see  Eq.  (18)] 
is  correct. 

If  we  denote  the  wave  functions  of  Co67  and  the 
second  and  first  excited  states  of  Fe57  by  ^7/2"",  ^5/2m', 
and  ^3/2my,  respectively,  then  the  cobalt  decay  may  be 

26  It  also  depends  on  depolarizing  forces,  if  any,  which  act  in 
the  intermediate  state.  We  calculate  it  on  the  assumption  that 
there  are  none. 


333 


DASH,     TAYLOR,     NAGLE,     CRAIG,     AND     VISSCHER  1124 

Table  II.  Qh  for  £=1  (Ml  y  ray).  Table  III.  Qtj  for  Z.=  2  (El  y  ray). 


\f», 

\wy 

Wj\ 

3/2 

1/2 

-1/2 

-3/2 

mi\ 
7/2 

3/2 
3/7 

1/2 
4/7 

-1/2 
0 

-3/2 

7/2 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5/2 

4/7 

3/7 

0 

0 

5/2 

24/49 

9/49 

16/49 

0 

3/2 

2/7 

4/7 

1/7 

0 

3/2 

22/49 

4/49 

19/49 

4/49 

1/2 

4/35 

18/35 

12/35 

1/35 

1/2 

12/35 

38/245 

72/245 

51/245 

-1/2 

1/35 

12/35 

18/35 

4/35 

-1/2 

51/245 

72/245 

38/245 

12/35 

-3/2 

0 

1/7 

4/7 

2/7 

-3/2 

4/49 

19/49 

4/49 

22/49 

-5/2 

0 

0 

3/7 

4/7 

-5/2 

0 

16/49 

9/49 

24/49 

-7/2 

0 

0 

0 

1 

-7/2 

0 

0 

4/7 

3/7 

represented  by 

fr/2ml  -» Em'  CO/2,  mi  1 5/2,  m' ;  1,  mt-m') 

x^6/2m'xr,-ro',    (Al) 

where  C  is  the  usual  Clebsch-Gordan  coefficient  and  x 
is  a  triplet  S-wave  function  describing  the  emitted 
neutrino  plus  the  absorbed  electron.  In  turn,  the  decay 
of  the  second  excited  state  is  written 

^6/2m'  — »  2~L  C(5/2,m'\3/2,  m,;  L.  m'—m3) 

Xh/2m'yLm'-m'\     (A2) 

where  yL  represents  the  emitted  y  ray  of  multipole  order 
L.  Upon  substituting  (A2)  into  (Al), 

fan-^Jl  H  C(7/2,  mi\5/2m';  1,  nti—m') 

XC(5/2,  w' 1 3/2,  mj;  L,  m'-m,) 

Xxim~m'yLm'~mih/2mi, 

we  find  that  the  sum  of  squares  of  the  contributions  to 
the  coefficient  of  ^3/2m;  is 


Qu=?:m>\C(7/2,mi\S/2,m';l,mi-m') 
XC(5/2,m'\3/2,mj 


L,  m'- 


h)Y 


The  Clebsch-Gordan  coefficients  may  be  easily  calcu- 
lated, or  found  in  tables,  and  the  sum  (which  never 
contains  more  than  3  terms)  evaluated  numerically. 
The  results  are  shown  in  Table  II  for  L=\  (dipole  y 
ray),  in  Table  III  for  L=2  (quadrupole  y  ray). 

Note  added  in  proof.  Recent  examination  of  the  hyper- 
fine  spectra  of  source  and  absorber  by  an  unsplit  ab- 
sorber and  source,  respectively,  has  yielded  relative  in- 
tensities in  the  ratio  3 : 3.2 : 1,  indicating  that  the  samples 
were  partially  magnetized.  Calculations  based  upon  the 
revised  spectrum  increases  the  deduced  value  of  the 
hyperfine  field  at  Co57  nuclei  to  375  kgauss.  Further 
deviation  of  the  actual  intensity  distribution  from  the 
distribution  assumed  in  the  text  does  not  cause  a  further 
increase  in  the  calculated  field.  Uncertainty  in  the  inter- 
mediate magnetic  history  of  the  specimens  prevents 
specifying  the  hyperfine  field  more  precisely  within  the 
limits  of  300  and  375  kgauss.  Experiments  now  in 
progress  should  resolve  the  uncertainty  in  the  near 
future. 


COMMENTS  AND  CORRECTIONS 


The  authors  of  the  papers  listed  below  have  requested  that  the 
following  corrections  to  their  papers  be  noted: 


Diffusion  des  photons  sur  les  atomes  et  les  noyaux  dans  les  cristaux, 
by  C.  Tzara«  J.  phys.  radium,  22,  303  (1961) 


>5 


205  2nd  col.,  4th  line  under  head:   For  "[4]  "  read  "[3] 
2nd  col.,  11th  line  under  head:    For  "[5]"  read  "[4] 

206  1st  col.,  11th  line:    For  "dN(w)/aw"  read  "dN(u})/du>" 
1st  col.,  13th  line:    For  "(5)"  read  "[4]" 

207  1st  col.,  line  above  eq.  (1):    For  "[6]"  read  "[5]" 
Eq.  (1):  The  numerator  should  read 

(Os}|eiKlU/KHns}){ns}leiK=u/K|{as}> 

Last  equation  on  page: 

Numerator  should  start  1(  {  etc. 

208  1st  col.,  eq.  (3):  Square  the  whole  term  in  the  first  line  of 

the  equation 
1st  col.:  Equation  below  (3)  should  read 

kis  =  Ki€s(2MNn^s)"1/2 


Polarized  Spectra  and  Hyperfine  Structure  in  Fe57,  by  S.  S.  Hanna 
et  al.^Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  177  (1960) 

226      Figure  2:  Reverse  the  signs  of  all  the  magnetic  quantum 
numbers 

335 


336 


;OMMENTS    AN 


RECTIONS 


#2  *  .Line  33.  Sente  ;e  should  read  ' 'Thus,  the  -.ings  between 
lines  1  and  2,  4  and  5,  and  5  and  6  should  be  equal  to  the 
splitting  of  the  excited  state." 


Temperature -Dependent  Shift  of  y  Rays  Emitted  by  a  Solid,  by  B.  D, 
Josephson  •  Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  341  (1960) 

252      1st  col.:  The  last  equation  should  read 

6E  =(6H>  =  (6(p2i/2mi)) 

=  -3mi<pf/2ml> 

=  -  {bmi/mi)Ti  =  (E/miC2)^ 


Recoilless  Rayleigh  Scattering  in  Solids,  by  C.  Tzara  and 
R.  Barloutaud«Phys.  Rev.  Letters,  4,  405  (1960) 

279      1st  col.:    Equation  (1)  should  read 

x 


^T  =  exP     "2iS 


3  Er 


1  + 


st^u 


The  Mossbauer  Effect  in  Tin  from  120°K  to  the  Melting  Point,  by 
A.  J.  F.  Boyle  et  al.  •Proc.  Phys.  Soc.  (London),  77,  129  (1961) 

291  Eqs.  (6),  (7),  and  (8):  A  minus  sign  should  precede  the 

right-hand  side  of  each  equation 

292  Eq.  (10)  should  read 


fleet  a  review,  W»h  a  engr 

3  1HW2  0E20H  ltH3 


/rsy 


-77-? 


c,;& 


r  i 


OS 


A  Series  of  Lecture  Note 
IS"  and  Reprint  Volumes 


CD 


Z 


NUCLEAR  MAGNETIC  RELAXATION:  A  Reprint 
Volume 

by  N.  Bloembergen  192  pages         $3.95 

S-MATRIX  THEORY  OF  STRONG  INTERACTIONS: 

A  Lecture  Note  and  Reprint  Volume 

by  Geoffrey  F.  Chew  192  pages         $3.95 


CD 


QUANTUM  ELECTRODYNAMICS:  A  Lecture  Note 
and  Reprint  Volume 

by  R.  P.  Feynman  208  pages        $3.95 


THE  THEORY  OF  FUNDAMENTAL  PROCESSES: 

A  Lecture  Note  Volume 

by  R.  P.  Feynman  184  pages        $3.95 

THE  MOSSBAUER  EFFECT:  A  Collection  of  Re- 
prints with  an  Introduction 

by  Hans  Frauenfelder  352  pages        $3.95 


THE  MANY-BODY  PROBLEM:  A  Lecture  Note  and 
Reprint  Volume 

by  David  Pines  472  pages        $3.95 


QUANTUM  THEORY  OF  MANY-PARTICLE  SYS- 

TEMS:  A  Lecture  Note  and  Reprint  Volume 
by  L.  Van  Hove,  N.  M.  Hugenholtz, 
and  L.  P.  Howland  264  pages         $3.95 


W.     A.       BENJAMIN,     INC.,     PUB     LISHERS 


