1

Cosmic Reionization

arXiv:astro-ph/0602375v2 22 May 2006

Observational constraints on Cosmic
Reionization
Xiaohui Fan1 , C.L. Carilli2 , B. Keating3
1 Steward Observatory, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721;
2 National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Socorro, NM, 87801;
3 Department of Physics, University of California, San Diego, CA, 92093

Key Words Cosmology – observational; Galaxy formation; cosmic reionization

Abstract
Recent observations have set the first constraints on the epoch of reionization (EoR), corresponding to the formation epoch of the first luminous objects. Studies of Gunn-Peterson (GP)
absorption, and related phenomena, suggest a qualitative change in the state of the intergalactic
medium (IGM) at z ∼ 6, indicating a rapid increase in the neutral fraction of the IGM, from
xHI < 10−4 at z ≤ 5.5, to xHI > 10−3 , perhaps up to 0.1, at z ≥ 6. Conversely, transmission spikes in the GP trough, and the evolution of the Lyα galaxy luminosity function indicate
xHI < 0.5 at z ∼ 6.5, while the large scale polarization of the cosmic microwave background
(CMB) implies a significant ionization fraction extending to higher redshifts, z ∼ 11 ± 3. The
results suggest that reionization is less an event than a process, with the process beginning as
early as z ∼ 14, and with the ’percolation’, or ’overlap’ phase ending at z ∼ 6. The data are
consistent with low luminosity star forming galaxies as being the dominant sources of reionizing
photons. Low frequency radio telescopes currently under construction should be able to make
the first direct measurements of HI 21cm emission from the neutral IGM during the EoR, and

2

Fan, Carilli, Keating

upcoming measurements of secondary CMB temperature anisotropy will provide fine details of
the dynamics of the reionized IGM.

CONTENTS
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

A basic model of reionization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

Observations of the Gunn-Peterson Effect at z ∼ 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

Gunn-Peterson Effect: Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

Complete Gunn-Peterson troughs: phase transition or gradual evolution? . . . . . . . .

8

Estimating the ionization state and the neutral fraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

Cosmic Strömgren spheres and surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

Other IGM Probes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

Evolution of metal absorption systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

GRBs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16

Evolution of the IGM thermal state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

Luminosity function and line profiles of Lyα galaxies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

18

Cosmic Microwave Background Probes of Reionization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20

The Generation of CMB Polarization and Temperature Anisotropy During the EoR . .

21

Current CMB Results and Future Prospects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

28

Observational Challenges

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

30

Discussion and Future Prospects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

31

Sources of Reionization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

34

Quasars and AGN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

34

Lyman Break galaxies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

35

Dusty and big galaxies at high redshift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

37

X-ray photons and decaying sterile neutrios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

38

Annu. Rev. Astro. Astrophy. 2005 1

1056-8700/97/0610-00

HI 21cm probes of Reionization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

39

The physics of the neutral IGM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

41

Capabilities to detect HI 21cm signals from reionization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

43

Observational challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

49

Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

52

1

Introduction

The baryonic pre-galactic medium (PGM) evolves in three distinct phases. At
high redshifts (z > 1100) the PGM is hot, fully ionized, and optically thick to
Thomson scattering, and hence coupled to the photon field. As the universe
expands, the PGM cools, and eventually recombines, leaving a surface of last
scattering (the cosmic microwave background, CMB), plus a neutral PGM. This
neutral phase lasts from z = 1100 to z ∼ 14. At some point between z ∼ 14 and 6,
hydrogen in the PGM is ‘reionized’, due to UV radiation from the first luminous
objects, leaving the fully reionized intergalactic medium (IGM) seen during the
‘realm of the galaxies’ (6 > z > 0). The ionized, dense PGM at very high redshift
has been well studied through extensive observations of the CMB. Likewise, the
reionized, rarified IGM at low redshift has been well characterized through QSO
absorption line studies. The middle phase – the existence of a neutral IGM
during the so-called ‘dark ages’ (Rees 1998), and the process of reionization of
this medium, is the last directly observable phase of cosmic evolution that remains
to be verified and explored. The epoch of reionization (EoR) is crucial in cosmic
structure formation studies, since it sets a fundamental benchmark indicating
the formation of the first luminous objects, either star forming galaxies or active
galactic nuclei (AGN).

3

4

Fan, Carilli, Keating
Cosmic reionization has been discussed within the larger context of mostly the-

oretical reviews on the formation of the first luminous objects (Loeb & Barkana
2002; Barkana & Loeb 2001; Ciardi & Ferrara 2005). The past few years have
seen the first observational evidence for a neutral IGM, and the first constraints
on the process of reionization. In this review we do not repeat the theory of
early structure formation, but focus on these recent observations of reionization
and the evolution of the neutral IGM. Such constraints come from optical and
near-IR spectroscopy of the most distant QSOs, and study of galaxy populations
at the highest redshifts, among others. Detections of the IGM Thomson optical
depth come from observations of the large angular scale polarization of the CMB
(Kogut et al. 2003; Spergel et al. 2006; Page et al. 2006”). These measurements
yield a & 3σ detection of polarized emission of the CMB, and future observations
of the small scale CMB anisotropy will complement the large angular scale polarization by probing the fine-details of the reionization epoch. We also review the
potential sources of reionization, including star forming galaxies, AGN, and decaying particles. We conclude with a discussion of low frequency radio telescopes
that are being constructed to detect the neutral IGM directly through the 21cm
line of neutral hydrogen.
We focus our review on the observations of hydrogen reionization. Neutral
helium reionization likely happened at a similar epoch to that of neutral hydrogen,
due to their similar ionization potential and recombination rate. Reionization
of He II happens at a much lower redshift – the He II Gunn-Peterson effect is
observed in the spectrum of quasars at z ∼ 3 (e.g. Jakobsen et al. 1994, Davidsen,
Anderson et al. 1999, Kriss et al. 2001, Shull et al. 2004, Zheng et al. 2004).
Evolution of the IGM temperture (e.g. Ricotti, Gnedin & Shull 2000, Schaye et

Cosmic Reionization

5

al. 2000, Theuns et al. 2002a,b) also suggest a rapid change of IGM temperture
at z ∼ 3, consistent with the onset of He II reionization. For a detailed recent
review of HeII reionization, see Ciardi & Ferrara (2005).

2

A basic model of reionization

In order to put recent observations in context, we include a brief, mostly qualitative, description of the reionization process. Again, for more extensive reviews of
early structure formation, see Loeb & Barkana (2002) Barkana & Loeb( 2002),
and Ciardi & Ferrara (2005).
Assuming reionization is driven by UV photons from the first luminous sources
(stars or AGN), analytic (eg. Madau, Haardt, & Rees 1997; Miralda-Escude,
Haenelt, & Rees 2000; Wyithe & Loeb 2003), and numerical (eg. Gnedin 2000;
Razoumov et al. 2002; Sokasian et al. 2003; Ciardi, Stoehr, & White 2004;
Paschos & Norman 2005), calculations suggest that reionization follows a number
of phases. The first phase will be relatively slow, with each UV source isolated
to its own Strömgren sphere. Eventually, these spheres grow and join, leading to
much faster reionization, due to the combination of accelerating galaxy formation,
plus the much larger mean free path of ionizing photons in the now porous IGM.
This stage is known as ‘overlap’, or ‘percolation’. The last phase entails the
etching-away of the final dense filaments in the IGM by the intergalactic UV
radiation field, leading to a fully ionized IGM (neutral fraction, xHI nH ∼ 10−5 ,
at z = 0).
There are a number of important caveats to this most basic model. First,
causality, cosmic variance, and source clustering will set an absolute minimum
width in redshift for the fast phase of reionization, ∆z > 0.15, and the process

6

Fan, Carilli, Keating

itself is likely to be much more extended in time (Wyithe & Loeb 2004). In
particular, Furlanetto & Oh (2005) point out that the overlap phase is a relatively local phenomenon, with significant differences along different lines of sight.
Second, the recombination time for the mean IGM becomes longer than the Hubble time at z ≥ 8, allowing for the possibility of complex reionization histories.
As shown by a number of semi-analytical works (e.g., Cen 2003a,b, Chiu et al.
2003, Wyithe & Loeb 2003, Haiman & Holder 2003), adding feedback from an
early generation of galaxy formation, or adjusting star formation efficiency at
z > 6 − 10, will produce a prolonged, or multi-epoch reionization history. Third,
it remains an open question as to whether reionization proceeds from high to low
density regions (inside-out; Ciardi & Madau 2003, Sokasian et al. 2003; Iliev et
al. 2006), or from low to high density regions (outside-in; Miralda-Escude et al.
2000, Gnedin 2000). Forth, a very different picture arises if we assume reionization by decaying fundamental particles, or by penetrating hard Xrays from the
first luminous sources. In this case, the reionization process is not localized to
individual Strömgren spheres, but occurs more uniformly throughout the IGM
(§8.4). Lastly, we have been necessarily vague in terms of precise redshifts and
timescales for the various phases – this is the main concern of the present review.
Throughout this review, we adopt a standard concordance cosmology (Spergel
et al. 2003, Spergel et al. 2006), unless stated otherwise.

3

Observations of the Gunn-Peterson Effect at z ∼ 6

Gunn & Peterson (1965) first proposed using Lyα resonance absorption in the
spectrum of distant quasars as a direct probe to the neutral hydrogen density
in the IGM at high-redshift (see also Field 1959, Shklovsky 1964, Scheuer 1965,

7

Cosmic Reionization

Bahcall & Salpeter 1965). For objects beyond reionization, neutral hydrogen
in the IGM creates complete Gunn-Peterson absorption troughs in the quasar
spectrum blueward of Lyα emission. Observations of the Gunn-Peterson effect
directly constrain the evolution of neutral hydrogen fraction and the ionization
state of the IGM.

3.1

Gunn-Peterson Effect: Basics

The Gunn-Peterson (1965) optical depth to Lyα photons is
τGP =

πe2
fα λα H −1 (z)nHI ,
me c

(1)

where fα is the oscillator strength of the Lyα transition, λα = 1216Å, H(z) is
the Hubble constant at redshift z, and nHI is the density of neutral hydrogen in
the IGM. At high redshifts:
5

τGP (z) = 4.9 × 10



Ωm h2
0.13

−1/2 

Ωb h2
0.02



1+z
7

3/2 

nHI
nH



,

(2)

for a uniform IGM. Even a tiny neutral fraction, xHI ∼ 10−4 , gives rise to
complete Gunn-Peterson absorption. This test is only sensitive at the end of the
reionization when the IGM is already mostly ionized, and saturates for the higher
neutral fraction in the earlier stage.
At z < 5, the IGM absorption is resolved into individual Lyα forest lines;
their number density increases strongly with redshift (N (z) ∝ (1 + z) 2.5 , see
Rauch 1998). Earlier attempts to study Gunn-Peterson absorption concentrated
on measuring the amount of flux between individual Lyα forest lines using highresolution spectroscopy to place limits on the diffuse neutral IGM. Webb et al.
(1992) and Giallongo et al. (1994) found τ < 0.05 at z ∼ 4. Songaila et al.
(1999) and Fan et al. (2000) place upper limits of τ = 0.1 and 0.4 based on lack

8

Fan, Carilli, Keating

of complete Gunn-Peterson troughs in SDSS J0338+0021 (z = 5.00) and SDSS
J1044–0125 (z = 5.74), respectively. However, at z > 5, even with a moderately
high resolution spectrum, Lyα forest lines overlap severely, making it impossible
to find a truly ”line-free” region.
A more accurate picture of the IGM evolution interprets the Lyα forest as a
fluctuating Gunn-Peterson effect: absorption arises from low-density gas in the
IGM that is in approximate thermal equilibrium between photoionization heating
by the UV background and adiabatic cooling due to the Hubble expansion, rather
than as discrete Lyα forest clouds (Bi 1993; Cen et al. 1994; Zhang et al. 1995;
Herquist et al. 1996). The neutral hydrogen fraction and therefore the GP optical
depth depends on the local density of the IGM. By studying the evolution of the
average transmitted flux or effective optical depth, one can trace the evolution of
the UV ionizing background and neutral fraction of the IGM. At high-redshift,
the IGM is highly clumpy (Miralda-Escude et al. 2000), which has to be taken
into account in order to estimate the IGM ionization from observations.

3.2

Complete Gunn-Peterson troughs: phase transition or gradual evolution?

The Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS, York et al. 2000) provides large samples
of luminous quasars over 0 < z < 6.5. Fan et al. (2000, 2001, 2003, 2004, 2006a)
carried out a survey of i-dropout quasars (z > 5.7) using the SDSS imaging data,
resulting in the discovery of 19 luminous quasars in this redshift regime (Figure
1). Other multicolor survey projects (e.g, Mahabal et al. 2005; AGES, Cool et
al. 2006; QUEST, Djorgovski et al. 2005; CFHT Legancy survey, Willott et al.
2005) are also searching for quasars at similar redshifts. They provide by far the

Cosmic Reionization

9

best probes of IGM evolution towards the end of the EoR.
Songaila (2004) summarized the evolution of transmitted flux over a wide
redshift range (2 < z < 6.3) using high signal-to-noise, moderate-resolution
(R ≥ 5000) observations of 50 quasars. Strong evolution of Lyα absorption
at zabs > 5 is evident, the transmitted flux quickly approaches zero at z > 5.5
(Figure 2). At zabs > 6, complete absorption troughs begin to appear: the
Gunn-Peterson optical depths are >> 1, indicating a rapid increase in the neutral fraction. However, is this evolution the result of a smooth transition due
to gradual thickening of the Lyα forest (e.g. Songaila & Cowie 2002, Songaila
2004)? Or is it a reflection of a more dramatic change in the IGM evolution,
marking the end of reionization (e.g., Djorgovski et al. 2001, Becker et al. 2001,
Fan et al. 2002)?
Djorgovski et al. (2001) detected an extended dark gap in the spectrum of
SDSS J1044–0125 (z = 5.74), at zabs = 5.2 − 5.6, with τGP > 4.6. The first clearcut Gunn-Peterson trough was discovered in the spectrum of SDSS J1030+0524
(z = 6.28, Fan et al. 2001, Becker et al. 2001, Figure 4), which showed complete
Gunn-Peterson absorption at 5.95 < zabs < 6.15 in both Lyα and Lyβ transitions.
A high S/N spectrum presented in White et al. (2003) placed a stringent limit
τGP > 6.3 in Lyα . However, Songaila (2004) suggested that constraints based
on Lyα alone do not deviate from a simple extrapolation from lower redshift by a
large factor, consistent with a relatively smooth evolution in the ionization state.
The GP optical depth τ ∝ f λ, where f and λ are the oscillator strengh and
rest-frame wavelength of the transition. For the same neutral density, the GP
optical depth of Lyβ and Lyγ are factors of 6.2 and 17.9 smaller than that of
Lyα. Therefore, Lyβ can provide more stringent constraints on the IGM ion-

10

Fan, Carilli, Keating

ization state when Lyα absorption saturates. Complete Lyβ absorption implies
a significant rise in the neutral fraction towards SDSS J1030+0524. Songaila
(2004) pointed out that in a clumpy IGM, the simple conversion factor of 6.2
between Lyα and Lyβ optical depths is an upper limit. Using high order Lyman
lines requires proper treatment of the clumpy IGM. Oh & Furlanetto (2005) and
Fan et al. (2006b) found τ α /τ β ∼ 2 − 3 and τ α /τ γ ∼ 4 − 6 for a clumpy IGM.
Fan et al. (2006b) measured the evolution of Gunn-Peterson optical depths
along the line of sight of the nineteen z > 5.7 quasars from the SDSS (Figure 3).
They found that at zabs < 5.5, the optical depth can be best fit as τ ∝ (1 + z)4.3 ,
while at zabs > 5.5, the evolution of optical depth accelerates: τ ∝ (1 + z)>10 .
There is also a rapid increase in the variation of optical depth along different lines
of sight: σ(τ )/τ increases from ∼ 15% at z ∼ 5, to > 30% at z > 6, in which
τ is averaged over a scale of ∼ 60 comoving Mpc. Figure 4 (White et al. 2003)
compares the Gunn-Peterson absorption in the two highest redshift quasars at the
time of this writing: SDSS J1030+0524 (z = 6.28) shows complete absorption.
On the other hand, SDSS J1148+5251 (z = 6.42) shows clear transmission in Lyα
and Lyβ transitions at the same redshift range, clearly indicating that that this
line of sight is still highly ionized (Oh & Furlanetto 2005, White et al. 2005). The
increased variance in the IGM optical depth at the highest redshifts is further
discussed in Songaila (2004), Djorgovski et al. (2005) and Fan et al. (2006b).
Wyithe & Loeb (2004) and Furlanetto & Oh (2005) pointed out that at the
end of reionization, the size of ionized bubbles grow rapidly. They estimate an
observed bubble size of tens of Mpc at z ∼ 6, and a scatter in the observed
redshift of overlap along different lines-of-sight to be ∆z ∼ 0.15. Wyithe & Loeb
(2005a) further showed that the Gunn-Peterson optical depth variations to be of

Cosmic Reionization

11

order unity on a scale of ∼ 100 comoving Mpc. The increased variance on the
IGM optical depth supports the interpretation that the IGM is close to the end
of reionization.
With the emergence of complete Gunn-Peterson troughs at z > 6, it becomes
increasingly difficult to place stringent limits on the optical depth and neutral
fraction of the IGM. Songaila & Cowie (2002) suggested using the distribution of
optically thick, dark gaps in the spectrum as an alternative statistic. Fan et al.
(2006b) examined the distribution of dark gaps with τ > 2.5 among their sample
of SDSS quasars at z > 5.7, and showed a dramatic increase in the average length
of dark gaps at z > 6 (Figure 5), similar to the model prediction of Paschos &
Norman (2005). Gap statistics provides a powerful new tool to characterize the
IGM ionization at the end of reionization (Gallerani et al. 2006, Kohler et al.
2006), and can be sensitive to larger neutral fractions, as they carry higher-order
information than optical depth alone. Songaila & Cowie (2002), Pentericci et al.
(2002), Fan et al. (2002, 2006b) also studied using the distribution function of
transmited fluxes (e.g. Rauch et al. 1997) or statistics of threshold crossing (e.g.
Miralda-Escudé et al. 1996).

3.3

Estimating the ionization state and the neutral fraction

Measurements of Gunn-Peterson optical depth can be used to derive the ionization state of the IGM, using parameters such as the mean UV ionizing background, the mean-free-path of UV photons, and neutral hydrogen fractions. The
evolution of Gunn-Peterson absorption is usually described in the context of photoionization. Weinberg et al. (1997) present the basic formalism to use the IGM
optical depth to measure the cosmic baryon density. McDonald et al. (2000) and

12

Fan, Carilli, Keating

McDonald & Miralda-Escude (2001) expanded this work to study the evolution
of the ionizing background at z < 5.2 by comparing the observed transmitted
flux to that of artificial Lyα forest spectra created from cosmological simulations.
Although slightly different in technical details, a number of works (Cen & McDonald 2002, Fan et al. 2002, Lidz et al. 2002, Songaila & Cowie 2002, Songaila
2004) followed the same formalism to calculate the evolution of the ionizing background at z > 5 and reached consistent results: from z ∼ 5 to z > 6, there is
an order of magnitude decrease in the UV background and the mean-free-path
of UV photons is shown to be < 1 physical Mpc at z > 6 (Fan et al. 2006b).
This scale is comparable to the clustering scale of star-forming galaxies at these
redshifts (e.g. Kashikawa et al. 2005, Hu et al. 2005, Malhotra et al. 2005).
High-redshift star forming galaxies, which likely provide most of the UV photons
for reionization, are highly biased and clustered at similar physical scales to the
mean free path. The assumption of a uniform UV background is no longer valid.
There is a clear indication of a non-uniform UV background at the end of reionization (Fan et al. 2006b). However, current observations at z > 6 are based on
a handful of quasars. A much larger sample is needed to quantify the variation
of the ionization state.
Using the same data, Fan et al. (2002, 2006b), Lidz et al. (2002), Cen &
McDonald (2002) find that at z > 6 the volume-averaged neutral fraction of
the IGM has increased to > 10−3.5 . The results are displayed in Figure 6. It is
important to note that this is strictly a lower limit, due to the large optical depths
in the Lyα line. Further, the presence of transmitting pixels and the finite length
of dark gaps in the quasar spectrum can also be used to place an independent
upper limit on the neutral fraction to be < 10 − 30% (Furlanetto et al. 2004, Fan

Cosmic Reionization

13

et al. 2006b). At higher neutral fraction, the Gunn-Peterson damping wing from
the average IGM (see §4.4) could wipe out any isolated HII region transmissions.
In summary, the latest work on GP absorption toward the highest redshift
QSOs implies a qualitative change in the nature of Lyα absorption at z ∼ 6,
including: (i) a sharp rise in the power law index for the evolution of GP optical
depth with redshift, (ii) a large variation of optical depth between different lines
of sight, and (iii) a dramatic increase in the number of dark gaps in the spectra. The GP results indicate that the IGM is likely between 10−3.5 and 10−0.5
neutral at z ∼ 6. While saturation in the GP part of the spectrum remains
a challenge, the current results are consistent with conditions expected at the
end of reionization, during the transition from the percolation, or overlap, stage
to the post-overlap stage of reionization, as suggested by numerical simulations
(Paschos & Norman 2005; Gnedin 2000, 2004; Ciardi et al. 2001, Razoumov et al.
2002, Gnedin & Fan 2006). Sources at higher redshift, and estimators sensitive
to larger neutral fractions, are needed to probe deeper into the reionization era.
Wide-field deep near-IR surveys using dedicated 4-meter class telescopes, such as
UKIDSS (Lawrance et al. 2006) and VISTA (McPherson et al. 2004), will likely
discover quasars at z ∼ 8 in the next decade (see also §5.2 for GRB observations).

4

Cosmic Strömgren spheres and surfaces

Luminous quasars produce a highly ionized HII region around them even when
the IGM is still mostly neutral otherwise. The presence of (time bounded) cosmic Strömgren spheres (CSS) around the highest redshift SDSS QSOs has been
deduced from the observed difference between the redshift of the onset of the GP
effect and the systemic redshift of the host galaxy (White et al. 2003; Wyithe &

14

Fan, Carilli, Keating

Loeb 2004a; Wyithe et al. 2005; Walter et al. 2003). The physical size of these
spheres is typically ∼ 5 Mpc at z > 6, or an order of magnitude larger volume than
the typical spheres expected from clustered galaxy formation (Furlanetto, Zaldarriaga, & Hernquist 2004), due to the extreme luminosity of the QSOs (∼ 1014
L⊙ ). The size of the Strömgren spheres is determined by the UV luminosity of
the QSO, the HI density of the IGM, and the age of the QSO. Wyithe & Loeb
(2004a) and Wyithe et al. (2005) use QSO demographics, plus the distribution
of CSS sizes, to infer a mean neutral IGM fraction of xHI ≥ 0.1 at z ∼ 6.
A complementary analysis considers the ‘cosmic Strömgren surface’ around
the z = 6.28 QSO SDSS J1030+0524. Using high quality spectra (see Figure 4),
Mesinger & Haiman (2004) show that the apparent size of the CSS around this
QSO is smaller using the Lyα than the Lyβ line. They attribute this difference to
the damping wing of Lyα , and from this infer an IGM neutral fraction xHI ≥ 0.2.
However, Oh & Furlanetto (2004) highlight the many significant uncertainties
in both these calculations, including: knowledge of the systemic redshift of the
source, unknown 3D geometry, QSO age distribution, effect of large scale structure and clustering of ionizing sources around early luminous quasars, and often
noisy spectra taken in a difficult wavelength range. In particular, recombinations
in denser regions can be a significant photon sink, and hence the clumping factor
becomes a key parameter. Yu & Lu (2005) estimate that these factors could result
in up to an order of magnitude uncertainity in the derived neutral fraction. Also,
there remains debate as to whether these techniques measure a mass or a volume
averaged neutral fraction. Fan et al. (2006b) show that over 5.7 < z < 6.4,
the average size of the quasar Strömgren spheres decreases by ∼ 2.5, consistent
with an increase of the neutral fraction by a factor ∼ 15 over this redshift range,

Cosmic Reionization

15

assuming the Strömgren radius Rs ∝ F (HI)−1/3 and other conditions being the
same. Measurements of CSS are sensitive to much larger neutral fraction than
using Gunn-Peterson effect, but are also strongly affected by systematics. More
examples of z > 6 QSOs over a larger range in intrinsic luminosity are required
to verify these calculations.

5

Other IGM Probes

In this section, we describe other IGM probes that are either sensitive to a large
neutral fraction, or could be extended to higher redshift in the near future.

5.1

Evolution of metal absorption systems

The early star formation that presumably started cosmic reionization also enriched the ISM and IGM with heavy elements. Detailed metal enrichment models
in the early universe are reviewed in Ciardi & Ferrara (2005). Songaila (2001,
2005) and Pettini et al. (2003) found that the total CIV abundance Ω(CIV) does
not significantly evolve over 1.5 < z < 5.5. Schaye et al. (2003) found a lower
bound of [C/H] ∼ −4 even in the underdense regions of the IGM at z < 4. Madau
et al. (2001, see also Stiavelli et al. 2004) found that by assuming massive stars
ionized the Universe with yield from Population II or III stars, the Universe would
have a mean metallicity of ∼ 10−3∼−4 Z⊙ after reionization, comparable to those
found in the high-redshift quasar absorption lines. While these measurements do
not directly constrain the reionization history, they suggest that one could detect
numerous metal absorption lines even at z > 6.
Furlanetto & Loeb (2003) suggest using observations of low-ionization absorption lines such as CII or OI to constrain properties of the stellar population that

16

Fan, Carilli, Keating

ionized the Universe at z > 6, such as star formation efficiency and escape fraction
from supernova winds. To directly constrain the reionization history, Oh (2002)
suggested using OIλ1302 absorption as tracer of the neutral fraction. OI has almost identical ionization potentials to H and should be in tight charge exchange
equilibrium with H, while its lower abundance means that it would not saturate


hZi
eff = 10−6
eff . OI (and
even when the Universe was mostly neutral: τOI
τHI
−2
10 Z⊙
SiIIλ 1260) forests could provide combined constraints on the reionization and
metal enrichment histories. Oh (2002) predicted that a handful of OI lines could
be detected in the Gunn-Peterson trough redshift regions of known z > 6 quasars
when observed at high resolution. Becker et al. (2006) obtained high-resolution,
high S/N spectra of a sample of six quasars at z > 5 using Keck/HERES and
detected OI system up to z = 6.26. They do not find a dense OI forest, consistent
with high degree of IGM ionization at z ∼ 6. However, it is puzzling that the line
of sight of SDSS J1148+5251 (z = 6.42), which has the highest ionization fraction
at z > 6 (§3.3), also has the highest density of OI lines, raising the possibility
that low metalicity, not high ionization, may be the cause for the lack of OI lines.
Detailed modelling of IGM enrichment is needed to inteprete high-redshift metal
line results.

5.2

GRBs

Gamma-Ray Bursts (GRBs) are the most powerful explosions in the Universe,
and could be detected at z > 10. At high-redshift, the time dilation means that
their afterglow will fade away (1 + z) times slower, aiding rapid spectroscopic
follow-up observations (e.g. Ciardi & Loeb 2000) to probe the IGM evolution.
GRB afterglow has been detected up to z = 6.30 (SWIFT GRB 050904, Price et

Cosmic Reionization

17

al. 2005, Tagliaferri et al. 2005, Haislip et al. 2005, Kawai et al., 2006).
For a largely neutral IGM, τ ∼ 105 , the damping wing of the GP trough
arising from the large GP optical depth of the neutral medium will extend into
the red side of the Lyα emission line (Miralda-Escudé 1998). For z ∼ 6, at
∼ 10Å redward of Lyα of the host galaxy, the optical depth is of order unity for a
neutral IGM. However, this GP damping wing test cannot be applied to luminous
quasars, due to the proximity effect from the quasar itself, as shown by Madau &
Rees (2000) and Cen & Haiman (2000) and discussed in §4. Absorption spectra
of GRBs, however, are not affected by the proximity effect and can be used to
probe the existence of damping wings and measure IGM neutral fractions up to
order of unity. However, strong internal absorption from the neutral hydrogen
of the ISM (log N(HI) > 21) in the host galaxy appears to be ubiquitous among
GRB afterglow spectra (e.g., Chen et al. 2005). Such internal absorption, or gas
infall in the host galaxy environment (Barkana & Loeb 2004), will complicate
the interpretation of GRB observations. At large distance from line center, the
damping wing from a diffused IGM has a profile τ ∝ ∆ν −1 , instead of τ ∝ ∆ν −2
for a discrete absorber. Totani et al. (2006) fit a Lyα absorption profile of GRB
050904 (z = 6.30) with contributions from the internal damped Lyα absorption
and the diffuse IGM damping wing simultaneously, and obtain a conservative
limit on the IGM neutral fraction xHI < 0.6.

5.3

Evolution of the IGM thermal state

Reionization will photo-heat the IGM to several times 104 K. After this episode,
the IGM will gradually cool mostly due to the Hubble expansion. Because of its
long cooling time, the IGM will retain some of its thermal memory of reioniza-

18

Fan, Carilli, Keating

tion – earlier reionization leads to a cooler IGM at lower redshifts. Theuns et al.
(2002a) used absorption line width measurements to estimate the IGM temperature at z = 2 − 4, and found an average temperature of ∼ 2.5 × 104 at z ∼ 3.5.
This temperature constrains reionization to be: zreion < 9. Hui & Haiman (2003)
carried out a similar analysis and considered different ionizing sources and different ionization histories. Figure 7 shows their models with different reionization
redshifts and a quasar-like ionizing spectrum. They concluded that for all models
where the Universe was ionized at z > 10, and remained ionized thereafter, the
IGM would have reached an asymptotic temperature too cold compared with observations. The IGM thermal history measurement requires the ionized fraction
of the IGM to have of order unity changes at late (6 < z < 10) epoch, regardless of
whether there is a very early episode of reionization. This independent constraint
on the reionization history is consistent with Gunn-Peterson measurements, and
it points to a rapid ionization transition at low redshift. However, this is a difficult observation, and the interpretation of IGM temperture evolution may be
further complicated by IGM heating during HeII reonization at lower redshift,
(e.g., Sokasian et al. 2002).

5.4

Luminosity function and line profiles of Lyα galaxies

Surveys of galaxies with strong Lyα emission lines through narrow-band imaging
in selected dark windows of the night sky OH emission forest have proven to
be a powerful technique for discovering the highest redshift galaxies (e.g., Hu et
al. 2002, 2004, Kodaira et al. 2003, Rhoads et al. 2003, Malhotra & Rhoads
2004, Tran et al. 2004, Kurk et al. 2004, Santos et al. 2004, Martin & Sawicki
2004, Taniguchi et al. 2005). At the time of this writing, > 100 Lyα galaxies

Cosmic Reionization

19

candidates have been found at z ∼ 6.5, including > 30 with spectroscopic confirmations, plus the most distant galaxy with a confirmed spectroscopic redshift,
SFJ J132418.3+271455 at z = 6.589 (Ajiki et al. 2003). Currently, ambitious
surveys of Lyα galaxies at even higher redshift, through windows in the near-IR,
are underway (e.g. Barton et al. 2004, Horton et al. 2004).
Lyα galaxies represent a significant fraction of star forming galaxies at high
redshift (Bouwens et al. 2006). Properties of Lyα galaxies directly probe the
IGM neutral fraction. As described above, in a largely neutral IGM, the GunnPeterson damping wing extends to the redside of Lyα emission. Without a large
Strömgren sphere, the intrinsic Lyα emission will be considerably attenuated. In
the simplest picture, one predicts: (1) the Lyα galaxy luminosity function will
decrease sharply in an increasingly neutral IGM, even if the total star formation
rate in the Universe remains roughly constant, and (2) the Lyα profiles will have
a stronger red wing and a smaller average equivalent width before the onset of
reionization.
Malhotra & Rhoads (2004) and Stern et al. (2004) combined the LALA survey
of Lyα galaxies (Rhoads et al. 2003) with other Lyα surveys in the literature
to determine the luminosity function of Lyα galaxies at z = 6.5 and 5.7. They
found no evolution between these two redshift bins, consistent with the IGM
being largely ionized by z ∼ 6.5 (Figure 8). Hu et al. (2005) constructed Lyα line
profiles at z = 6.5 and 5.7 from their surveys using Keck and Subaru, and found
a similar lack of evolution. The interpretations of these results, however, require
more detailed modelling. Haiman (2002), Santos (2004), Cen et al. (2005) showed
that the local HII regions around Lyα galaxies reduce the attenuations of Lyα
flux. Gnedin & Prada (2004), Wyithe & Loeb (2005b), Cen (2005) and Furlanetto

20

Fan, Carilli, Keating

et al. (2005) further demonstrated that the clustering of ionizing sources increases
the HII region size and further reduces the attenuation. Haiman & Cen (2005)
estimated that the lack of evolution in the Lyα luminosity function is consistent
with the neutral fraction xHI < 0.25, when no clustering is considered (see also
Malhortra & Rhoads 2005). Including large scale clustering, the constraint on the
IGM neutral fraction becomes less stringent (Furlanetto, Zaldarriago & Hernquist
2005). Santos (2004) showed that the presence of galactic winds may also play
a crucial role in determining the observed Lyα fluxes. Haiman & Cen (2005)
suggest studies of Lyα profiles as a function of luminosity, compared with lowredshift samples, could provide robust diagnostics to the IGM ionization state.
Furlanetto et al. (2005) showed that at large neutral fraction, only galaxies
in large ionized bubbles can be detected in Lyα, which have larger bias than
individual galaxies. With future large area Lyα surveys, it may be possible
to measure the size distribution of HII regions during reionization in order to
constrain reionization history.

6

Cosmic Microwave Background Probes of Reionization

The Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) is a rich “fossil record” of the early
universe. The CMB not only reveals the universe’s initial conditions, but also
its structure and dynamics from the time of the CMB’s origin 400,000 years
after the Big Bang to today. A CMB photon arriving in a terrestrial, balloonborne, or space-based CMB observatory is encoded with the conditions of the
universe along its 13.7 billion year journey. In particular, since the CMB is the
oldest observable electromagnetic radiation it acts as a backlight, illuminating the
transition from bulk-neutrality to complete reionization. Both the temperature

Cosmic Reionization

21

anisotropy and polarization of the CMB help reconstruct the details of the EoR.
As we will see, the CMB’s polarization and temperature anisotropy are completely
complementary probes; both in their spatial structure, and in their dependence
on the conditions of the EoR which they probe.

6.1

The Generation of CMB Polarization and Temperature Anisotropy
During the EoR

Thomson scattering produces CMB polarization only when free-electron scatterers are illuminated by an anisotropic photon distribution (Hu & White(1997)).
Moreover, the photon anisotropy, when decomposed into spherical harmonics Yℓ,m
in the rest frame of the electron, must possess a non-zero quadrupole (ℓ = 2) term
– no other contributes due to the orthogonality of the spherical harmonics. Both
free-electrons and anisotropically distributed photons were present during the
transition from complete ionization to the EoR. This epoch produced the primary CMB polarization signal, referred to as “E-mode” or “gradient mode” owing to its symmetry properties under parity transformations (Zaldarriaga & Seljak(1997), Kamionkowski et al.(1997)). The anti-symmetric component of CMB
polarization is referred to as “B-mode” or “curl mode” and arises in inflationary
cosmological models which predict a primordial gravitational wave background.
The E-mode polarization anisotropy is produced by the same perturbations which
produce temperature anisotropy and peaks at ≃ 10′ angular scales (or multipoles ℓ ≃ 1000) with an amplitude approximately 10% of the CMB temperature
anisotropy at large (> 10◦ ) angular scales.
We begin this section by briefly reviewing how the EoR produces new CMB
polarization and temperature anisotropy. The physics of CMB polarization and

22

Fan, Carilli, Keating

anisotropy has been treated in numerous sources. We refer the reader to (Zaldarriaga & Seljak(1997), Kamionkowski et al.(1997), Hu & White(1997), Dodelson(2003)) for analytic and theoretical treatments and (Seljak & Zaldarriaga(1996))
for numerical calculations. Ultimately, the CMB data, in combination with the
21 cm emission and Lyα absorbtion by neutral HI, will allow for a detailed reconstruction of the physics of the EoR.
6.1.1

Large Angular Scale CMB Polarization and Reionization

Large-angular scale CMB polarization as a probe of the ionization history of the
universe, has been considered in e.g. (Zaldarriaga(1997), Keating et al.(1998),
Kaplinghat et al.(2003)). The importance of large-angular scale CMB polarization is that, unlike the 21 cm and Lyα HI-absorption measurements discussed
elsewhere in this review, the polarization of the CMB is sensitive to ionized hydrogen (HII) as it is generated by Thomson scattering.
Reionization produces free-electrons which Thomson-scatter CMB photons,
producing CMB polarization. For angular scales smaller than the horizon at
reionization the scattering damps the CMB temperature in direction n̂ as T ′ (n̂) =
e−τ T (n̂), where τ is the Thomson optical depth. Reionization, therefore, damps
′

the temperature anisotropy power angular spectrum as CℓT = e−2τ CℓT . The
damping of the temperature power spectrum is degenerate with the primordial
power spectrum’s amplitude, A, for scales smaller than the horizon at last scattering.
Fortunately, a new feature, e.g. (Zaldarriaga(1997)), in the E-mode power
spectrum develops at large angular scales which breaks the degeneracy between
A and τ . The degeneracy (for the CMB temperature anisotropy) and its breaking
(using CMB polarization) is illustrated in (real-space) in figure 9. Figure 10 shows

Cosmic Reionization

23

the polarization angular power spectrum associated with these simulations, along
with current observational results (discussed further in 6.2). Note in 10 the new
large-angular scale (low-ℓ) peak which discriminates between models with and
without reionization.
The polarization anisotropy of the CMB reveals the ionization condition of the
universe in ways which the temperature anisotropy cannot. Following recombination at z = 1089 ± 1 (3) primordial hydrogen remained neutral until the epoch
of reionization. The term “last-scattering” is only approximately true since we
know that the universe is nearly 100% ionized at present (z = 0). Therefore some
fraction (few to ∼ 10%) of the photons scattered again following decoupling. If
reionization was instantaneous, only the primordial temperature quadrupole at
the “last-scattering surface” (z ≃ 1100) projected to the redshift of reionization
contributes to the CMB polarization at the < 1µK level (at > 10◦ scales). This
reionization feature has been detected by WMAP and is interpreted as a detection of τ = 0.10 ± 0.03, or τ = 0.09 ± 0.03 when all six cosmological parameters
are fit to all of the WMAP data (TT,TE,EE)(page) .
Whereas CMB temperature anisotropy is generated by processes occurring after reionization (e.g., gravitational redshifts due to matter inhomogeneity along
the line of sight – the Integrated Sachs-Wolfe (ISW) effect), the large-scale polarization of CMB is not similarly affected. The large-scale CMB polarization is
a cleaner and more precise probe of the onset of the reionization epoch than the
anisotropy for two reasons. The first is that the ratio of the polarized intensity to
the total intensity is unchanged when the CMB propagates through an absorbing medium (such as the post-reionization intergalactic plasma) – both polarization components are attenuated equally. The second is that both polarization

24

Fan, Carilli, Keating

components incur equal gravitational redshifts (blueshifts) when climbing out of
(falling into) time-varying gravitational potential wells from last-scattering to today since gravity cannot distinguish between the two linear polarization states.
This is equivalent to asserting that CMB polarization does not experience the
ISW effect, and so the low-multipole E-mode spectrum is not contaminated by
the ISW effect.
High precision observations of the large-scale polarization will reveal more of
the EoR’s details. The polarization power spectra are sensitive to the duration of reionization. With upcoming observations the dynamics of the EoR can
be constrained, complementing 21 cm observations (§8), by providing (modest)
redshift information; most notably regarding the transition from partial to total reionization by constraining xHI (z) – difficult using 21 cm data alone. This
would be a powerful probe of “double reionization” models(?). A cosmic variance limited experiment, with sufficient control over instrumental systematics
and foregrounds, can distinguish the transition from partial to total reionization
using details of the polarization power spectra (Kaplinghat et al.(2003), Holder
et al.(2003)). Kaplinghat et al. show that large-scale CMB polarization can
constrain the redshift of the transition from partial to total reionization with
√
precision σzri = 333στ / zri , where στ is the precision with which the experiment measures the optical depth. Upcoming measurements, such as Planck, will
produce percent-level constraints on partial reionization or double reionization
scenarios and discriminate between models with identical τ , but very different
ionization histories(Kaplinghat et al.(2003)).
Reionization also produces a new low-ℓ peak in the B-mode polarization pattern, which is absent in models without reionization. Even a modest ioniza-

Cosmic Reionization

25

tion fraction increases the observability of the B-mode (curl-mode) polarization. This is significant because gravitational lensing of large scale structure
converts E-mode power into B-mode power (Zaldarriaga & Seljak(1998), Hu &
Okamoto(2002)). This contaminant increases with increasing multipoles up to
ℓ ∼ 1000. With the new, low-ℓ structure, a more stringent limit on the inflationarygenerated gravitational wave background can be obtained than would be possible
without reionization(Kaplinghat, Knox and Song (2003)).
6.1.2

Small Angular Scale CMB Polarization and Reionization

Because even the primary CMB polarization is so small, observing effects to second order in τ or distinguishing the details of the Strömgrensphere percolation
process is extremely challenging using CMB polarization. Fortunately, the small
angular scale CMB anisotropy will provide a rich data set with vital information
on the fine-details of the reionization epoch.
6.1.3

The effects of reionization on CMB temperature anisotropy

CMB polarization probes the onset of reionization and distinguishes partial reionization from complete, but it cannot probe the details of the ionization percolation process as it is sensitive to the integrated Thomson optical depth to the
last scattering surface. In fact, the reionization details which can be provided
by large scale polarization is known to be limited by cosmic variance (Hu &
Holder 2003) and the smoothing inherent in large scale polarization measurements. Fortunately, the CMB temperature anisotropy at small angular scales
may reveal many of these interesting features (?, Gruzinov & Hu (1998), Knox et
al.(1998), Haiman & Knox(1999), Barkana & Loeb 2001, Santos et al. 2003, Zahn
et al.(2005)). Thus, both the bulk and fine details of reionization will be probed
by the complementary measurements of large-scale CMB polarization anisotropy

26

Fan, Carilli, Keating

and small-scale temperature anisotropy observations.
In non-instantaneous models of reionization (due to discrete ionizing sources),
reionization proceeds in a “patchy” manner where the Strömgrenspheres of ionized hydrogen surrounding the sources eventually coalesce to produce the fullyionized universe observed out to z ∼ 6. This patchiness induces secondary CMB
temperature anisotropy (?, Gruzinov & Hu (1998), Knox et al.(1998), McQuinn
et. al. (2005)). In addition to the damping of the CMB temperature anisotropy
power spectrum, there are two interesting secondary temperature anisotropy effects: 1) the kinetic Sunyaev-Zel’dovich effect (kSZ) and 2) the Ostriker-Vishniac
effect (OV).
The kSZ effect is due to the motion of regions of reionized electrons along
the line of sight. It is similar to the kinematic SZ effect produced by inverse
Compton scattering of the CMB by electrons in moving galaxy clusters (Sunyaev
& Zeldovich(1980)), but here it refers to the motions of the ionized electrons in
the pre-galactic medium (PGM) during the EoR. At very small angular scales
(< 4′ ) the primary CMB anisotropy signal is damped due to photon diffusion out
of overdense regions (Silk damping) prior to decoupling. Here the thermal SZ
effect dominates over the primary CMB anisotropy, but at the thermal SZ null
(218 GHz) the EoR kSZ effect may be the dominant source of CMB temperature
anisotropy.
During reionization, electron spatial inhomogeneity can arise in two ways: either by a variable ionization fraction, xi , of by a constant xi and a variable
baryon density. This effect is the OV effect which is primarily generated by
structures in the non-linear regime, i.e., at low-z. The OV effect is the result of
a “patchy” reionzed medium. Much progress has been made due to the devel-

Cosmic Reionization

27

opment of fast structure formation codes (e.g., smooth particle hydrodynamics
– SPH) which trace the reionization mechanism (since they trace the formation
of baryonic structures). The reionization efficiency of the baryonic structures is
the only free parameter, and many of these approaches, e.g., Zahn et al. (2005)
incorporate semi-analytic reionization models into their simulations. Using an
extended Press-Schechter formalism to model the reionization process Zahn et
al. (2005) find that patchy reionization makes a large contribution to the CMB
anisotropy at scales of 6′ (ℓ ∼ 2000) which exceeds the kSZ effect. In fact, ignoring these secondary, EoR effects will lead to significant biases in the estimation of
cosmological parameters derived from the primary CMB anisotropy, which further underscores vital importance of their measurement (Santos et al. 2003,Zahn
et al.(2005)).
Both the kSZ effect and the OV effects occur at small scales (< 0.1◦ , ℓ > 2000)
and probe both the homogeneity and efficiency of the reionization process. The
shapes of the predicted temperature anisotropy power spectra for these secondary
effects appear to be robust to changes in the reionization model (Knox(2003),
Santos et al. 2003, Zahn et al.(2005)), though the peak-position of the secondary
power spectra occurs when xHI ∼ 0.5, which is model-dependent (Furlanetto et
al. 2005a). In contrast, the overall amplitude of the secondary spectra appears to
be significantly model-dependent. However, the amplitude depends only weakly
on the epoch of reionization and more strongly on the duration of the patchy
phase, making it complementary to the CMB polarization measurements of the
optical depth(McQuinn et. al. (2005)). For completeness we close this subsection
on secondary effects by mentioning that both the polarized kSZ and OV effects are
expected to be nearly negligible and practically impossible to measure(Seshadri

28

Fan, Carilli, Keating

& Subramanian (1998), Hu (2000))

6.2

Current CMB Results and Future Prospects

The first detection of reionization phenomena using CMB observations came
with NASA’s Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) which reported
a nearly 5σ detection of a reionization feature in the large angular scale (> 10◦ )
temperature-polarization cross-correlation function (hT Ei) with only a single year
of data(Kogut et al.(2003)). This detection was the first use CMB polarization to measure the physics of the EoR. It also was the first detection of the
Thomson optical depth, τ , rather than the lower limits (provided by Lyα measurements) or upper limits (provided by CMB temperature anisotropy measurements). WMAP’s initial detection of τ in 2003 using the TE-data and subsequent
detection using the E-mode polarization only (page) also determines the primordial power spectrum amplitude A, σA ≃ 2στ (3). WMAP’s detection illustrates
CMB polarization’s power to probe vitally important cosmological parameters
that are essentially unobservable using temperature anisotropy alone.
WMAP’s three-year data set (page) reports several detections of the E-mode
and temperature-polarization cross-correlation power spectrum, especially at low-

ℓ (due to WMAP’s ability to map most of the sky). CBI, DASI, and BOOMERANG(Piacenti
et al.(2005)) have also detected the hT Ei cross-correlation spectrum, at smaller
angular scales than WMAP. WMAP’s first-year results are relatively robust to
the choice of additional data sets and priors used to constrain cosmological parameters (including τ ), such as SDSS ((Tegmark et al.(2004))) and Lyα forest
measurements (Seljak et al.(2005)).
In figures 10 and 11 observational CMB polarization and temperature-polarization

Cosmic Reionization

29

cross-correlation power spectra are shown for the angular scales relevant for probing the EoR. The primary effects of reionization are encoded in the E-mode
autocorrelation and temperature polarization cross-correlation power spectra at
ℓ . 50. As demonstrated in, e.g., (Zaldarriaga(1997), Hu & Holder 2003, Keating
& Miller (2005)) essentially all the information on τ comes from ℓ < 50. While
most of the τ -constraint comes from ℓ < 10, a non-negligible amount comes from
10 < ℓ < 40. Currently, only WMAP(page) and BOOMERANG(Montroy et
al.(2005)) have detected E-mode polarization at angular scales greater than 1◦
(ℓ < 200), and only WMAP has detected the E-mode polarization for ℓ < 100.
CBI(Readhead et al.(2004)) and CAPMAP(Barkats et al.(2005)) have detected
the E-mode polarization, though at smaller angular scales (higher ℓ) than are
relevant for probing the EoR with CMB polarization alone.
While no detections of the kSZ or OV effects have been reported, several groups
have published detections of CMB anisotropy at scales which are relevant to both
secondary temperature effects. For 3000 < ℓ < 10000, the kSZ temperature
anisotropy power spectrum scales roughly as Cl (Ωb h)2 σ8p where 3 < p < 7 (see
e.g. (Zhang et al.(2004))). (Dawson et al.(2002)) report a detection of CMB
anisotropy at sub-arcminute (ℓ ≃ 7000) scales using the BIMA array and (Readhead et al.(2004b)) report a detection at larger (few-arcminute) scales using CBI.
The results of the two groups are consistent, and seem to indicate significant
power in excess of the CMB primary anisotropy at those scales. Both groups
speculate on the likelihood that this excess structure is due to the thermal SZ
effect. While neither group has detected the kSZ or OV effects, they are valuable
technological and methodological precursors for future CMB anisotropy measurements of the EoR.

30

Fan, Carilli, Keating

6.3

Observational Challenges

A hallmark of CMB experiments since the detection of the CMB has been the mitigation and excision of systematic effects. CMB observations have gone to great
lengths to combat systematic effects, including building duplicate telescopes (e.g.
the COBE and WMAP satellites). Another method of improving experimental
fidelity is to conduct extremely wide-band observations for foreground monitoring and removal. For example, WMAP has radiometers covering more than two
octaves in frequency(Jarosik et al.(2003)), and Planck’s radiometers will cover
nearly five octaves(Lamarre et al.(2003), Mennella et al.(2004)).
Particularly for the large scale E-mode polarization, measuring the CMB with
multiple frequency channels alone is not sufficient. To overcome statistical (cosmic) variance on the low-ℓ CℓE peak, an experiment must observe a large survey
region – at least ∼ 30◦ × 30◦ . Such a large area is likely to be contaminated
by galactic emission, which can only be subtracted to finite precision. The
most conservative approach to deal with galactic foregrounds is to exclude regions of strong foreground emission (such as the galactic plane) from the survey.
For example, the WMAP team used multiple frequency channels in combination with sky-cuts that removing 15% of the sky surrounding the galactic plane
(Kogut et al.(2003)) and introduced correlations between multipoles at the few
percent-level. Even with sophisticated foreground modelling and multiple frequency coverage the challenges of achieving polarization fidelity at the 100 nK
level over > 10◦ angular scales – required, for example, to detect the signatures of
non-instantaneous reionization scenarios (e.g, (Kaplinghat et al.(2003), Holder et
al.(2003))) – are daunting. The CMB community is well aware of the challenge;
see for example, the CMB Task Force Committee report (Weiss et al.(2005)).

Cosmic Reionization

31

Observational challenges for secondary temperature anisotropy (kSZ and OV)
measurements include point sources, primary CMB confusion, secondary CMB
confusion due to gravitational lensing and the thermal SZ effect. To detect the
secondary effects, the primary CMB anisotropy must be overcome by measuring
at scales smaller than the Silk damping scale, requiring large (> 5 m class) telescopes. Of the foregrounds for the kSZ and OV effects, the thermal SZ effect
is perhaps the most straightforward to mitigate – by measuring at the thermal
SZ-null near 218 GHz. At small scales, point sources need to be excised based
on ancillary measurements of their spectra and position. There are also significant hurdles to overcome in the theoretical modelling of the secondary temperature effects. In particular, separating the low-z OV effect from high-z patchy
reionization effects will be challenging, though hopefully amenable to theoretical
modelling and simulation.
Since galactic foregrounds and point sources contribute to spurious polarization and anisotropy with different systematics, combining the large angular CMB
polarization observations with the small scale temperature anisotropy measurements represents the most promising avenue towards a faithful reconstruction of
the EoR using the CMB.

6.4

Discussion and Future Prospects

WMAP’s on-going measurements of CMB polarization are expected to continue
until at least 2007. Planck is expected to be launched in 2008 and will start making full-sky observations of the polarization and primary temperature anisotropy
of the CMB. Planck is expected to achieve a nearly cosmic variance limited
measurement of τ . A balloon-borne CMB polarimeter called EBEX (Oxley et

32

Fan, Carilli, Keating

al.(2005)) will cover a large region of the sky in an attempt to measure the signature of gravitational waves imprinted on the CMB.
More reionization information will emerge from CMB B-mode polarization observations, which search for the imprint of primordial gravitational radiation on
the CMB. Like the E-mode polarization reionization signature, the B-mode polarization peaks at super-degree scales so the upcoming experiments optimized
to search for the B-mode signal will have appreciable sensitivity to reionization
features in the E-mode spectrum (Keating & Miller (2005)).
An ancillary benefit of reionization is that it boosts the primary (inflation generated) B-mode power spectrum significantly near ℓ = 10. Due to reionization,
a tighter limit on the tensor-to-scalar ratio, r, in the presence of gravitational
lensing (at redshifts z < 10) can be obtained than that calculated in (Knox &
Song(2002), Kesden et al.(2002)). Kaplinghat, Knox & Song (Kaplinghat, Knox
and Song (2003)) demonstrate that the minimum detectable inflationary energy
scale behaves as 1/τ 4 due to the low-ℓ B-mode power spectrum peak produced by
reionization. This motivates very wide-field, or full-sky, observations of CMB polarization. NASA’s Beyond Einstein initiative features a CMB polarimeter called
“CMBPol”1 . This instrument is designed to detect the signature of inflationary
gravitational waves over a wide range of inflationary energy scales. This experiment will achieve cosmic variance limited precision on τ , which is essentially the
same as Planck’s sensitivity (Kaplinghat et al.(2003)), but in contrast to Planck,
CMBPol will be optimized to detect CMB polarization.
Three large-format bolometric array telescopes are currently being developed
to probe CMB temperature anisotropy and the kSZ and OV effects. The Atacama
1

http://universe.nasa.gov/program/inflation.html

Cosmic Reionization

33

Cosmology Telescope (ACT, (Kosowsky(2003))) is a 6 m telescope operating in
three frequency bands (145, 225, and 265 GHz) with ≃ 1′ angular resolution.
With concordance cosmological parameters, ACT should be able to constrain the
redshift of reionization to percent-level accuracy (Zhang et al.(2004)). The South
Pole Telescope (SPT, Ruhl et al. 2004) is a 10 m telescope operating in 5 bands
from 100 to 345 GHz with angular resolution ranging from 1.5′ to ≃ 0.5′ . Finally,
the largest CMB anisotropy telescope which will be sensitive to secondary CMB
temperature anisotropy is the 12 m Atacama Pathfinder EXperiment (APEX)
which will use a 320 pixel array of transition edge sensor (TES) bolometers, also
from a high altitude ( 5000 m) observatory in the Chilean Atacama desert. All of
these instruments, with the exception of CMBPol, are scheduled for “first-light”
before 2010.
This section has emphasized the role of the CMB in illuminating the physics of
the EoR. Both the CMB’s polarization and its temperature anisotropy provide a
wealth of reionization data in a fashion that is complementary to the 21 cm and
Lyα observations discussed elsewhere in this review. While the importance of
large-scale CMB polarization to reionization was recognized early-on, its ability
to reveal more than the bulk Thomson optical depth was not initially appreciated.
Now we understand that the polarization and the temperature anisotropy provide a detailed view of the EoR. In fact, they do so in completely complementary
ways: the polarization reveals the epoch of reionization in a way the temperature anisotropy cannot. Likewise, the CMB’s temperature anisotropy probes
secondary effects to which the polarization is blind. When the new CMB polarization and temperature anisotropy observations are combined a high-fidelity
image of the EoR will emerge.

34

7

Fan, Carilli, Keating

Sources of Reionization

Regardless of the detailed reionization history, the IGM has been almost fully
ionized since at least z ∼ 6. This places a minimum requirement on the emissivity of UV ionizing photons per unit comoving volume required to keep up with
recombination and maintain reionization (Miralda-Escudé et al. 2000):
51.2 −1

Ṅion (z) = 10

s

−3

Mpc



C
30



×



1+z
6

3 

Ωb h2
0.02

2

,

(3)

hn2 i

where C ≡ hnHHi2 is the clumping factor of the IGM. It is difficult to determine
C from observations, and has large uncertainty when estimated from simulations
(C = 10 − 100, Gnedin & Osteriker 1997). At z < 2.5, the UV ionizing background is dominated by quasars and AGN (e.g. Haardt & Madau 1996). At
z > 3, the density of luminous quasars decreases faster than that of star-forming
galaxies, and the ionizing background has an increased contribution from stars
(e.g. Haehelt et al. 2001). In this section we summarize what is known about the
ionizing background contribution from quasars and AGN, young stars, or other
sources of high energy photons (e.g. particle decay).

7.1

Quasars and AGN

Quasars and AGN are effective emitters of UV photons. The UV photon escape
fraction is generally assumed to be of order unity. The UV photon emissivity from
quasars and AGN can be directly measured from integrating quasar luminosity
functions at high-redshift. The density evolution of luminous quasars (M1450 <
−27) has been well-determined from surveys such as SDSS (e.g. Warren et al.
1994, Kennefick et al. 1995, Schmidt et al. 1995, Fan et al. 2001a, b, 2004,
Richards et al. 2005) up to z ∼ 6. Luminous quasar density declines exponentially

35

Cosmic Reionization

towards high-redshift: it is ∼ 40 times lower at z ∼ 6 than at its peak at z ∼ 2.5.
However, quasars have a steep luminosity function at the bright end – most of the
UV photons come from the faint quasars that are currently below the detection
limit at high-redshift.
Fan et al. (2001b) showed that quasars could not have maintained IGM ionization at z ∼ 6, as far as the shape of the luminosity function at z ∼ 6 is not
much steeper than that at z < 3. In fact, Fan et al. (2001a) and Richards et al.
(2005) used the SDSS sample to find that at least the bright end slope of quasars
at z > 4 are considerably flatter than that at low-redshift, consistent with the
findings of the COMBO-17 survey (Wolf et al. 2003). Miralda-Escudé (2003),
Yan & Windhorst (2004a) and Meiksin (2005) used different parameterizations of
quasar luminosity function evolution and came to the same conclusion. Willott et
al. (2005) and Mahabal et al. (2005) present surveys of a few deg2 for faint z ∼ 6
quasars. Their detection of only one z ∼ 6 faint QSO implies that the quasar
population contribution to the ionizing background is < 30% that of star-forming
galaxies.

7.2

Lyman Break galaxies

Due to the rapid decline in the AGN populations at very high z, most theoretical
models assume stellar sources reionized the universe. However, despite rapid
progress, there is still considerable uncertainty in estimating the total UV photon
emissivity of star-forming galaxies at high-redshift. Modifying the constraint from
Equation 4, Bunker et al. (2004) and Bouwens et al. (2005) showed:
ρ˙∗ ≈ (0.026 M⊙ yr−1 Mpc−3 )



1
fesc,rel



C
30



1+z
7

3

.

(4)

36

Fan, Carilli, Keating

where ρ˙∗ is the UV star formation rate rate, C30 is the IGM clumping factor, fesc,rel is the fraction of ionizing radiation escaping into the intergalactic
medium to that escaping in the U V -continuum (∼ 1500Å). The uncertainties
come from three factors: the star formation rate, clumping factor, and UV escape factor. Current estimates of the star formation rate at z ∼ 6 all come from
photometrically-selected i-dropout objects selected in a small number of deep
fields observed by the HST: the HUDF (Beckwith et al. 2005 in preparation),
GOODS fields (Giavalisco et al. 2004), and UDF ACS Parallels (Thompson et
al. 2005). These estimates are affected strongly by sample (or cosmic) variance
at z ∼ 6 due to the small volume of deep surveys, as well as estimates or extrapolations towards faint luminosities. The clumping factor is typically taken from
cosmological simulations (e.g. C ∼ 30, Gnedin & Osteriker 1997). The UV escape
fraction remains problematic. Direct measurements of the escape fraction range
from upper limits, < 0.1 to < 0.4 (e.g. Giallongo et al. 2002, Fernández-Soto et
al. 2003, Inoue et al. 2005) to > 0.5 (Steidel et al. 2001). Therefore, instead
of measuring the accurate UV photon emissivity, most efforts have been trying
to determine whether star-forming galaxies could provide sufficient photons to at
least meet the requirement in Equation 5 at z ∼ 6.
Using HUDF data, Yan & Windhorst (2004b) found 108 plausible candidates
at 5.5 < z < 6.5 down to mAB (z) = 30.0 mag. They estimated a steep faintend luminosity function with a power-law index of −1.8 to −1.9, and concluded
that this steep slope is sufficient to satisfy the reionization requirement, and
that most of the photons that ionized the universe come from dwarf galaxies.
Similarly, Stiavelli et al. (2004) compared GOODS and HUDF observations and
found that the observed mean surface brightness of galaxies at z ∼ 6 is sufficient

Cosmic Reionization

37

for reionization when the young stellar population has a top heavy IMF. Bunker
et al. (2004), however, found a much lower star formation density at z ∼ 6 from
the HUDF. Their results showed a factor of 6 decline in star formation rate from
z ∼ 3 to 6. Even using the most optimistic escape faction (f = 1), their results
imply insufficient photons to ionize the Universe by z ∼ 6 from stellar sources.
Bouwens et al. (2005) combined all the available datasets that include 506
i-dropout (z ∼ 6) galaxy candidates to construct a luminosity function. Figure
12 summarizes the determination of the evolution of star-formation rate at both
the luminous and faint end. The star formation rate begins to decline modestly
at z > 5. The shape of the luminosity function has also evolved significantly
from z ∼ 3 to 6. However, the integrated UV luminosity (down to 0.04 L∗z=3 )
did not evolve significantly. Their results support the previous claim that dwarf
galaxies provide the majority of ionizing photons at z ∼ 6, sufficient to ionize the
Universe.
Most recently, Kashlinsky et al. (2005) have reported the detection of a significant excess in the Spitzer IRAC bands above that expected based on known
galaxy counts. They interpret this excess as being due to population III stars
forming at z > 10. These stars would clearly contribute to early reionization,
although the magnitude of the contribution remains uncertain due to the difficulty of the measurement, and the uncertainty of the origin of this mid-infrared
background.

7.3

Dusty and big galaxies at high redshift

Recent observations have revealed two surprising types of galaxies at z > 6.
First, millimeter observations of the host galaxies of the highest redshift QSOs

38

Fan, Carilli, Keating

reveal large dust masses (∼ 108 M⊙ ) in ∼ 30% of the sources (Bertoldi et al.
2003a). And in one case, J1148+5251 at z = 6.42, millimeter line emission from
CO has been detected, indicating a large molecular gas mass (∼ 2 × 1010 M⊙ ;
Walter et al. 2003, 2004; Bertoldi et al. 2003b). Second, Eyles et al. (2005) and
Mobasher et al. (2005) present Spitzer observations of z ∼ 6−6.5 galaxies. These
objects show SEDs characteristic of post-starburst galaxies, with stellar masses
between 1010 − 1011 M⊙ and stellar ages of several hundred Myrs. Reddening is
also infered by Chary, Stern, & Eisenhardt (2005) in one galaxy, implying a dusty
galaxy (Av ∼ 1). These results require active star formation (> 102 M⊙ year−1 )
starting at z ∼ 8 − 15. These objects are capable of ionizing large volumes at
high-redshift, and could have played an important role in the early reionization
of the IGM, depending on their currently ill-constained space density (Panagia
et al. 2005; Barkana & Loeb 2005c).

7.4

X-ray photons and decaying sterile neutrios

High-energy X-ray photons from mini-quasars or supernova remnants at highredshift could also contribute significantly to the reionization process (Oh 2001;
Venkatesan et al. 2001; Madau et al. 2004; Ricotti & Ostriker 2004). These
photons have long mean-free-paths, and could pre-ionize the IGM significantly,
providing the optical depth required by WMAP polarization measurement, and
produce a rapid ending of reionization at z ∼ 6 as suggested by the Gunn-Peterson
measurements. However, Dijkstra et al. (2004) and Salvaterra et al. (2005) show
that the hard X-rays from these same sources would produce a present-day soft Xray background. They calculate the X-ray background if such photons dominated
the reionization budget, and conclude that models with accreting black holes (a

Cosmic Reionization

39

combination of luminous and faint AGN) would overproduce the observed X-ray
background by a large factor. A population dominated by mini-quasars could
still partially ionize the IGM at z > 6, but its contribution could be severely
constrained if the X-ray background is further resolved into discrete sources.
Finally, Hansen & Haiman (2004) proposed reionization by decaying sterile
neutrinos at high-redshift. However, Mapelli & Ferrara (2005) showed that by
satisfying limits on the X-ray, optical and near-IR cosmic background, the total
Thomson optical depth from sterile neutrinos is small, and they could have only
played a minor role in reionization. Chen & Kaminkowski (2003) and Pierpaoli
(2003) show that the number of decays needed to reionize the universe at z ∼ 20
will produce a CMB inconsistent with observations.
Furlanetto et al. (2004b) show that low frequency observations of the power
spectrum of brightness temperature fluctuations in the HI 21cm line from the
neutral IGM during reionization will be able to differentiate between uniform
versus HII region dominated reionization.

8

HI 21cm probes of Reionization

The 21cm line of neutral hydrogren presents a unique probe of the evolution
of the neutral intergalactic medium (IGM), and cosmic reionization. Furlanetto
& Briggs (2004) point out some of the advantages of using the HI line in this
regard: (i) unlike Lyα (ie. the Gunn-Peterson effect), the 21cm line does not
saturate, and the IGM remains ‘translucent’ at large neutral fractions (Carilli et
al. 2002). And (ii) unlike CMB polarization studies, the HI line provides full
three dimensional (3D) information on the evolution of cosmic structure, and
the technique involves imaging the neutral IGM directly, and hence can easily

40

Fan, Carilli, Keating

distiguish between different reionization models (Furlanetto et al. 2004b). HI
21cm observations can be used to study the evolution of cosmic structure from
the linear regime at high redshift (ie. density-only evolution), through the nonlinear, ‘messy astrophysics’ regime associated with luminous source formation. As
such, HI measurements are sensitive to structures ranging from very large scales
down to the source scale set by the cosmological Jeans mass, thereby making
21cm the “richest of all cosmological data sets” (Barkana & Loeb 2005b).
Many programs have been initiated to study the HI 21cm signal from cosmic
reionization, and beyond. The largest near-term efforts are the Mileura Wide
Field Array (MWA2 ), the Primeval Structure Telescope (PAST3 ), and the Low
Frequency Array (LOFAR4 ). These telescopes are being optimized to study the
power spectrum of the HI 21cm fluctuations. The VLA-VHF5 system is designed
specifically to set limits on the cosmic Strömgren spheres around z ∼ 6 to 6.4
SDSS QSOs. In the long term the Square Kilometer Array (SKA6 ) should have
the sensitivity to perform true three dimensional imaging of the neutral IGM in
the 21cm line during reionization. And at the lowest frequencies (< 80 MHz),
the Long Wavelength Array (LWA7 ), and eventually the Lunar array (LUDAR;
Corbin et al 2005; Maccone 2005), are being designed for the higher z HI 21cm
signal from the PGM.
In this section we summarize the current theories and capabilities for detecting
the neutral IGM during, and prior to, reionization using the HI 21cm line (see
2

web.haystack.mit.edu/arrays/MWA/LFD/index.html

3

web.phys.cmu.edu/past/

4

www.lofar.org/

5

cfa-www.harvard.edu/dawn/

6

www.skatelescope.org/

7

lwa.unm.edu/index.shtml

Cosmic Reionization

41

also Carilli 2005; Furlanetto, Oh, & Briggs 2006).

8.1

The physics of the neutral IGM

The physics of radiative transfer of the HI 21cm line through the neutral IGM
have been considered in detail by many authors (Scott & Rees 1990; Bharadwaj
& Ali 2005; Furlanetto & Briggs 2004; Zaldariagga et al. 2004b; Santos et al.
2005; Tozzi et al. 1999; Madau et al. 1997; Morales 2005). We review only the
basic results here.
In analogy to the Gunn-Peterson effect for Lyα absorption by the neutral IGM,
the optical depth, τ , of the neutral hydrogen to 21cm absorption for our adopted
values of the cosmological parameters is:
τ=

3c3 ~A10 nHI
dv
xHI
(1 + δ)(1 + z)3/2 [H(z)/( )],
∼ 0.0074
2
TS
dr
16kB ν21 TS H(z)

(5)

where A is the Einstein coefficient and ν21 = 1420.40575 MHz (eg. Santos et al.
2005). This equation shows immediately the rich physics involved in studying the
HI 21cm line during reionization, with τ depending on the evolution of cosmic
over-densities, δ (predominantly in the linear regime), the neutral fraction, xHI
(ie. reionization), the HI excitation, or spin, temperature, TS , and the velocity
structure, dv
dr , including the Hubble flow and peculiar velocities.
In the Raleigh-Jeans limit, the observed brightness temperature (relative to
the CMB) due to the HI 21cm line at a frequency ν = ν21 /(1 + z), is given by:
TB ≈

TS − TCMB
TCM B
τ ≈ 7(1 + δ)xHI (1 −
)(1 + z)1/2 mK,
1+z
TS

(6)

The conversion factor from brightness temperature to specific intensity, Iν , is
−2
−2
B
given by: Iν = (λ212k
(1+z))2 TB = 22(1 + z) TB Jy deg . Equation 6 shows that

for TS ∼ TCM B one expects no 21cm signal. When TS >> TCM B , the brightness

42

Fan, Carilli, Keating

temperature becomes independent of spin temperature. When TS << TCM B , we
expect a strong negative (ie. absorption) signal against the CMB.
Tozzi et al. (1999) point out that the HI excitation temperature will equilibrate
5

with the CMB on a timescale ∼ 3×10
(1+z) year, in absence of other effects. However,
collisions, and resonant scattering of Lyα photons, can drive TS to the gas kinetic
temperature, TK (Wouthuysen 1952; Field 1959; Hirata 2005). Zygelman (2005)
calculates that, for the mean IGM density, collisional coupling between TS and
TK becomes significant for z ≥ 30. Madau et al. (1997) show that resonant
scattering of Lyα photons will couple TS and TK when Jα > 9 × 10−23 (1 + z) erg
cm−2 s−1 Hz−1 sr−1 , or about one Lyα photon per every two baryons at z = 8.
The interplay between the CMB temperature, the kinetic temperature, and the
spin temperature, coupled with radiative transfer, lead to a number of interesting
physical regimes for the HI 21cm signal (Ali 2005; Barkana & Loeb 2004; Carilli
2005): (I) At z > 200 equilibrium between TCM B , TK , and TS is maintained
by Thomson scattering off residual free electrons and gas collisions. In this case
TS = TCM B and there is no 21cm signal. (II) At z ∼ 30 to 200, the gas cools
adiabatically, with temperature falling as (1+z)2 , ie. faster than the (1+z) for the
CMB. However, the mean density is still high enough to couple TS and TK , and
the HI 21cm signal would be seen in absorption against the CMB (Sethi 2005).
(III) At z ∼ 20 to 30, collisions can no longer couple TK to TS , and TS again
approaches TCM B . However, the Lyα photons from the first luminous objects
(Pop III stars or mini-quasars), may induce local coupling of TK and TS , thereby
leading to some 21cm absorption regions (Cen 2006). At the same time, Xrays
from these same objects could lead to local IGM warming above TCM B (Chen
et al. 2003). Hence one might expect a patch-work of regions with no signal,

Cosmic Reionization

43

absorption, and perhaps emission, in the 21cm line. (IV) At z ∼ 6 to 20 all the
physical processes come to play. The IGM is being warmed by hard Xrays from
the first galaxies and black holes (Loeb & Zaldarriaga 2004; Barkana & Loeb
2004; Ciardi & Madau 2003), as well as by weak shocks associated with structure
formation (Furlanetto, Zaldarriaga, & Hernquist 2005; Wang & Hu 2005), such
that TK is likely larger than TCM B globally (Furlanetto et al. 2004b). Likewise,
these objects are reionizing the universe, leading to a fundamental topological
change in the IGM, from the linear evolution of large scale structure , to a bubble
dominated era of HII regions (Furlanetto et al. 2005a).

8.2

Capabilities to detect HI 21cm signals from reionization

The HI 21cm signature of the neutral IGM during, and prior to, reionization can
be predicted analytically, using a standard Press-Schechter type of analysis of
linear structure formation, plus some recipes to approximate non-linear evolution
(Santos et al. 2005; Zaldariagga et al. 2004a; Ali 2005; Bharadwaj & Ali 2005;
Wang & Hu 2005; Gnedin & Shaver 2004), or through the use of numerical
simulations (Ciardi & Madau 2003; Fulanetto, et al. 2004b; Wang et al. 2005).
Tomography: Figure 13 shows the expected evolution of the HI 21cm signal
during reionization based on numerical simulations (Zaldaraiagga et al. 2004a;
Furlanetto et al. 2004a; Furlanetto et al. 2004b). They find that the mean HI
signal is about TB ∼ 25 mK prior to reionization, with fluctuations of a few
mK on arcmin scales due to linear density evolution. In this simulation, the HII
regions caused by galaxy formation are seen in the redshift range z ∼ 8 to 10,
reaching scales up to 2′ (frequency widths ∼ 0.3 MHz ∼ 0.5 Mpc physical size).
These regions have (negative) brightness temperatures up to 20 mK relative to

44

Fan, Carilli, Keating

the mean HI signal. This corresponds to 5µJy beam−1 in a 2′ beam at 140 MHz.
The point source rms sensitivity (dual polarization) in an image from a synthesis radio telescope is given by:
rms = (

1.9
Tsys
)(
) Jy beam−1
0.5
(∆νkHz thr )
ǫef f Aant Nant

(7)

where ∆ν is the channel width in kHz, t is the integration time in hours, Aant
is the collecting area of each element in the array (m2 ), ǫef f is the aperture
efficiency, and N is the number of elements (ǫAN = total effective collecting
area of the array). At low frequency, the system temperature, Tsys , is dominated
ν
by the synchrotron foreground, and behaves as: TF G ∼ 100( 200MHz
)−2.8 , in the

coldest regions of the sky. Consider the SKA, with an effective collecting area of
one square kilometer at 140 MHz, distributed over 4 km, Tsys = 300 K, a channel
width of 0.3 MHz, and integrating for one month. The rms sensitivity is then
1.3µJy beam−1 , with a beam FWHM ∼ 2′ . This square kilometer array will be
adequate to perform three dimensional imaging of the average structure of the
IGM during reionization.
Unfortunately, the nearer term low frequency path finder arrays will have ≤
10% the collecting of the SKA, and will likely not be able to perform such direct
3D imaging (see Table 1 in Carilli 2005). However, these near term experiments
should have enough sensitivity to probe the neutral IGM in other ways. Figure
14 shows three possible HI 21cm line signatures that might be observed prior to
the SKA.
Global signal: The left panel in Figure 14 shows the latest predictions of the
global (all sky) increase in the background temperature due to the HI 21cm line
from the neutral IGM (Gnedin & Shaver 2003). The predicted HI emission signal
peaks at roughly 20 mK above the foreground at z ∼ 10. At higher redshift, prior

Cosmic Reionization

45

to IGM warming, but allowing for Lyα emission from the first luminous objects,
the HI is seen in absorption against the CMB. Since this is an all sky signal,
the sensitivity of the experiment is independent of telescope collecting area, and
the experiment can be done using small area telescopes at low frequency, with
well controlled frequency response (Subrahmanyan, Chippendale, Ekers 2005).
Note that the line signal is only ∼ 10−4 that of the mean foreground continuum
emission at ∼ 150 MHz.
Power spectra: The middle panel in Figure 14 shows the predicted power
spectrum of spatial fluctuations in the sky brightness temperature due to the HI
21cm line (Mcquinn et al. 2006). For power spectral analyses the sensitivity is
greatly enhanced relative to direct imaging due to the fact that the universe is
isotropic, and hence one can average the measurements in annuli in the Fourier
(uv) domain, ie. the statistics of fluctuations along an annulus in the uv-plane
are equivalent (Santos et al. 2005; Zaldariagga et al. 2004a; Bharadwaj & Ali
2005; Morales 2005; Subrahmanyan et al. 1998; Bowman et al. 2005). Moreover,
unlike the CMB, HI line studies provide spatial and redshift information, and
hence the power spectral analysis can be performed in three dimensions.
Figure 14 includes the power spectrum arising from linear density fluctuations
following the dark matter, plus the effect of reionization. The signature of reionization can be seen as a bump in the power spectrum above the density-only
curve due to the formation of HII regions. The rms fluctuations at z = 10 peak
at about 10 mK rms on scales ℓ ∼ 5000.8 A factor 2 to 4 increase in the rms
might be expected over this naive (Poisson) calculation due to gas peculiar velocities, ie. infall into superclusters and along filaments (Barkana & Loeb 2005a, Ali
8

o

= 2.2′ , or k ∼ 10ℓ4 Mpc−1 = 0.5Mpc−1 comoving.
Or θ ∼ 180
ℓ

46

Fan, Carilli, Keating

2005; but cf. Kuhlen et al. 2005), and possible clustering of luminous sources,
ie. biased galaxy formation (Furlanetto et al. 2005a; Santos et al. 2005).
Also included in Figure 14 are the noise power spectra for near and longer term
radio arrays. The noise power spectrum, in mK2 , in standard spherical harmonic
N
units, ℓ(ℓ+1)
2π Cℓ , for an array with (roughly) uniform coverage of the uv plane, is

given by:
CℓN =

2 (2π)3
Tsys
∆νtfc2 ℓ2max

(8)

where ∆ν is the channel width in Hz, t is the integration time in seconds, fc
= areal covering factor of the array = Nant AAant
, Atot is the total area of the
tot
array defined by the longest baseline (Atot 2)2 ), and ℓmax is set by the longest
baseline (bmax ) in the array: ℓmax = 2πbmax /λ (Santos et al. 2005; for a three
dimensional generalization, see Morales 2005). For example, the SKA will have
30% of its collecting area inside 1 km, or fc = 0.3 out to 1 km. Typical noise
values for near-term arrays are ∼ 1 to 10 mK rms in the range ℓ = 103 to 104 , for
long integrations (see Figure 14). This sensitivity is adequate to constrain the
power spectrum of the HI 21cm fluctuations, even if true images of the emission
cannot be constructed.
A point of debate has been the fraction of HI in collapsed objects, as opposed
to the diffuse IGM (Iliev et al. 2003). This fraction has a complex dependence
on structure formation history. Oh & Mack (2003) and Gnedin (2004) conclude
that the majority of the HI during reionization will remain in the diffuse phase,
while Ahn et al. (2005) argue that most of the HI will reside in mini-halos. Iliev
et al (2003), and Ahn (2005) have considered the HI 21cm power spectrum due to
clustering of such minihalos at high redshift. For a beam size of 1′ , and channel
width of 0.2 MHz, they predict 3σ brightness temperature fluctuations due to

Cosmic Reionization

47

clustered minihalos ∼ 7mK at z = 8.5, decreasing to 2mK at z = 20.
Absorption toward discrete radio sources: A interesting alternative to
emission studies is the possibility of studying smaller scale structure in the neutral
IGM by looking for HI 21cm absorption toward the first radio-loud objects (AGN,
star forming galaxies, GRBs) (Carilli et al. 2004b). The rightpanel of Figure 14
shows the predicted HI 21cm absorption signal toward a high redshift radio source
due to the ‘cosmic web’ prior to reionization, based on numerical simulations
(Carilli, Gnedin, Owen 2002). For a source at z = 10, these simulations predict an
average optical depth due to 21cm absorption of about 1%, corresponding to the
‘radio Gunn-Peterson effect’, and about five narrow (few km/s) absorption lines
per MHz with optical depths of a few to 10%. These latter lines are equivalent to
the Ly α forest seen after reionization, and correspond to over-densities evolving
in the linear regime (δ ≤ 10). Fulanetto & Loeb (2002), and Oh & Mack (2003)
predict a similar HI 21cm absorption line density due to gas in minihalos as that
expected for the 21cm forest.
Fundamental to absorption studies is the existence of radio loud sources during
the EoR. This question has been considered in detail by Carilli et al. (2002),
Haiman et al. (2004), and Jarvis & Rawlings (2005). They show that current
models of radio-loud AGN evolution predict between 0.05 and 1 radio sources
per square degree at z > 6 with S150MHz ≥ 6 mJy, adequate for EoR HI 21cm
absorption studies with the SKA.
Cosmic Strömgren spheres: While direct detection of the typical structure
of HI and HII regions may be out of reach of the near-term EoR 21cm telescopes,
there is a chance that even this first generation of telescopes will be able to detect
the rare, very large scale HII regions associated with luminous quasars near the

48

Fan, Carilli, Keating

end of reionization (§4). The expected signal is ∼ 20mK ×xHI on a scale ∼ 10′ to
15′ , with a line width of ∼ 1 to 2 MHz (Wyithe & Loeb 2004b). This corresponds
to 0.5 ×xHI mJy beam−1 , for a 15′ beam at z ∼ 6 to 7. Kohler et al. (2005)
calculate the expected spectral dips due to large HII regions around luminous
quasars (> 2 × 1010 L⊙ ) during the EoR. In a typical spectrum from 100 to 180
MHz with a 10′ beam they predict on average one relatively deep (-2 to -4 mK)
dip per LoS on this scale. Wyithe et al. (2005b) perform a similar calculation
using the evolution of the bright QSO luminosity function to predict the number
of HII regions around active QSOs at z > 6. They conclude that there should
be roughly one SDSS-type HII region around an active QSO (physical radius >
4Mpc) per 400 deg2 field per 16 Mhz bandwidth at z ∼ 6, and one R ≥ 2 Mpc
region at z ∼ 8, and up to ∼ 100× more fossil HII regions due to non-active
AGN, depending on the duty cycle.
Beyond reionization: Recent calculations of the brightness temperature fluctuations due to the 21cm line have extended to redshifts higher than reionization,
z > 20. Barkana & Loeb (2004; 2005a) predict the power spectrum of fluctuations during the era of ‘Lyα coupling’ (z ∼ 20 to 30; see also Kuhlen et al. 2005
and Cen 2006). Brightness temperature fluctuations can be due to emission from
clustered minihalos, plus enhanced by absorption against the CMB by the diffuse
IGM, with a predicted rms ∼ 10mK for ℓ ∼ 105 , due to a combination of linear
density fluctuations, plus Poisson (‘shot’) noise and biasing in the Lyα source (ie.
galaxy) distribution.
Loeb & Zaldarriaga (2004) go even further in redshift, to z > 50 to 200. In
this regime the HI generally follows linear density fluctuations, and hence the
experiments are as clean as CMB studies, and TK < TCM B , so a relatively strong

Cosmic Reionization

49

absorption signal might be expected. They also point out that Silk damping, or
photon diffusion, erases structures on scales ℓ > 2000 in the CMB at recombination, corresponding to comoving scales = 22 Mpc. The HI 21cm measurements
can explore this physical regime at z ∼ 50 to 300. The predicted rms fluctuations
are 1 to 10 mK on scales ℓ = 103 to 106 (0.2o to 1′′ ). These observations could
provide the best tests of non-Gaussianity of density fluctuations, and constrain
the running power law index of mass fluctutions to large ℓ, providing important
tests of inflationary structure formation. Sethi (2005) also suggests that a large
global signal, up to -0.05 K, might be expected for this redshift range.
Unfortunately, the sky background is very hot > 104 K at these low frequencies (< 50 MHz), and the predicted signals are orders of magnitude below the
expected sensitivities of even the biggest planned low frequency arrays in the
coming decade.

8.3

Observational challenges

Foregrounds: The HI 21cm signal from reionization must be detected on top of a
much larger synchrotron signal from foreground emission (§9.2). This foreground
includes discrete radio galaxies, and large scale emission from our own Galaxy,
with relative contributions of about 10% and 90%, respectively. The expected HI
21cm signal is about 10−4 of the foreground emission at 140 MHz.
di Matteo et al. (2002) show that, even if point sources can be removed to
the level of 1 µJy, the rms fluctutions on spatial scales ≤ 10′ (ℓ ≥ 1000) due to
residual radio point sources will be ≥ 10 mK just due to Poisson noise, increasing
by a factor 100 if the sources are strongly clustered (see also di Matteo, Ciardi,
& Miniati 2004; Oh & Mack 2003).

50

Fan, Carilli, Keating
A key point is that the foreground emission should be smooth in frequency,

predominantly the sum of power-law, or perhaps gently curving, non-thermal
spectra. A number of complimentary approaches have been presented for foreground removal (Morales, Bowman, & Hewitt 2005). Gnedin & Shaver (2003)
and Wang et al (2005) consider fitting smooth spectral models (power laws or low
order polynomials in log space) to the observed visibilities or images. Morales &
Hewitt (2003) and Morales (2004) present a 3D Fourier analysis of the measured
visibilities, where the third dimension is frequency. The different symmetries in
this 3D space for the signal arising from the noise-like HI emission, versus the
smooth (in frequency) foreground emission, can be a powerful means of differentiating between foreground emission and the EoR line signal. Santos et al. (2005),
Bharadwaj & Ali (2005), Zaldariagga et al. (2004a) perform a similar analysis,
only in the complementary Fourier space, meaning cross correlation of spectral
channels. They show that the 21cm signal will effectively decorrelate for channel separations > 1 MHz, while the foregrounds do not. The overall conclusion
of these methods is that spectral decomposition should be adequate to separate
synchrotron foregrounds from the HI 21cm signal from reionization at the mK
level.
Ionosphere: A second potential challenge to low frequency imaging over wide
fields is phase fluctuations caused by the ionosphere. These fluctuations are due
to index of refraction fluctuations in the ionized plasma, and behave as ∆φ ∝ ν −2 .
Morever, the typical ‘isoplanatic patch’, or angle over which a single phase error
applies, is a few to 10 degrees (physical scales of 10’s km in the ionosphere),
depending on frequency (Cotton et al. 2004; Lane et al. 2004). Fields larger than
the isoplanatic patch will have multiple phase errors across the field, and hence

Cosmic Reionization

51

cannot be corrected through standard (ie. single solution) phase self-calibration
techniques. New wide field self-calibration techniques, involving multiple phase
solutions over the field, or a ‘rubber screen’ phase model (Cotton et al. 2004;
Hopkins et al. 2003), are being developed that should allow for self-calibration
over wide fields.
Interference: Perhaps the most difficult problem facing low frequency radio
astronomy is terrestrial (man-made) interference (RFI). The relevant frequency
range corresponds to 7 to 200 MHz (z = 200 to 6). These are not protected
frequency bands, and commercial allocations include everything from broadcast
radio and television, to fixed and mobile communications.
Many groups are pursuing methods for RFI mitigation and excision (see Ellingson 2004). These include: (i) using a reference horn, or one beam of a phased
array, for constant monitoring of known, strong, RFI signals, (ii) conversely, arranging interferometric phases to produce a null at the position of the RFI source,
and (iii) real-time RFI excision using advanced filtering techniques in time and
frequency, of digitized signals both pre- and post-correlation. The latter requires
very high dynamic range (many bit sampling), and very high frequency and time
resolution.
In the end, the most effective means of reducing interference is to go to the
remotest sites. The MWA and PAST have selected sites in remote regions of
Western Australia, and China, respectively, because of known low RFI environments. Of course, the ultimate location would be the far-side of the moon.
The technical challenges to HI 21cm observations of reionization are many. Use
of spectral decomposition to remove the foregrounds requires careful control of
the synthesize beam as a function of frequency, with the optimal solution being

52

Fan, Carilli, Keating

a telescope design where the synthesized beam is invariant as a function of frequency (Subrahmanyan et al. 2005). High dynamic range front ends are required
to avoid saturation in cases of strong interference, while fine spectral sampling
is required to avoid Gibbs ringing in the spectral response. The polarization
response must be stable and well calibrated to remove polarized foregrounds
(Haverkorn et al. 2004). Calibation in the presence of a structured ionospheric
phase screen requires new wide field calibration techniques. The very high data
rate expected for many element (≥ 103 ) arrays requires new methods for data
transmission, cross correlation, and storage. At the lowest frequencies, ≤ 20MHz
or so, where we hope to study the PGM, phase fluctuations and the opacity of
the ionosphere becomes problematic, leading to the proposed LUDAR project on
the far side of the moon. The far side of the moon is also the best location in
order to completely avoid terrestrial interference.

9

Summary

The few years since the seminal theoretical reviews of Barkana & Loeb have seen
dramatic progress in determining observational constraints on cosmic reionization. Figure 15 shows the current limits on the cosmic neutral fraction versus
redshift. The observations paint an interesting picture. On the one hand, studies
of GP optical depths and variations, and the GP ‘gap’ distribution, as well as of
the thermal state of the IGM at high z, and of cosmic Strömgren spheres and
surfaces around the highest redshift QSOs, suggest a qualitative change in the
state of the IGM at z ∼ 6. These data indicate a significant neutral fraction,
xHI > 10−3 , and perhaps as high as 0.1, at z ≥ 6, as compared to xHI ≤ 10−4
at z < 5.5. The IGM characteristics at this epoch are consistent with the end of

Cosmic Reionization

53

the ‘percolation’ stage of reionization (Gnedin & Fan 2006). On the other hand,
transmission spikes in the GP trough and study of the evolution of Lyα galaxy
luminosity function indicate a neutral fraction smaller than 50% at z ∼ 6.5.
Moreover, the measurement of the large scale polarization of the CMB implies a
significant ionization fraction extending to higher redshifts, z ∼ 15 to 20. Moreover, the measurement of the large scale polarization of the CMB suggests a
significant ionization fraction extending to higher redshifts, z ∼ 11 ± 3.
We emphasize that all these measurements have implicit assumptions and uncertainties, as discussed throughout. Indeed, the GP effect and CMB large scale
polarization studies can be considered complimentary probes of reionization, with
optical depth effects limiting GP studies to the end of reionization, while CMB
studies are weighted toward the higher redshifts, when the densities were higher.
The data argue against a simple reionization history in which the IGM remains
largely neutral from z ∼ 1100 to z ∼ 6 − 7, with a single phase transition at
z ∼ 6 (the “late” model in Figure 15), as well as against a model in which the
Universe reaches complete ionization at z ∼ 15 − 20 and remained so ever since
(the “early” model in Figure 15). These facts, combined with the large line of
sight variations at the end of reionization as indicated by Gunn-Peterson measurements, suggest a more extended reionization history. Interestingly, the latest
theoretical models with reionization caused by Population II star formation are
consistent with both GP optical depth and WMAP CMB polarization measurement (e.g. Gnedin & Fan 2006). Current data do not present strong evidence for
a dominant contribution by metal-free Population III star formation at z > 15 to
reionization (Haiman & Bryan 2006), and have weak constraints on, although do
not require, models with multiple episodes of reionization (the “double” model

54

Fan, Carilli, Keating

in Figure 15), which were suggested by a possible high CMB Thomspon optical
depth based on early WMAP measurements.
Overall, we agree with the assessment of Furlanetto et al. (2004b) that reionization is less an event than a process, extended in both time and space. Much
emphasis has been given to the determination of the ‘reionization redshift’. However, current observations suggest that, unlike recombination, which occurs over
a very narrow range in fractional redshift, zrecomb = 1089 ± 1, cosmic reionization
occurs over a fairly large fractional redshift, from z ∼ 6 up to as high as z ∼ 14.
The redshift of HII region overlap might be quite different than the redshift at
which the IGM is largely (> 50%) ionized. It may also differ in different parts
of the universe. The implication is that the formation of the first liminous objects (stars and AGN) occurs in a ‘twilight zone’, heavily obscured at (observed)
optical wavelengths by a partially neutral IGM, and observable only at near-IR
through radio wavelengths, and in the hard Xrays.
We also consider the sources responsible for reionization. Current data are consistent with star forming galaxies, in particular, relatively low luminosity galaxies,
as being the dominant sources of reionizing photons. However, again, there are a
number of important, and poorly constrained, parameters in these calculations,
including the IMF and the UV escape fraction, and we certainly cannot rule-out
a significant contribution from mini-QSOs.
Lastly, we show that low frequency radio telescopes currently under construction should be able to make the first direct measurements of HI 21cm emission
from (and/or absorption by) the neutral IGM. These observations will present a
clear picture of the reionization process, and the evolution of the neutral IGM
into the dark ages.

Cosmic Reionization

55

Acknowledgements: CC thanks the Max-Planck-Gesellschaft and the HumboldtStiftung for support through the Max-Planck-Forschungspreis, K. Menten and
the MPIfR for their hospitality, and S. Furlanetto for extensive comments. XF
thanks supports from NSF grant AST 03-07384, a Sloan Research Fellowship and
Packard Fellowship for Science and Engineering. BK thanks Nathan Miller for
his contributions to this review and Steven Furlanetto, Manoj Kaplinghat, and
Meir Shimon for helpful comments on this manuscript. CMBFAST was used
in the preparation of this review. The National Radio Astronomy Observatory
(NRAO) is a facility of the National Science Foundation, operated under cooperative agreement by Associated Universities, Inc.

Literature Cited
Anderson, Hogan, Williams, & Carswell(1999)Anderson, S. F., Hogan, C. J.,
Williams, B. F., & Carswell, R. F. 1999, A.J., 117: 56-62
Ahn et al. 2005Ahn, K., Shapiro, P., Alvarez, M., Iliev, T., Martel, H., Ryu, D.
2005, New AR, in press (astroph/0509651)
Ajiki et al. (2003)Ajiki, M., et al. 2003, A.J., 126: 2091-2107
Ali 2005Ali, Sk. 2005, MNRAS, in press, (astroph-0503237)
Bahcall & Salpeter (1965)Bahcall, J. N., & Salpeter, E. E. 1965, Ap.J., 142:
1677-1680
Barkana & Loeb 2001Barkana, R., Loeb, A. 2001, Phys. Rep. 349, 125-238
Barkana & Loeb (2004)Barkana, R., & Loeb, A. 2004, Ap.J., 601, 64-69
Barkana & Loeb 2005aBarkana, R., Loeb, A. 2005a, ApJ, 626, 1-11
Barkana & Loeb 2005bBarkana, R., Loeb, A. 2005b, ApJ, 624, L65-68
Barkana & Loeb 2005cBarkana, R., Loeb, A. 2005c, MNRAS, 363, L36

56

Fan, Carilli, Keating

Barkats et al.(2005)Barkats, D., et al. 2005, Ap.J., 619, L127-130
Barton et al. (2004)Barton, E. J., Davé, R., Smith, J.-D. T., Papovich, C., Hernquist, L., & Springel, V. 2004, Ap.J. Lett., 604: L1-L4
Becker et al. (2006)Becker06] Becker, G. D., Sargent, W. L. W., Rauch. M., &
Simcoe, R. A. 2006, ApJ, in press (astro-ph/0510747)
Becker et al. (2001)Becker, R. H., et al. 2001, A.J., 122: 2850-2857
Bertoldi et al. 2003Bertoldi, F., Carilli, C., Cox, P. et al. 2003, A& A, 406, L55-58
Bertoldi et al. 2004Bertoldi, F., Cox, P., Neri, R. et al. 2004, A& A, 409, L47-50
Bharadwaj & Ali 2005Bharadwaj, S. & Ali, Sk. 2005, MNRAS, 356, 1519-1428
Bi 1993Bi, H. 1993, Ap.J., 405: 479-490
Bouwens et al.(2004)Bouwens, R. J., et al. 2004a, Ap.J. Lett., 606, L25-28
Bouwens et al. 2004Bouwens, R.J, et al. 2004c, Ap.J. Lett., 616, L79-82
Bouwens et al. 2005Bouwens, R.J, Illingworth, G.D., Thompson, R.I., & Franx,
M. 2005, Ap.J., 624, L5-8
Bouwens et al. 2006Bouwens, R. J., Illingworh, G. D., Blakeslee, J. P., & Franx,
M. 2006, ApJ, in press (astro-ph/0509641)
Bowman et al. 2005Bowman, J, Morales, M., Hewitt, J. 2005, ApJ, 638, 20-28
Bunker et al. 2004Bunker, A. J., Stanway, E. R., Ellis, R. S., & McMahon, R. G.
2004, MNRAS, 355: 374-384
Carilli et al 2004aCarilli, C., Gnedin, N., Furlanetto, S., & Owen, F. 2004,
NewAR, 48, 1053-1061
Carilli et al. 2004bCarilli, C., Furlanetto, S., Briggs, F., Jarvis, M., Rawlings, S.,
Falcke, H. 2004, NewAR, 48, 1029-1038
Carilli et al. 2002Carilli, C., Gnedin, N., Owen, F. 2002, ApJ, 577, 22-30
Cen 2003aCen, R. 2003a, Ap.J., 591, 12-37

Cosmic Reionization

57

Cen 2003bCen, R. 2003b, Ap.J., 591, L5-8
Cen 2005Cen, R. 2005, ApJL, submitted (astro-ph/0507014)
Cen 2006Cen, R. 2006, ApJL, submitted (astro-ph/0601010)
Cen & Haiman 2000Cen, R., & Haiman, Z. 2000, Ap.J. Lett., 542: L75-L78
Cen, Haiman, & Mesinger 2005Cen, R., Haiman, Z., & Mesinger, A. 2005, Ap.J.,
621: 89-94
Cen & McDonald 2002Cen, R., & McDonald, P. 2002, Ap.J., 570: 457-462
Cen, Miralda-Escude, Ostriker, & Rauch 1994Cen, R., Miralda-Escude, J., Ostriker, J. P., & Rauch, M. 1994, Ap.J. Lett., 437: L9-L12
chary05Chary, R., Stern, D., Eisenhardt, P. 2005, ApJ, 635, L5
Chen et al. 2005Chen, H., Prochaska, J. X., Bloom, J. S., Thompson, I. B, 2005,
ApJ, 634, L25
Chen & Kamionkowski(2004)Chen, X., & Kamionkowski, M. 2004, Phys. Rev.
D., 70, 043502
Chen & Miralda-Escude 2004Chen, X. & Miralda-Escude, J. 2004, ApJ, 602, 1-11
Chiu et al. 2003Chiu, W. A., Fan, X., & Ostriker, J. P. 2003, ApJ, 59 9. 759
Ciardi & Ferrara 2005Ciardi, B., & Ferrara, A. 2005, Space Science Reviews, 116:
625-705
Ciardi & Madau 2003Ciardi, B., Madau, P. 2003, ApJ, 596, 1-8
Ciardi et al. 2003Ciardi, B., Stoehr, F., White, S. 2004, MNRAS, 343, 1101-1109
Ciardi et al. 2001Ciardi, B., Ferrara, A., Marri, S., & Raimondo, G. 2001, MNRAS, 324: 381-388
Ciardi & Loeb 2000Ciardi, B., & Loeb, A. 2000, Ap.J., 540: 687-696
Colombo et al.(2005)Colombo, L. P. L., Bernardi, G., Casarini, L., Mainini, R.,
Bonometto, S. A., Carretti, E., & Fabbri, R. 2005, Astron. and Astrophys.,

58

Fan, Carilli, Keating
435, 413

Cool et al. (2006)Cool06] Cool, R. J., et al. 2006, AJ, in press
Corbin et al. 2005Corbin, M. et al. 2005, exploratory proposal to NASA
Cotton et al. 2004Cotton, W., Condon, J., Perley, R. et al. 2004, SPIE, 5489,
180-189
Davidsen, Kriss, & Wei(1996)Davidsen, A. F., Kriss, G. A., & Wei, Z. 1996, Nature, 380: 47-49
Dawson et al.(2002)Dawson, K. S., Holzapfel, W. L., Carlstrom, J. E., Joy, M.,
LaRoque, S. J., Miller, A. D., & Nagai, D. 2002, Ap.J., 581, 86
Dijkstra, Haiman, & Scharf 2005Dijkstra, M., Haiman, Z. & Loeb, A. 2005, ApJ,
613, 646-654
Di Matteo et al 2002Di Matteo, T., Rosalba, P., Abel, T., Rees, M. 2002, MNRAS, 564, 576-580
di Matteo et al. 2004Di Matteo, T., Ciardi, B., & Miniati, F. 2004, MNRAS, 355,
1053 - 1065
Djorgovski, Castro, Stern, & Mahabal 2001Djorgovski, S. G., Castro, S., Stern,
D., & Mahabal, A. A. 2001, Ap.J. Lett., 560: L5-L8
Djorgovski et al. 2005Djorgovski, S. G., Bogosavljevic, M., & Mahabal, A. 2005,
atro-ph/0509065
Dodelson(2003)Dodelson, S. 2003, Modern cosmology / Scott Dodelson. Amsterdam (Netherlands): Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-219141-2, 2003, XIII + 440
p.,
Ellingson05Ellingson, S. 2005, Exp. Astron., 17, 261-267
Eyles et al. 2005Eyles, L. et al. 2005, MNRAS, 364, 443-450
Fan et al. 2000Fan, X., et al. 2000, A.J., 120: 1167-1174

Cosmic Reionization

59

Fan et al. 2001aFan, X., et al. 2001a, A.J., 121: 54-65
Fan et al. 2001bFan, X., et al. 2001b, A.J., 122: 2833-2849
Fan et al. 2002Fan, X., Narayanan, V. K., Strauss, M. A., White, R. L., Becker,
R. H., Pentericci, L., & Rix, H.-W. 2002, A.J., 123: 1247-1257
Fan et al. 2003Fan, X., et al. 2003, A.J., 125: 1649-1659
Fan et al. 2004Fan, X., et al. 2004, A.J., 128: 515-522
Fan et al. 2006aFan et al. 2006a, AJ, in press (astro-ph/0512080)
Fan et al. 2006bFan et al. 2006b, AJ, submitted (astro-ph/0512082)
Fernández-Soto, Lanzetta, & Chen(2003)Fernández-Soto, A., Lanzetta, K. M., &
Chen, H.-W. 2003, MNRAS, 342: 1215-1221
Field 1959Field, G.B. 1959, ApJ, 129, 551-565
Furlanetto & Briggs 2004Furlanetto, S. & Briggs, F. 2004, New AR, 48, 10391052
Furlanetto, Og, Briggs 2006Furlanetto, S., Oh, S.P., Briggs, F. 2006, Physics Reports, in prep
Furlanetto, OhFurlanetto, S., Oh, S.P. 2005, MNRAS, 363, 1031 - 1048
Furlanetto & Loeb 2002Furlanetto, S, & Loeb, A. 2002, ApJ, 579, 1-9
Furlanetto et al. 2004aFurlanetto, S., Zaldarriaga, M. Hernquist, L. 2004, ApJ,
613, 16-22
Furlanetto et al. 2004bFurlanetto, S., Sokasian, A., Hernquist, L. 2004, MNRAS
347, 187-195
Furlanetto et al. 2005aFurlanetto, S., McQuinn, D., Hernquist, L. 2005, MNRAS,
365, 115
Furlanetto et al. 2005bFurlanetto, S. R., Zaldarriaga, M., & Hernquist, L. 2006,
MNRAS, 365, 1012-1020

60

Fan, Carilli, Keating

Furlanetto, Hernquist, & Zaldarriaga 2004cFurlanetto, S. R., Hernquist, L., &
Zaldarriaga, M. 2004, MNRAS, 354: 695-707
Furlanetto & Loeb 2003Furlanetto, S. R., & Loeb, A. 2003, Ap.J., 588: 18-34
Gallerani et al. 2006Gallerani, S., Roy Choudhury, T., Ferrara, A. 2006, MNRAS,
submitted (astro-ph/0512129)
Giallongo et al. 2002Giallongo, E., Cristiani, S., D’Odorico, S., & Fontana, A.
2002, Ap.J. Lett., 568: L9-12
Giallongo et al. 1994Giallongo, E., D’Odorico, S., Fontana, A., McMahon, R. G.,
Savaglio, S., Cristiani, S., Molaro, P., & Trevese, D. 1994, Ap.J. Lett., 425: L14
Giavalisco et al. 2004Giavalisco, M., et al. 2004, Ap.J. Lett., 600: L93-98
Gnedin & Ostriker 1997Gnedin, N. Y., & Ostriker, J. P. 1997, Ap.J., 486: 581598
Gnedin 2000Gnedin, N. 2000, ApJ, 535, 530-554
Gnedin & Shaver 2003Gnedin, N. & Shaver, P. 2004, ApJ, 608, 611-621
Gnedin 2004Gnedin, N. 2004, ApJ, 610, 9-13
Gnedin & Prada 2004Gnedin, N. Y., & Prada, F. 2004, Ap.J. Lett., 608: L77-L80
Gnedin & Fan 2006Gnedin, N. Y., & Fan, X. 2006, Ap.J.submitted (astroph/0603794)
Gruzinov & Hu (1998)Gruzinov, A., and Hu, W. 1998, Ap.J., 508, 435
Gunn & Peterson 1965Gunn, J. E., & Peterson, B. A. 1965, Ap.J., 142: 16331641
Haardt & Madau 1996Haardt, F., & Madau, P. 1996, Ap.J., 461, 20-37
Haehnelt et al. 2001Haehnelt, M. G., Madau, P., Kudritzki, R., & Haardt, F.
2001, Ap.J. Lett., 549, L151-L154

Cosmic Reionization

61

Haiman 2002Haiman, Z. 2002, Ap.J. Lett., 576: L1-L4
Haiman & Cen 2005Haiman, Z., & Cen, R. 2005, Ap.J., 623: 627-631
Haiman et al. 2004Haiman, Z., Quartaert, E., Bower, G. 2004, ApJ, 612, 698-705
Haiman & Holder 2003Haiman, Z. & Holder, G. P. 2003, ApJ, 595, 1
Haiman & Knox(1999)Haiman, Z., & Knox, L. 1999, ASP Conf. Ser. 181: Microwave Foregrounds, 181, 227
haiman & Bryan 2006Haiman, Z. & Bryan, G.L. 2006, ApJ letters, in press (astroph/0603541)
Haislip et al. 2005Haislip, J. et al. 2005, Nature, submitted (astro-ph/0509660)
Hansen & Haiman 2004Hansen, S. H., & Haiman, Z. 2004, ApJ, 600: 26-31
Haverkorn et al. 2004Haverkorn, M., Katgert, P., de Bruyn, A. 2004, A& A, 427,
549-559
Hernquist et al. 1996Hernquist, L., Katz, N., Weinberg, D. H., & MiraldaEscudé, J. 1996, Ap.J. Lett., 457: L51- L54
Hopkins et al. 2003Hopkins, P., Doeleman, S., Lonsdale, C. 2003, AAS, 203, 4005
Hirata, C.M. 2005, MNRAS, in press
Holder et al.(2003)Holder, G. P., Haiman, Z., Kaplinghat, M., & Knox, L. 2003,
Ap.J., 595, 13
Horton et al. 2004Horton, A., Parry, I., Bland-Hawthorn, J., Cianci, S., King,
D., McMahon, R., & Medlen, S. 2004, SPIE, 5492: 1022-1032
Hu (2000)Hu, W. 2000, Ap.J., 529, 12
Hu & White(1997)Hu, W., & White, M. 1997, New Astronomy, 2, 323
Hu & Okamoto(2002)Hu, W., & Okamoto, T. 2002, Ap.J., 574, 566
Hu & Holder 2003Hu, W. & Holder, G., 2003, Phys. Rev. D, 68, 3001-3004
Hu et al. 2002Hu, E. M., Cowie, L. L., McMahon, R. G., Capak, P., Iwamuro,

62

Fan, Carilli, Keating
F., Kneib, J.-P., Maihara, T., & Motohara, K. 2002, Ap.J. Lett., 568: L75-L79

Hu et al. 2004Hu, E. M., Cowie, L. L., Capak, P., McMahon, R. G., Hayashino,
T., & Komiyama, Y. 2004, A.J., 127: 563-575
Hu et al. 2005Hu, E. M., Cowie, L. L., Capak, P., Kakazu, Y.. 2005, to ppear in
IAU 199 Conf. Proc.: ”Probing Galaxies through Quasar Absorption Lines,”
eds. Williams, Shu, Menard (astro-ph/0509616)
Hui & Haiman 2003Hui, L., & Haiman, Z. 2003, Ap.J., 596: 9-18
Iliev et al. 2003Iliev, I., Scannapieco, E., Martel, H., Schapiro, P. 2003, MNRAS,
341, 81-90
Iliev et al. 2005Iliev, I., Mellema, G., Pen, U., Merz, H., Shapiro, P., Alvarez, M.
2006, MNRAS, in press (astroph/0512187)
Inoue et al. 2005Inoue, A. K., Iwata, I., Deharveng, J.-M., Buat, V., & Burgarella, D. 2005, A&A, 435: 471-482
Jakobsen et al.(1994)Jakobsen, P., Boksenberg, A., Deharveng, J. M., Greenfield,
P., Jedrzejewski, R., & Paresce, F. 1994, Nature, 370: 35-39
Jarvis & Rawlings 2005Jarvis, M. & Rawlings, S. 2005, New AR, 48, 1173-1185
Jarosik et al.(2003)Jarosik, N., et al. 2003, Ap.J.Supplement, 145, 413
Kashikawa et al. 2005Kashikawa, N. et al. 2005, ApJ, 637, 631
kashilnskyKashlinsky, A., Arendt, R., Mather, J., Moseley, S. 2005, Nature, 438,
45 – 50
Kamionkowski et al.(1997)Kamionkowski, M., Kosowsky, A., & Stebbins, A.
1997, Phys. Rev. D., 55, 7368
Kaplinghat et al.(2003)Kaplinghat, M., Chu, M., Haiman, Z., Holder, G. P.,
Knox, L., & Skordis, C. 2003, ApJ, 583, 24
Kaplinghat, Knox and Song (2003)Kaplinghat M., Knox, L., & Song, Y., 2003,

Cosmic Reionization

63

Phys. Rev. Lett., 91, 241301
Kawai et al. 2006Kawai, N., et al. 2006, Nature, in press (astro-ph/0512052)
Keating et al.(1998)Keating, B., Timbie, P., Polnarev, A., & Steinberger, J. 1998,
Ap.J., 495, 580
Keating et al.(2001)Keating, B. G., O’Dell, C. W., de Oliveira-Costa, A.,
Klawikowski, S., Stebor, N., Piccirillo, L., Tegmark, M., & Timbie, P. T. 2001,
Ap.J., 560, L1
Keating & Miller (2005)Keating, B. and Miller, N. 2005, astro-ph 0508269, to
appear in New Astronomy Reviews
Kesden et al.(2002)Kesden, M., Cooray, A., & Kamionkowski, M. 2002, Physical
Review Letters, 89, 011304
Kennefick, Djorgovski, & de Carvalho 1995Kennefick, J. D., Djorgovski, S. G., &
de Carvalho, R. R. 1995, A.J., 110: 2553-2565
Knox et al.(1998)Knox, L., Scoccimarro, R., & Dodelson, S. 1998, Physical Review Letters, 81, 2004
Knox & Song(2002)Knox, L., & Song, Y.-S. 2002, Physical Review Letters, 89,
011303
Knox(2003)Knox, L. 2003, New Astronomy Review, 47, 883
Kodaira et al. 2003Kodaira, K., et al. 2003, PASJ, 55: L17-L21
Kogut et al.(2003)Kogut, A., et al. 2003, Ap.J.Suppl., 148, 161
Kosowsky(2003)Kosowsky, A. 2003, New Astronomy Review, 47, 939
Kohler et al. 2005Kohler, K., Gnedin, N., Miralda-Escude, J., Shaver, P. 2005,
ApJ, 633, 552
Kohler et al. 2006Kohler, K., Gnedin, N., & Hamilton, A. J. S. 2006, submitted
(astro-ph/0511627)

64

Fan, Carilli, Keating

Kriss et al.(2001)Kriss, G. A., et al. 2001, Science, 293: 1112-1116
Kuhlen05Kuhlen, M., Madau, P., Montgomery, R. 2005, ApJ, 637, L1
Kurk et al. 2004Kurk, J. D., Cimatti, A., di Serego Alighieri, S., Vernet, J.,
Daddi, E., Ferrara, A., & Ciardi, B. 2004, A&A, 422: L13-L17
Lamarre et al.(2003)Lamarre, J. M., et al. 2003, New Astronomy Review, 47,
1017
Lane et al. 2004Lane, W., Cohen, A., Cotton, W., et al. 2004, SPIE, 5489, 354361
Lawrence et al. 2006Lawrence, A., et al. 2006, MNRAS, submitted
Leitch et al.(2005)Leitch, E. M., Kovac, J. M., Halverson, N. W., Carlstrom,
J. E., Pryke, C., & Smith, M. W. E. 2005, Ap.J., 624, 10
Lidz et al. 2002Lidz, A., Hui, L., Zaldarriaga, M., & Scoccimarro, R. 2002, Ap.J.,
579: 491-499
Loeb & Barkana 2000Loeb, A., Barkana, R. 2001, ARAA, 39, 19-66
Loeb & Zaldarriaga 2004Loeb, A. & Zaldarriaga, M. 2004, Phys.Rev. Lett. 92,
1301-1304
Maccone 2004Maccone, C. 2004, 35th COSPAR Assembly, p. 1415-1419
Madau et al. 1997Madau, P., Haardt, F., & Rees, M. J. 1997, Ap.J., 514, 648-659
Madau et al. 2004Madau, P., Rees, M. J., Volonteri, M., Haardt, F., & Oh, S. P.
2004, Ap.J., 604: 484-494
Madau et al. 2001Madau, P., Ferrara, A., & Rees, M. J. 2001, Ap.J., 555: 92-105
Madau & Rees 2000Madau, P., & Rees, M. J. 2000, Ap.J. Lett., 542: L69-L73
Madau et al. 1997Madau, P., Meiksin, A., Rees, M. 1997, ApJ, 475, 429-444
Mahabal05Mahabal, A., Stern, D., Bogosavljevic, M., Djorgovski, S., Thompson,
D. 2005, ApJ, 634, L9

Cosmic Reionization

65

malhotraMalhotra, S. & Rhoads, J. 2005, ApJ, 617, L5
Malhotra et al. 2005Malhotra, S., et al. 2005, Ap.J., 626: 666-679
Malhotra & Rhoads 2004Malhotra, S., & Rhoads, J. E. 2004, Ap.J. Lett., 617:
L5-L8
Mapelli & Ferrara 2005Mapelli, M., & Ferrara, A. 2005, MNRAS, 364, 2
Martin & Sawicki 2004Martin, C. L., & Sawicki, M. 2004, Ap.J., 603: 414-424
McDonald et al. 2000McDonald, P., Miralda-Escudé, J., Rauch, M., Sargent,
W. L. W., Barlow, T. A., Cen, R., & Ostriker, J. P. 2000, Ap.J., 543: 1-23
McDonald & Miralda-Escudé 2001McDonald, P., & Miralda-Escudé, J. 2001,
Ap.J. Lett., 549: L11-L14
mcphersonMcPherson, A., Born, A., Sutherland, W., Emerson, J. 2004, SPIE,
5489, 638 - 649
McQuinn et. al. (2005)McQuinn, M., Furlanetto, S., Hernquist, L., Zahn, O.,
Zaldarriaga, M. 2005, Ap.J., 630, 657
mcquinnMcquinn, M., Zahn, O., Zaldarraiga, M., Hernquist, L., Furlanetto, S.
2006, ApJ, in press (astroph/0512263)
Meiksin 2005Meiksin, A. 2005, MNRAS, 356: 596-606
Melchiorri et al. 2005Melchiorri, A., Choudhury, T. R., Serra, P., & Ferrara, A.
2005, astro-ph/0506486
Mennella et al.(2004)Mennella, A., et al. 2004, AIP Conf. Proc. 703: Plasmas in
the Laboratory and in the Universe: New Insights and New Challenges, 703,
401. Also, astro-ph/0310058
Mesinger, A., Haiman, Z. 2004, ApJ, 611, L69-72
Miralda-Escude 1998Miralda-Escudé, J. 1998, Ap.J., 501: 15-22
Miralda-Escudé 2003Miralda-Escudé, J. 2003, Ap.J., 597: 66-73

66

Fan, Carilli, Keating

Miralda-Escudé et al. 1996Miralda-Escudé, J., Cen, R., Ostriker, J. P., & Rauch,
M. 1996, Ap.J., 471: 582-616
Miralda-Escudé et al. 2000Miralda-Escudé, J., Haehnelt, M., & Rees, M. J. 2000,
Ap.J., 530: 1-16
Mobasher et al. 2005Mobasher, B. et al. 2005 ApJ, 635, 832
Montroy et al.(2005)Montroy, T., et al. 2005, astro-ph/0507514
Morales & Hewitt 2004Morales, M. & Hewitt, J. 2004, ApJ, 615, 7-18
Morales 2005Morales, M. 2005, ApJ, 619, 678-683
Oh 2001Oh, S. P. 2001, Ap.J., 553: 499-512
Oh 2002Oh, S. P. 2002, MNRAS, 336: 1021-1029
Oh & Furlanetto 2005Oh, S. P., & Furlanetto, S. R. 2005, Ap.J. Lett., 620: L9L12
Oh & Haiman 2004Oh, S.P. & Haiman, Z. 2004, MNRAS, 346, 456-472
Oh & Mack 2003Oh, S.P. & Mack, K. 2003, MNRAS, 346, 871-877
Oxley et al.(2005)Oxley, P., et al. 2005, Proc.SPIE Int.Soc.Opt.Eng. 5543 (2004)
320-331
Piacentini et al.(2005)Piacentini F., et al. 2005, astro-ph/0507507
PierpaoliPierpaoli, E. 2003, MNRAS, 342, L63
pagePage, L., Hinshaw, G., Komantsu, E., 2006, ApJS, in press (astroph/0603450)
Panagia et al. 2005Panagia, N. et al. 2005, ApJ, 633, L1
Paschos & Norman 2005Paschos, P., & Norman, M. L. 2005, Ap.J., 631: 59-84
Pentericci et al. 2002Pentericci, L., et al. 2002, A.J., 123: 2151-2158
Pettini et al. 2003Pettini, M., Madau, P., Bolte, M., Prochaska, J. X., Ellison,
S. L., & Fan, X. 2003, Ap.J., 594: 695-703

Cosmic Reionization

67

Price et al. 2005Price, P. A. et al. 2005, ApJL, submitted (astro-ph/0509697)
Rauch 1998Rauch, M. 1998, ARA&A, 36: 267-316
Rauch et al. 1997Rauch, M., et al. 1997, Ap.J., 489: 7-20
Razoumov et al. 2002Razoumov, A. O., Norman, M. L., Abel, T., & Scott, D.
2002, Ap.J., 572: 695-704
Readhead et al.(2004)Readhead, A. C. S., et al. 2004, Science, 306, 836
Readhead et al.(2004b)Readhead, A. C. S., et al. 2004, Ap.J., 609, 498
Rees98Rees, M.J. 1998, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Colloquium: The Age of the Universe, Dark Matter, and Structure Formation,
(NAS: Washington DC), p. 47 - 52
Rhoads et al. 2003Rhoads, J. E., et al. 2003, A.J., 125: 1006-1013
Richards et al. 2002Richards, G. T., et al. 2002, A.J., 123: 2945-2975
Richards et al. 2005Richards, G. T., et al. 2005, AJ, submitted
Ricotti, Gnedin, & Shull(2000)Ricotti, M., Gnedin, N. Y., & Shull, J. M. 2000,
Ap.J., 534: 41-56
Ricotti & Ostriker 2004Ricotti, M., & Osteriker, J. P. 2004, MNRAS, 352: 547562
Ruhl et al.(2004)Ruhl, J., et al. 2004, Proceedings of the SPIE, 5498, 11
Salvaterra et al. 2005Salvaterra, R., Haardt, F., & Ferrara, A. 2005, MNRAS,
362, L50 - L54
Santos 2004Santos, M. R. 2004, MNRAS, 349: 1137-1152
Santos et al. 2004Santos, M. R., Ellis, R. S., Kneib, J.-P., Richard, J., & Kuijken,
K. 2004, Ap.J., 606: 683-701
Santos et al. 2005Santos, M., Cooray, A., Knox, L. 2005, ApJ, 625, 575-587
Santos et al. 2003Santos, M. G., Cooray, A. Haiman, Z., Knox, L. and Ma, C.-P.,

68

Fan, Carilli, Keating
2003, Ap.J., 598: 756-766

Schaye et al.(2000)Schaye, J., Theuns, T., Rauch, M., Efstathiou, G., & Sargent,
W. L. W. 2000, MNRAS, 318: 817-826
Schaye et al. 2003Schaye, J., Aguirre, A., Kim, T.-S., Theuns, T., Rauch, M., &
Sargent, W. L. W. 2003, Ap.J., 596: 768-796
Scheuer 1965Scheuer, P. A. G. 1965, Nature, 207: 963Schiminovich et al.(2005)Schiminovich, D., et al. 2005, Ap.J. Lett., 619, L47
Schmidt et al. 1995Schmidt, M., Schneider, D. P., & Gunn, J. E. 1995, A.J., 110:
68-77
Schneider et al. 2005Schneider, D. P., et al. 2005, A.J., 130: 367-380
Scott & Rees 1990Scott, D., Rees, M.J. 1990, MNRAS, 247, 510-516
Seshadri & Subramanian (1998)Seshadri, T., and Subramanian, K. 1998, Phys.
Rev. D., 58, 063002
Seljak & Zaldarriaga(1996)Seljak, U., & Zaldarriaga, M. 1996, Ap.J., 469, 437
Seljak et al.(2005)Seljak, U., et al. 2005, Phys. Rev. D., 71, 103515
Sethi 2005Sethi, S. 2005, MNRAS, 363, 818
Shklovsky 1964Shklovsky, I. S. 1964, Astron. Zh. 41: 801
Shull et al.(2004)Shull, J. M., Tumlinson, J., Giroux, M. L., Kriss, G. A., &
Reimers, D. 2004, Ap.J., 600: 570-579
Sokasian et al. 2002Sokasian, A., Abel, T., Hernquist, L. 2002, MNRAS, 332, 601
Songaila 2004Songaila, A. 2004, A.J., 127: 2598-2603
Songaila 2005Songaila, A. 2005, A.J., in press (astro-ph/0507649)
Songaila & Cowie 2002Songaila, A., & Cowie, L. L. 2002, A.J., 123: 2183-2196
Songaila, Hu, Cowie, & McMahon 1999Songaila, A., Hu, E. M., Cowie, L. L., &
McMahon, R. G. 1999, Ap.J. Lett., 525: L5-L8

Cosmic Reionization

69

Spergel, D., Verde, L., Peiris, H. et al. ApJS, 148, 175-194
Spergel, D., Bean, R., O’Dore, M. et al. ApJS, in press (astroph/0603449
Steidel et al. (1999)Steidel, C. C., Adelberger, K. L., Giavalisco, M., Dickinson,
M. and Pettini, M. 1999, Ap.J., 519, 1.
Steidel et al. 2001Steidel, C. C., Pettini, M., & Adelberger, K. L. 2001, Ap.J.,
546: 665-671
Stern et al. 2005Stern, D., Yost, S. A., Eckart, M. E., Harrison, F. A., Helfand,
D. J., Djorgovski, S. G., Malhotra, S., & Rhoads, J. E. 2005, Ap.J., 619: 12-18
Stiavelli, Fall, & Panagia 2004Stiavelli, M., Fall, S. M., & Panagia, N. 2004, Ap.J.
Lett., 610: L1-L4
Subrahmanyan et al. 1998Subrahmanyan, R., Kesteven, M., Ekers, R., Sinclair,
M., Silk, J. 1998 MNRAS 298, 1189-1197
Subrahmanyan et al. 2005Subrahmanyan, R., Chippendale, A., Ekers, R. 2005,
ATNF newsletter, 56, 18-19
Sunyaev & Zeldovich(1980)Sunyaev, R. A., & Zeldovich, I. B. 1980, MNRAS,
190, 413
Tagliaferri et al. 2005Tagliaferri, G. et al. 2005, A&A, 443, L1
Taniguchi et al. 2005Taniguchi, Y., et al. 2005, PASJ, 57: 165-182
Tegmark et al.(2004)Tegmark, M., et al. 2004, Phys. Rev. D., 69, 103501
Theuns et al. 2002aTheuns, T., Schaye, J., Zaroubi, S., Kim, T.-S., Tzanavaris,
P., & Carswell, B. 2002,
Theuns et al.(2002b)Theuns, T., Bernardi, M., Frieman, J., Hewett, P., Schaye,
J., Sheth, R. K., & Subbarao, M. 2002, Ap.J. Lett., 574: L111-L114
Ap.J. Lett., 567: L103-L106
Thompson et al. 2005Thompson, R. I., et al. 2005, A.J., 130: 1-12

70

Fan, Carilli, Keating

Totani et al. 2006Totani, T., et al. 2006, PASJ, in press
Tozzi et al. 1999Tozzi, P., Madau, P., Meiksin, A., Rees, M. 2000, ApJ, 528,
597-606
Tran et al. 2004Tran, K.-V. H., Lilly, S. J., Crampton, D., & Brodwin, M. 2004,
Ap.J. Lett., 612: L89-L92
Venkatesan et al. 2001Venkatesan, A., Giroux, M. L., & Shull, J. M. 2001, Ap.J.,
563: 1-8
Walter et al. 2003Walter, F., Bertoldi, F., Carilli, C., et al. 2003, Nature, 424,
406-408
Walter et al. 2004Walter, F., Carilli, C., Bertoldi, F. et al. 2004, ApJ, 615, L17-20
Wang et al. 2005Wang, X., Tegmark, M., Santos, M., Knox, L. 2005, ApJ, in
press (astroph-0501081)
Wang & Hu 2005Wang, X., Hu, W. 2005, ApJ, in press (astroph/0511141)
Warren et al. 1994Warren, S. J., Hewett, P. C., & Osmer, P. S. 1994, Ap.J., 421:
412-433
Webb et al. 1992Webb, J. K., Barcons, X., Carswell, R. F., & Parnell, H. C.
1992, MNRAS, 255: 319-324
Weinberg et al. 1997Weinberg, D. H., Miralda-Escude, J., Hernquist, L., & Katz,
N. 1997, Ap.J., 490: 564-570
Weiss et al.(2005)Weiss, R., et al. 2003, http://www.nsf.gov/mps/ast/tfcr.jsp
White et al. 2003White, R. L., Becker, R. H., Fan, X., & Strauss, M. A. 2003,
A.J., 126: 1-14
White et al. 2005White, R. L., Becker, R. H., Fan, X., & Strauss, M. A. 2005,
A.J., 129: 2102-2107
Willott et al. 2005Willott, C. J., Percival, W. J., McLure, R. J., Crampton, D.,

Cosmic Reionization

71

Hutchings, J. B., Jarvis, M. J., Sawicki, M., & Simard, L. 2005, Ap.J., 626:
657-665
Wolf et al. 2003Wolf, C., Wisotzki, L., Borch, A., Dye, S., Kleinheinrich, M., &
Meisenheimer, K. 2003, A&A, 408: 499-514
Wouthuysen 1952Wouthuysen, S. 1952, AJ, 57, 31-33
Wyithe & Loeb 2003Wyithe, J. S. B., & Loeb, A. 2003, ApJ, 586, 693
Wyithe & Loeb 2004Wyithe, J. S. B., & Loeb, A. 2004, Nature, 432: 194-196
Wyithe & Loeb 2005aWyithe, J. S. B., & Loeb, A. 2005a, Ap.J., 625: 1-5
Wyithe & Loeb 2005bWyithe, J. S. B., & Loeb, A. 2005b, ApJ, 625, 1
Wyithe et al. 2005Wyithe, J.S., Loeb, A., Carilli, C. 2005, ApJ, 628, 575-582
Wyithe & Loeb 2004Wyithe, J.S., Loeb, A. 2004b, ApJ, 610, 117
Wyithe et al. 2005bWyithe, J.S., Loeb, A., Barnes, D. 2005, ApJ, 634, 715
Yan & Windhorst 2004aYan, H., & Windhorst, R. A. 2004a, Ap.J. Lett., 600:
L1-L5
Yan & Windhorst 2004bYan, H., & Windhorst, R. A. 2004b, Ap.J. Lett., 612:
L93-L96
York et al. 2000York, D. G., et al. 2000, A.J., 120: 1579-1587
Yu & Lu 2005Yu, Q., & Lu, Y. 2005, Ap.J., 620, 31
Zahn et al.(2005)Zahn, O., Zaldarriaga, M., Hernquist, L., & McQuinn, M. 2005,
Ap.J., 630, 657
Zaldarriaga & Seljak(1997)Zaldarriaga, M., & Seljak, U. 1997, Phys. Rev. D., 55,
1830
Zaldarriaga(1997)Zaldarriaga, M. 1997, Phys. Rev. D., 55, 1822
Zaldarriaga & Seljak(1998)Zaldarriaga, M., & Seljak, U. 1998, Phys. Rev. D., 58,
023003

72

Fan, Carilli, Keating

Zaldariagga et al. 2004aZaldarigga, M., Furlanetto, S., Henquist, L. 2004, ApJ,
608, 622-635
Zaldariagga et al. 2004bZaldarigga, M., Furlanetto, S., Loeb, A. 2004, ??
Zhang, Anninos, & Norman 1995Zhang, Y., Anninos, P., & Norman, M. L. 1995,
Ap.J. Lett., 453: L57- L60
Zhang et al.(2004)Zhang, P., Pen, U., Trac, H. 2004, MNRAS, 355, 451 - 460
Zheng et al.(2004)Zheng, W., et al. 2004, Ap.J., 605: 631-644
Zygelman 2005Zygelman, B. 2005, ApJ, 622, 1356-1362

Cosmic Reionization

73

Figure 1: Moderate resolution spectra of nineteen SDSS quasars at 5.74 < z <
6.42. Adapted from Fan et al. (2006b)

74

Fan, Carilli, Keating

Figure 2: Transmitted flux blueward of Lyα emission as a function of redshift
from z ∼ 2 to 6.3 using Keck/ESI and HIRES data. Large open squares are points
data for possible BAL quasars. Flux was computed in bins of 15Å. Adapted from
Songaila (2004)

Cosmic Reionization

75

Figure 3: Evolution of Optical depth with combined Lyα and Lyβ results. The
dash line is for a redshift evolution of τGP ∝ (1 + z)4.3 . At z > 5.5, the best fit
evolution has τGP ∝ (1 + z)>10.9 , indicating an accelerated evolution. The large
open symbols with error bars are the average and standard deviation of optical
depth at each redshift. The sample variance increases also increases rapidly with
redshift. Adapted from Fan et al. (2006b).

76

Fan, Carilli, Keating

Wavelength
8600

Flux [10-18 erg cm-2s-1A-1]

8400
10

6

8

4

6

2

4

0

8800

SDSS J1030+0524

Lyman Beta

2

Lyman Alpha

0
5.80

5.90
8400

6.00

6.10
8600

6.20

6.30
8800

10

SDSS J1148+5251

6
8
4
6

Lyman Beta
2

4
0
2

Lyman Alpha

0
5.80

5.90

6.00

6.10

6.20

6.30

Redshift

Figure 4: Close-up of the Lyα and Lyβ troughs in the two highest redshift quasars
currently known. SDSS J1030+0524 (z = 6.28) shows complete Gunn-Peterson
absorption in both Lyα and Lyβ , where SDSS J1148+5251 (z = 6.42) has clear
transmission, suggesting large line of sight variance at the end of reionization.
Adapted from White et al. (2003).

Cosmic Reionization

77

Figure 5: Distributions of dark gaps, defined as regions in the spectra where all
pixel having observed optical depth larger than 2.5 for Lyα transition. Upward
arrows are gaps immediately blueward of quasar proximity zone, therefore the
length is only a lower limit. Solid lines with error bars are average depth lengths
with 1-σ dispersion at each redshift bin. Long dark gaps start to appear at
z ∼ 5.6, with the average gap length increases rapidly at z > 6, marking the end
of reionization. It is compared with simulation of Paschos & Norman (2005), in
which dashed and dotted lines are for moderate and high spectral resolutions.
The simulation has an overlapping redshift at z ∼ 7. Adapted from Fan et al.
(2006b).

78

Fan, Carilli, Keating

Figure 6: Evolution of volume-averaged neutral hydrogen fraction of the IGM.
The solid points with error bars are measurements based on the nineteen highredshift quasars. The dashed and dashed-dotted-dashed lines is volume-averaged
results from the A4 and A8 simulations of Gnedin (2004). The neutral fraction
inferred from the observations is comparable to that of the transition from overlapping stage to post-overlap stage of reionization in simulations (Gnedin 2000).
Adapted from Fan et al. (2006b)

Cosmic Reionization

79

Figure 7: Evolution of IGM temperature for a quasar-like ionizing spectrum,
assuming different reionization history. In models where the Universe is reionized
early and remained such afterwards, the IGM temperature is too cold comparing
to measurements at z = 2 − 4. Model A has a single-episode reionization at
z = 14 and remains highly ionized thereafter. Model B also has early reionization,
but experienced a drop in ionizing flux until z ∼ 7 at which it undergoes a
second period of reionization. To prevent overcooling, a major heating event
that resulted in large change in the IGM ionization state would have to occur at
z = 6−10. However, different history of HeII reionization history may complicate
this intepretation. Adapted from Hui & Haiman (2003).

80

Fan, Carilli, Keating

Figure 8: The luminosity function of Lyα galaxies at z ∼ 6.5 and z ∼ 5.7, from
the complications in Malhotra & Rhoads (2004). The luminosity function shows
little evolution between these redshifts, consistent with a largely ionized IGM at
z ∼ 6.5. Adapted from Malhotra & Rhoads (2004).

Cosmic Reionization

81

Figure 9: Large angular scale temperature (color scale) and polarization (lines)
simulations in real-space. The left panel shows a simulation with no reionization
and the right panel shows the effects of instantaneous reionization with τ = 0.17.
Both maps and CMB observables are smoothed with a 4◦ beam. Reionization
does not affect the large-scale temperature pattern but it produces roughly tentimes larger polarization at large scales – note the change in scale for polarization
between the two panels. The maximum polarization in the right panel is ≃ 800
nK. Figures courtesy of Eric Hivon.

82

Fan, Carilli, Keating

Figure 10: Measurements of the large-angular scale gradient-mode polarization
power spectrum CℓE for angular scales greater than 1◦ ⇔ ℓ . 200. The solid line
is the polarization power spectrum for the WMAP best fit cosmological model,
with τ = 0.09 (4,page) The dashed line displays the polarization power spectrum
for a model generated using the WMAP cosmological parameters but with τ = 0,
which is consistent with the E-mode detections by BOOMERANG, CBI, DASI,
and CAPMAP and the upper limit of POLAR.

Cosmic Reionization

83

Figure 11: Measurements of the temperature-polarization cross-correlation power
spectrum CℓT E . The solid line is the power spectrum for the WMAP best fit
cosmological model, with τ = 0.09 (4, page).

84

Figure 12:

Fan, Carilli, Keating

The cosmic star formation history (uncorrected for extinction) in-

tegrated down to 0.3L∗z=3 (top panel) and 0.04L∗z=3 (bottom panel). These luminosities correspond to the faint-end limits for z850 and i775 -dropout probes at
z ∼ 7 − 8 and z ∼ 6, respectively. The large red circle denotes determination at
z ∼ 6 from Bouwens et al. (2006). and compared with previous determinations
by Schiminovich et al. (2005) (open squares), Steidel et al. (1999) (green crosses),
Giavalisco et al. (2004b) (black diamonds), Bouwens et al. 2004a (magenta triangle), Bunker et al. (2004) (blue square), Bouwens et al. (2004b) (magenta
pentagon), and Bouwens et al. (2005) (magenta square). The figure is divided
into two panels to illustrate how much stronger the evolution is at the bright end
of the LF (& 0.3L∗z=3 ) than it is when integrated to the i-dropout faint-end limit
(0.04L∗z=3 ). Adapted from Bouwens et al. (2005).

Cosmic Reionization

85

Figure 13: The simulated HI 21cm brightness temperature distribution during
reionization at z = 12, 9, 7 (Furlanetto et al. 2004a; Zaldariagga et al. 2004a).

86

Fan, Carilli, Keating

2

2

(mK )

10

0

z=8
−2

10

2

10

3

k P

∆T

(k)/2 π

2

10

0

10

z = 12
−2

10

−2

10

−1

0

10

10

1

10

−1

k (Mpc )

Figure 14: Left: Global (all sky) HI signal from reionization (Gnedin & Shaver
2003). The shaded region shows the expected thermal noise in a carefully controlled experiment. Center: Predicted HI 21cm brightness temperature power
spectrum (in log bins) at redshifts 8 and 12 (McQuinn et al. 2006). The thin
black line shows the signal when density fluctuations dominate. The dashed green
line shows the predicted signal for x̄i = 0.2 at z = 12, and x̄i = 0.6 at z = 8, in
the Furlanetto et al. (2004) semi-analytic model. The thick blue line shows the
SKA sensitivity in 1000hrs. The thick red dot-dash show the sensitivity of the
pathfinder experiment LOFAR. The cutoff at low k is set by the primary beam.
Right: The simulated SKA spectrum of a radio continuum source at z = 10
(Carilli et al. 2002). The straight line is the intrinsic power law (synchrotron)
spectrum of the source. The noise curve shows the effect of the 21cm line in the
neutral IGM, including noise expected for the SKA in a 100 hour integration.

Cosmic Reionization

87

Figure 15: The volume averaged neutral fraction of the IGM versus redshift using
various techniques. The dash line shows the fiducial model of Gnedin (2004) with
late reionization at z = 6 − 7, the solid line shows an idealized model with double
reionization as described in Cen (2003a), and the dotted line illustrates the model
with early reionization at z ∼ 14.

