Accepted by The Astrophysical Journal Letters
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 04/03/99

A NEW CALCULATION OF THE RECOMBINATION EPOCH
S. Seagera , D. D. Sasselov1 D. Scottb
a Astronomy Department, Harvard University, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138
b Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z1

arXiv:astro-ph/9909275v2 16 Sep 1999

Accepted by The Astrophysical Journal Letters

ABSTRACT
We have developed an improved recombination calculation of H, He I, and He II in the early Universe
which involves a line-by-line treatment of each atomic level. We find two major differences compared
with previous calculations. Firstly, the ionization fraction xe is approximately 10% smaller for redshifts
<
∼ 800, due to non-equilibrium processes in the excited states of H. Secondly, He I recombination is
much slower than previously thought, and is delayed until just before H recombines. We describe the
basic physics behind the new results and present a simple way to reproduce our calculation. This should
enable fast computation of the ionization history (and quantities such as the power spectrum of CMB
anisotropies which depend on it) for arbitrary cosmologies, without the need to consider the hundreds
of atomic levels used in our complete model.
Subject headings: cosmology: theory — atomic processes — early universe — cosmic microwave
background
darriaga, Spergel & Seljak (1997), to compute accurate
CMB power spectra for different cosmologies.

1. INTRODUCTION

We have recently revisited the calculation of the recombination epoch of the early Universe by making as
few approximations as possible and trying to retain full
accuracy (Seager, Sasselov, & Scott 1999, hereafter Paper I). We were motivated by the potential to measure
(with the MAP and Planck satellites) CMB anisotropies
at the roughly 1% level over a wide range of angular scales,
and indications (Hu et al. 1995, hereafter HSSW) that the
existing solution for hydrogen and helium recombination
has uncertainties at that level. Indeed, we uncovered a
number of minor improvements, as well as two more major
effects which change the ionization history in a significant
way.
Detailed understanding of the recombination process is
crucial for modeling the power spectrum of CMB anisotropies. Since the seminal work of the late 1960s (Peebles
1968, Zel’dovich et al. 1968), several refinements have been
introduced (see discussion in HSSW and Paper I), but little has changed. Modern codes for evolving the ionization
fraction xe = ne /nH (where ne is the number density of
electrons and nH is the total number density of H nuclei)
have been based almost entirely on the single differential
equation introduced 30 years ago, with a more accurate recombination coefficient, but no other basic improvement.
With today’s computing power, there is not the necessity for making sweeping approximations that existed 30
years ago. We believe our work represents the most accurate picture to date of how exactly the Universe as a
whole became neutral. In this Letter we summarize what
is new in the physics involved and present an approximate
treatment of our set of equations which accurately reproduces our complete calculation. We discuss in detail the
physical basis for each approximation and pay attention
to the limits of validity. The paper is supplemented by
a computer code (recfast) which can be used to do the
calculation, and in conjunction with, e.g. cmbfast by Zal-

2. HOW THE UNIVERSE BECAME NEUTRAL

2.1. Our Multi-level Calculation
In the canonical Hot Big Bang picture, the recombination epoch is when the Universe became cool enough
for protons to capture electrons and form neutral hydrogen. This recombination process was not instantaneous,
because the electrons, captured into different atomic energy levels, could not cascade instantaneously down to the
ground state. The electrons were impeded because of fast
reionizations out of excited states due to the huge reservoir of low energy photons, and because of the high optical depth of the Lyman lines and continuum transitions
to ground state. Any Lyman line or continuum transition to the ground state emitted a photon with energy
where there were few blackbody photons, which immediately photoexcited or photoionized a neighbouring atom in
the ground state. Atoms reached the ground state through
either cosmological redshifting of the Ly α line photons, or
by the 2s–1s two photon process. Because these rates
from n=2 to the ground state were much slower than the
net recombination rate to n=2, a “bottleneck” occured
which slowed down the entire recombination process. The
Universe expanded and cooled faster than recombination
could be completed, and a small fraction of free electrons
and protons remained. This fraction, during and after
recombination, affects the CMB anisotropies through the
precise shape of the thickness of the photon last scattering
surface (i.e. the visibility function).
The ‘standard’ methodology considers an ‘effective 3level atom’ with a ground state, first excited state (n=2)
and continuum, with the states n > 2 represented by a
recombination coefficient. A single ordinary differential
equation can then be derived to describe the ionization
fraction, equation (1) (See Peebles, 1968, 1993). Many
1

2

A New Calculation of the Recombination Epoch

assumptions go into this derivation, including: that H excited states are in equilibrium with the radiation; that
stimulated deexcitation is negligible for the Ly α transition; that a simple recombination coefficient can be used;
that every net recombination results in a ground state
atom, so that the ground state number density n1 =
nH − np (where nH is the total hydrogen number density,
ionized or neutral, while np is the proton number density,
i.e. ionized H); that the Ly α redshifting can be dealt with
using a simple escape probability; that collisional processes
are negligible; and that He can be ignored.
Our new methodology, made possible with modern computing power, is to calculate recombination with as few
approximations as possible. Instead of evolving a single ODE for dxe /dt for H recombination, we evolve one
ODE for each of 300 atomic energy level populations, as
well as one for electrons and one for the matter temperature. With this level-by-level treatment, we include thousands of bound-bound transitions which correctly couple
the ODEs, and we calculate recombination to each atomic
level as it evolves with redshift which eliminates the need
for an effective recombination coefficient (α in §3). We
also included other effects (which turned out to be negligible), such as collisional transitions, feedback of distortions to the radiation field, complete heating and cooling
terms, and H chemistry. See Paper I for full details on this
method. Our new method tests the approximations used
in deriving the standard ODE, and we find all of them
to be valid, except for the equilibrium assumption. The
causes and consequences of this are discussed in §2.2.1,
and the effect can be approximated using the single ODE
approach, with a small modification that artificially speeds
up the recombination at low z, as discussed in §3.
With larger ionization potentials, He I and He II recombined before H. He II recombination shows no deviation from previous calculations, in that we find only
small differences compared with Saha equilibrium. However, He I recombination is important for the CMB anisotropies (HSSW), and to some extent for the chemistry
in the early Universe (Stancil et al. 1999), and requires
closer scrutiny. Our code evolves He I and He II in the
same level-by-level method describe above, and simultaneously with H. Previous calculations for He I used the
Saha equilibrium method (e.g. HSSW) or an effective 3level method (Matsuda, Sato & Takeda 1971). We find
that the excited states of He I remain in equilibrium with
the radiation (unlike H), but that accurate treatment of
He I results in a much delayed recombination. This can
also be reproduced using a simple ODE for He I.
2.2. What is New in the Physics
2.2.1. Hydrogen
Neutral H production is slightly faster when using our
multi-level calculation, compared to the standard calculation (updated with the most recent parameters (HSSW)),
as shown in Figure 2.2.1.
For the standard equilibrium case, the net bound-bound
rates are zero, and this is an implicit assumption in deriving equation (1). We find that at z <
∼ 1000, the net boundbound rates become different from zero, because at low
temperatures, the cool blackbody radiation field means
there are few photons for photoexcitation of high energy

transitions (e.g. 70–10, 50–4 etc.). In this case spontaneous deexcitation dominates, causing a faster downward
cascade to the n=2 state. In other words, once an electron is captured to, say, n=70, it can cascade down to
the n=2 state faster than in the equilibrium case, because
few photons are around to photoexcite it. In addition, the
faster downward cascade rate is faster than the photoionization rate from the upper state, and one might view this
as radiative decay stealing some of the depopulation “flux”
from photoionization. Both the faster downward cascade
and the lower photoionization rate contribute to the faster
net recombination rate.

Fig. 1: Multi-level hydrogen recombination for the standard
CDM parameters Ωtot = 1.0, ΩB = 0.05, H0 = 50, YP =
0.24, T0 = 2.728 K. The two lines are the complete calculation
of Paper I (dotted) and the standard (effective 3-level atom)
calculation (dashed).

An imbalance develops as the background radiation continues to cool while the entire Lyman series remains optically thick (the “bottleneck” gets worse). A Boltzmann
distribution relative to n=2 is no longer sustainable − the
excited states become progressively overpopulated. (Note
that this is not a population inversion.) The radiation
field is cool, but strong, and able to keep neighbouring
states well coupled, as well as to hold the highest Rydberg states in equilibrium with each other. However, in
comparison with the standard equilibrium capture-cascade
calculation for α, this unusual situation leads us to higher
effective recombination rates to the majority of excited
states, without increasing photoionization proportionally.
This results in a higher net rate of production of neutral
hydrogen atoms.
Because the net effect of our new H calculation is a faster
recombination (a lower freeze out ionization fraction), our
results can be reproduced by artificially speeding up recombination in the standard calculation, simply by multiplying the recombination and ionization coefficient by a
‘fudge factor’ F .
2.2.2. Helium
Our new multi-level calculation shows a significantly delayed He I recombination compared to previous calculations. In fact, for our low ΩB models He I recombination
is still finishing at the very beginning of H recombination.
Figure 2.2.2 shows the ionization fraction xe through He II,
He I and H recombination, plotted against the standard H
calculation and He II and He I recombination calculated

Seager, Sasselov & Scott
using the Saha ionization equilibrium equation.

3

below). Because the triplet excited states remain unpopulated during recombination, the effective 3-level atom is
the ground state 11 s, the first singlet excited state, and
the continuum.
3. THE APPROXIMATE SET OF EQUATIONS

Fig. 2: Helium and hydrogen recombination for the standard
CDM parameters with YP = 0.24 and T0 = 2.728 K. The first
step from right to left is recombination of He III to He II, the
second step is He II to He I. The dashed line is our new He
I calculation, while the dotted line is the He Saha equilibrium
recombination and the H standard calculation.

The recombination of He I is slow for the same reasons that H recombination is, namely because of the optically thick n1 p–11 s transitions which make cascades to
the ground state slow, and the exclusion of recombinations
to the ground state. In other words He I follows a Case
B recombination with an inhibition factor. Because the
“bottleneck” at n=2 largely controls recombination, it is
not surprising that He I and H recombination occur at a
similar redshift; the ionization energy of n=2 is similar in
both.
The physics of He I recombination is different than that
for H recombination because of its different atomic structure. More specifically, the high excited states of He I are
much more strongly packed towards the continuum compared to those of H: the energy difference between the 3p
levels and the continuum is 1.6 eV for He I versus 1.5 eV
for H, compared to 24.6 eV versus 13.6 eV for the ground
state. Because of this, the radiation field has a stronger effect on the excited states of He I than those of H. This has
3 main consequences: 1) The strong radiation field during
He I recombination keeps the ratio of photoionization rate
to downward cascade rate higher than the H case, resulting
in a slower recombination than H. 2) The strong radiation
field also causes the triplet states (e.g. n3 p–n1 s) to be virtually unpopulated. The triplets have only forbidden (i.e.
very slow) transitions with the singlets, and a metastable
“ground state” 4.77 eV from the continuum. 3) The radiation field is strong enough that the excited states remain in
equilibrium with the radiation throughout recombination.
There is one possibility to speed up the slow He I recombination. It is the existence of some neutral H, which
could ‘steal’ He I resonance line photons, invalidate the effective Case B by removing the “bottleneck” at n=2, and
make it a Saha equilibrium recombination instead. However, our detailed calculation shows that the rate for this
process never comes close to being significant.
Because He I recombination simply follows a Case B
recombination and unlike for H the excited singlet states
remain in equilibrium throughout recombination, it can be
reproduced using the effective 3-level single ODE (shown

Here we present a set of equations which allow a simple
way to reproduce our new recombination results from the
multi-level code. Though approximate, the set provided
below includes more of the recombination physics than
the ‘standard’ calculation, and reproduces approximately
(via parametrizations) the departures from equilibrium in
H, and the slow He I recombination found in Paper I.
However, a word of caution is necessary – the set of
equations below have a range of validity which corresponds
roughly to the choice of typical cosmologies discussed in
Paper I. Attempts to calculate recombination in more extreme cosmologies, or with the addition of extra physics,
will probably require evolution of the full set of equations
of the multi-level code. In addition, our approximations
here are designed for optimal use with the CMB anisotropies, and do not fit as well the range below z ≤ 300,
where molecular formation becomes important. Therefore
detailed study of the chemistry in the early universe will
probably also require evolution of the full set of equations
of the multi-level code.
The approximate set of equations below — two ODEs
for the ionization fractions of H and He I, and an equation
for the matter temperature — should be solved simultaneously. We recommend leaving out He II recombination
entirely, since it has no effect on the power spectrum of
CMB anisotropies. Otherwise Saha equilibrium is an adequate approximation. The two ODEs derive from consideration of detailed balance in the effective 3-level atoms of
H and He I (see Peebles, 1968, 1993). The total recombination coefficients in each case have been parametrized
to reproduce our multi-level results. The equation of the
total rate of change of the matter temperature is a truncated version of Paper I eq. (69), including adiabatic and
Compton cooling terms. The set is as follows:

dxp
= xe xp nH αH − βH (1 − xp )e−hνH2s /kTM
dz
(1+KH ΛH nH (1−xp ))
× H(z)(1+z)(1+K
,
H (ΛH +βH )nH (1−xp ))

(1)


dxHeII 
= xHeII xe nH αHeI − βHeI (fHe − xHeII )e−hνHeI21 s /kTM
dz
(2)

−hνps /kTM
)
1 + KHeI ΛHe nH (fHe − xHeII )e
,
×
H(z)(1 + z) 1 + KHeI (ΛHe + βHeI )nH (fHe − xHeII )e−hνps /kTM
αH = F 10−19

r
TM
αHeI = q 
T2

1+

r

TM
T2

atb
m3 s−1 ,
1 + ctd
!1−p

1+

r

(3)

!1+p −1
TM
 m3 s−1 ,
T1
(4)

4

A New Calculation of the Recombination Epoch

xe
2TM
8σT aR TR4
dTM
(TM −TR )+
=
.
dz
3H(z)(1 + z)me c 1 + fHe + xe
(1 + z)
(5)
Equation (5) is for the matter temperature, which we
recommend to use in the entire calculation above, due to
the small but important effect resulting from the difference between TM and TR at low redshift. Below we list
all constants and parameters which appear in the above
equations.
The constants are Boltzmann’s constant k, Planck’s constant h, the speed of light c, Thomson scattering cross
section σT , the electron mass me , and the radiation constant aR . The three independent variables are proton fraction xp = np /nH , singly ionized helium fraction xHeII =
nHeII /nH , and matter temperature TM . The dependent
variable is the electron fraction xe = ne /nH = xp + xHeII .
Here n refers to number density, and nH is the total hydrogen number density.
Turning to the atomic data, the H Ly α rest wavelength is λH2p = 121.5682 nm. The H 2s–1s frequency
νH2s = c/λH2p , is close enough to Ly α that the same averaged wavelength value can be used. The He I 21 p–11 s
wavelength is λHeI21 p = 58.4334 nm. Note that the He I
21 s–11 s frequency νHeI2s = c/60.1404 nm. Unlike for H,
the separation of He I 21 p and 21 s is large enough that
λHe21 p and λHe21 s must be distinguished, hence the extra
exponential term in equation (2) over equation (1), with
νHeI21 p21 s = νHeI21 p − νHeI21 s ≡ νps (where we define this
last notation to save space). The H 2s–1s two photon
rate is ΛH = 8.22458 s−1 (Goldman, 1989), while the He I
21 s–11 s two photon rate is ΛHe = 51.3 s−1 (Drake et al.
1969).
Further, αH is the Case B recombination coefficient
for H, from Hummer (1994), and fitted by Péquignot et
al. (1991), with a = 4.309, b = −0.6166, c = 0.6703,
d = 0.5300 and t = TM /104 K. The factor F is 1.14, and allows equation (1) to agree with our multi-level calculation
by speeding up recombination. Note that it also enters into
the coefficient β via α as described below. αHe is the Case
B He I recombination coefficient for singlets, from Hummer and Storey (1998). The parameters are q = 10−16.744 ,
p = 0.711, T1 = 105.114 K, and T2 fixed arbitrarily at
3 K. This fit is good to < 0.1% over the relevant temperature range (4,000–10,000 K), and still fairly accurate over a
much wider range of temperatures. The β are photoionization coefficients and are calculated from the recombination
coefficients by: β = α(2πme k TM /h2 )3/2 exp(−hν2s /kTM ).
Here ν2s and α are different for H and He I. Note that TM
and ν2s are used here, and that incorrectly using TR or ν2p
will cause a small but important difference for high baryon
models.
The cosmological parameters are the redshift z, Hubble
factor H(z), the cosmological redshifting of H Lyα photons
KH ≡ λ3H2p /(8πH(z)), the cosmological redshifting of He I
21 p–11 s photons KHeI ≡ λ3HeI 1 /(8πH(z)), and the radi2 p
ation temperature TR = T0 (1 + z). The primordial He
abundance was taken to be YP = 0.24 by mass (Schramm
& Turner, 1998), and the present-day CMB temperature
T0 to be 2.728 K (the central value determined by the FIRAS experiment, Fixsen et al. 1996).

A word of caution about the numerical computation.
The equations are generally stiff, and so there are two
approaches which can be taken. One is to use an integrator appropriate for stiff sets of equations, the other is to
use Saha equilibrium values of xe to carry the integrations
through the stiffest regimes (the beginning of each recombination epoch). The former case is not much slower, and
certainly will work for arbitrary cosmology. For the latter
case some experimentation may be necessary in order to
efficiently choose the redshift to start and finish the Saha
approximation for particular cosmologies, and then it may
be faster.
For He II it is sufficient to use the relevant Saha equation:
(xe − 1 − fHe )xe
(2πme kT )3/2 −χHeII /kT
=
e
.
1 + 2fHe − xe
h3 nH

(6)

For the non-stiff integrator approach, this can be switched
on at say z > 5,000. Then there will be a period when
He is all singly ionized, and after say z = 3500 the Saha
equation for He I needs to be switched on:
(2πme kT )3/2 −χHeI /kT
(xe − 1)xe
=4
e
.
1 + fHe − xe
h3 nH

(7)

This can be used until say 1% of the He I has recombined,
at which point the coupled ODEs can be solved using a
routine such as dverk (Hull et al., 1976). It is also worth
fixing the hydrogen to be fully ionized until some redshift,
then using Saha for H to get recombination started. It
may also save some integration time if He recombination
is switched off once the fraction of neutral He has fallen
below some small number.
We found that in fact it was not necessary to evolve the
H and He equations simultaneously, at least for cosmologies which we checked in detail. It appears to be sufficient
to evolve each separately, even in cases where there is a
small overlap in the recombination epochs. However, there
is little computational expense in solving the 3 ODEs simultaneously, and so that is what we recommend.
4. CONCLUSION

We have presented the basic physics behind our improved recombination calculation which shows a significantly delayed He I recombination and a 10% lower residual xe at freezeout compared to previous calculations. We
present a set of equations to reproduce our work, which
are modified versions of those previously used because our
new, detailed calculation agrees very well with the results
of the standard calculation. This underscores the tremendous achievement of Peebles, Zel’dovich and colleagues in
so fully understanding cosmic recombination 30 years ago.
However, the goal of modern cosmology is to determine
the cosmological parameters to an unprecedented level of
precision, and in order to do so it is now necessary to understand very basic things, like recombination, much more
accurately.
We would like to thank George Rybicki, Ian
Dell’Antonio, Avi Loeb and Han Uitenbroek for many useful conversations. Also David Hummer and Alex Dalgarno
for discussions on the atomic physics, and Jim Peebles for

Seager, Sasselov & Scott
discussions on several aspects of this work. We thank Martin White, Wayne Hu and Uroš Seljak for insisting on this
Letter, and the referee for helpful comments. DS is sup-

5

ported by the Canadian Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council.

REFERENCES
Drake, G. W. F., Victor, G. A., & Dalgarno, A. 1969, Phys. Rev.,
180, 25
Fixsen, D. J., Cheng, E. S., Gales, J. M., Mather, J. C., Shafer, R.
A. & Wright, E. L. 1996, ApJ, 473, 576
Goldman, S. P. 1989, Phys. Rev. A, 40, 1185
Hu, W., Scott, D., Sugiyama, N., & White, M. 1995, Phys. Rev. D,
52, 5498
Hull, T. E., Enright, W. H., & Jackson, K. R. 1976,
http://www.cs.toronto.edu/NA/dverk.f.gz
Hummer, D. G. 1994, MNRAS, 268, 109
Hummer, D. G., & Storey, D. J. 1998, MNRAS, 297, 1073
Matsuda, T., Sato, H. & Takeda, H. 1971, Prog. Theor. Phys., 46,
416

Peebles, P. J. E. 1968, ApJ, 153, 1
Peebles, P. J. E. 1993, Principles of Physical Cosmology (Princeton
University Press: Princeton), chapter 6
Péquignot, D., Petitjean, P., & Boisson, C. 1991, A&A, 251, 680
Schramm, D. N., & Turner, M. S. 1998, Rev. Mod. Phys., 70, 318
Seager, S., Sasselov, D. D., & Scott, D. 1999, submitted to ApJ
(Paper I)
Seljak, U., & Zaldarriaga, M. 1996, ApJ, 463, 1
Stancil et al., in preparation
Zaldarriaga, M., Spergel, D. N., & Seljak, U. 1997, ApJ, 488, 1
Zel’dovich, Ya. B., Kurt, V. G., & Sunyaev, R. A. 1968, Zh. Eksp.
Teoret. Fiz., 55, 278. English transl., 1969, Sov. Phys. JETP, 28,
146

