24
Going back to the general case (93), it is similarly
convenient to rewrite it as follows (Kos et al., 2014a).
We introduce the functions
ij,kl
F±,∆,`
(z, z̄) = ((1 − z)(1 − z̄))

± (z z̄)

∆k +∆j
2

∆k +∆j
2

∆ ,∆kl

ij
g∆,`

∆ ,∆kl

ij
g∆,`

(z, z̄)

(1 − z, 1 − z̄) ,

(96)

which are symmetric/antisymmetric under z → 1 − z,
z̄ → 1 − z̄. We then take the sums and differences of (93)
with the same equation with z, z̄ replaced by 1 − z, 1 − z̄.
Then (93) is equivalent to the pair of equations:
X
O

12,34
(z, z̄)
λ12O λ34O F∓,∆
O ,`O

±

X
O0

32,14
λ32O0 λ14O0 F∓,∆
(z, z̄) = 0 . (97)
O 0 ,`O 0

If all operators are equal, the lower sign case is trivial,
and the upper sign reduces to the single correlator
crossing relation (94).
Crossing relations can be imposed at any point z, z̄
where both the s- and t-channels converge. From the
discussion in Sec. III.F.2, this is the plane of all complex
z minus cuts along (1, +∞) where the s-channel diverges
and (−∞, 0) where the t-channel diverges. As we will see
in Sec. IV.A, the standard choice in numerical studies is
to impose crossing in a Taylor expansion around the point
z = z̄ = 1/2, which is well inside this region.
There is also a third u-channel OPE (13)-(24). The
u-channel is typically not considered in the numerical
bootstrap, because it is not convergent at z = z̄ =
1/2.78 For 4 identical external scalars, the u-channel
is automatically satisfied if the s-t channel crossing
relation holds (Poland and Simmons-Duffin, 2011).
For nonidentical external operators, the u-channel is
important. To impose the u-channel crossing relation,
one changes the conformal frame by interchanging
the positions of operators 1 and 2 (Rattazzi et al.,
2011a). The u-channel in the original frame becomes the
t-channel in the new frame, and crossing can be imposed
around z = z̄ = 1/2. The s-channel CPW decomposition
in the new frame only differs by signs of all odd-spin
terms because of (25).
In the case when the CFT has a global symmetry G,
the crossing relations were formalized in Rattazzi et al.
(2011a). Consider a 4pt function of scalar operators
transforming in G representations πi . The exchanged
operators Oπ then transform in representations π
appearing in the tensor product decompositions of πi ⊗πj .
Each term in the s- and t-channel CPW decompositions

78 Although

it can be considered when crossing relations are
analyzed around another point, e.g. u = v = 1 (Li, 2017).

comes multiplied with a tensor structure obtained by
contracting two 3pt G-invariant tensors, as described in
~π in the
Sec. III.G. We can represent it by a vector V
space of 4pt G-invariant tensors (π1 ⊗ π2 ⊗ π3 ⊗ π4 )G .
(Anti)symmetrizing under z → 1 − z, z̄ → 1 − z̄,
the crossing relation takes form (97), with every term
~π . It is thus a
multiplied by the corresponding vector V
constraint in the space of vector functions. As an explicit
example, crossing relations of 4pt functions hφa φb φc φf i
and hφa φ†b φc φ†f i for φa a fundamental of SO(N ) or
SU (N ) were found in Rattazzi et al. (2011a).
A similar vector structure arises when analyzing 4pt
functions of operators with Lorentz spin, with the
(c)
conformally invariant 4pt tensors T4 in (78) playing the
role of the G-invariant 4pt tensors in the case of global
symmetry. General crossing relations involving both
global symmetry and Lorentz indices were formalized in
Kos et al. (2014a).

1. Explicit solutions to crossing

Many nontrivial 2d CFTs have exact solutions
(e.g. the minimal models), and the conformal block
decompositions of their 4pt functions provide explicit
solutions to crossing relations. Here we will discuss a
few explicit solutions to crossing known in d > 2. Their
existence is important, even though as we will see they
come from theories which are not physically the most
interesting ones. For example, it is common to check the
numerical algorithms against the known explicit solutions
to exclude coding errors, before proceeding to study more
physically interesting solutions numerically.
Essentially all explicit solutions in d > 2 are provided
by scale-invariant “gaussian theories”, i.e. theories
coming from a quadratic action written in terms
of a fundamental field and not having any massive
parameter.79 The correlation functions of such theories
are generated by Wick’s theorem from the basic 2pt
function of the fundamental field. The simplest examples
are the massless free scalar and massless free fermion
theory, which are conformally invariant in any d, and the
free abelian gauge theory, conformally invariant in d = 4.
In 4d, explicit conformal block decompositions of 4pt
scalar correlation functions hOOOOi in these theories
2
(for O = φ, φ2 , ψ̄ψ, Fµν
) were obtained by Dolan and
Osborn (2001b).

79 The

only exceptions known to us are the “fishnet theories”
— nonunitary bi-scalar field theories integrable in the large-N
limit (Gürdoğan and Kazakov, 2016).
Recently some
conformally-invariant 4pt functions and their conformal block
decompositions were computed in such theories in 4d (Grabner
et al., 2018), and in their nonlocal generalizations to arbitrary d
(Kazakov and Olivucci, 2018).

25
Another class of gaussian theories are mean
field theories (MFTs), also called generalized free
fields (Heemskerk et al., 2009), (El-Showk and
Papadodimas, 2012, section 4). Correlation functions
in these theories have the same disconnected structure
generated by Wick’s theorem as in the above mentioned
free theories. The only difference is that the scaling
dimension of the fundamental field, fixed to a particular
value in free theories, becomes a free parameter in
MFT.80 For example, we can consider the MFT of a
scalar field φ of arbitrary dimension ∆φ . Such a MFT is
unitary as long as ∆φ satisfies the unitarity bound, and
reduces to the free massless scalar for ∆φ = (d − 2)/2.
Just like for the usual free theories, the full space of
operators in MFTs can be classified by considering
normal-ordered products of the fundamental field and
its derivatives.81 For example there is an operator φ2
which has dimension 2∆φ .
Although relatively trivial and nonlocal, MFTs satisfy
most CFT axioms (except for for the existence of a local
stress tensor). As we will see below, they frequently fall
inside regions allowed by the bootstrap bounds, so it
helps to be familiar with them. Explicit conformal block
decompositions of MFT 4pt functions containing scalars
were obtained by Heemskerk et al. (2009) for d = 2, 4
and by Fitzpatrick and Kaplan (2012) in general d.
IV. NUMERICAL METHODS
A. Convex optimization and linear programming

The CFT crossing relations describe a continuously
infinite number of constraints on the CFT data
parametrized by the cross ratios. In order to study the
crossing relations numerically one must discretize this
set of constraints. Starting with Rattazzi et al. (2008),
the common approach adopted in numerical studies is
to Taylor expand the crossing relations around a point
in cross-ratio space, typically taken to be the symmetric
configuration u = v = 1/4 or equivalently z = z̄ = 1/2.
If one takes derivatives only up to a certain order Λ, then
one obtains a finite set of constraints.
Before proceeding, let us highlight that a number of
other choices could be made here, e.g. evaluating the
crossing equations at different values of the cross ratios,
Taylor expanding around other points, integrating the

crossing equations, etc.82 Here we focus on the approach
of Taylor expanding around the symmetric configuration
since it works well in practice and is the most common
approach in the literature. One justification for this
choice of the expansion point is that it makes both the
direct and the crossed channel in the conformal block
expansion to converge maximally fast (Pappadopulo
et al., 2012). However, it is by no means obvious that it is
the most efficient way to discretize the crossing relations.
In the case of a single 4pt function of identical scalars
hσσσσi, the resulting constraints take the form
X
∆σ
0=
λ2σσO F~∆
,
(98)
O ,`O
O

∆σ
where F~∆
can be thought of as a vector with
O ,`O
components
mn

∆σ
∆σ
= ∂zm ∂z̄n F∆
F~∆
(z, z̄) z=z̄=1/2 , (99)
O ,`O
O ,`O

where we take derivatives of the functions (95) and we
keep components up to a cutoff m + n ⩽ Λ.83 This
computation will thus involve derivatives of conformal
blocks up to some finite order.
∆σ
Computing the vectors F~∆,`
constitutes a nontrivial
preliminary step for analyzing Eq. (98). This step
is handled starting from one of the many exact or
approximate expressions for conformal blocks discussed
in Sec. III.F. The state-of-the-art approach is to use the
rational approximation, see Sec. III.F.5, where available
software packages are also described. This approach
gives rise to approximate expressions which reproduce
∆σ
F~∆,`
with any desired precision. These expressions
can be efficiently evaluated “on the fly”, as needed
in the continuous simplex algorithm from Sec. IV.A.1.
They can also be used as an input to the semidefinite
programming methods described in Sec. IV.B.
We now proceed to describe strategies on how to decide
if Eq. (98) has solutions, i.e. if there exists some choice
of the exchanged CFT spectrum {∆O , `O } and OPE
coefficients λσσO which makes it satisfied. First, let us
remark that Eq. (98) is a set of linear equations in λ2σσO .
This is at the heart of both the linear programming
approaches described in this subsection as well as the
extremal functional and truncation methods described
below. In particular, if one has a candidate CFT
spectrum for operators appearing in σ × σ but does not
know the OPE coefficients, one can straightforwardly
solve a linear algebra problem to find the coefficients.

80 This

structure naturally emerges in large-N CFTs as a
consequence of large-N factorization.
This is particularly
transparent in CFTs with holographic duals, since MFT
correlation functions are generated by free massive fields in
AdSd+1 and the arbitrary scaling dimension is determined by
the mass.
81 The OPE φ × φ contains only operators of the schematic form
φ(∂ 2 )n ∂ ` φ, which have spin ` and dimension 2∆φ + 2n + `.

82 Some of these alternative ideas have been explored by Hogervorst

and Rychkov (2013, section 4.2), Castedo Echeverri et al.
(2016b), Mazac (2017), Li (2017), and Mazac and Paulos (2018).
83 Since the functions (95) are odd under z → 1 − z, z̄ → 1 − z,
only components with m + n odd lead to nontrivial equations.

