                                                                                                                           IPPP/10/67; DCPT/10/134




                                                         Spectroscopy as a test of Coulomb’s law
                                                                                       –
                                                                          A probe of the hidden sector

                                                                              Joerg Jaeckel and Sabyasachi Roy

                                                                          Institute for Particle Physics Phenomenology,
                                                                     Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom




arXiv:1008.3536v2 [hep-ph] 2 Sep 2010
                                                                                               Abstract
                                                  High precision spectroscopy can provide a sensitive tool to test Coulomb’s law on atomic
                                                  length scales. This can then be used to constrain particles such as extra “hidden” photons
                                                  or minicharged particles that are predicted in many extensions of the standard model,
                                                  and which cause small deviations from Coulomb’s law. In this paper we use a variety
                                                  of transitions in atomic hydrogen, hydrogenic ions, and exotic atoms to probe Coulomb’s
                                                  law. This extends the region of pure Coulomb’s law tests to larger masses. For hidden
                                                  photons and minicharged particles this region is already tested by other astrophysical and
                                                  laboratory probes. However, future tests of true muonium and muonic atoms are likely to
                                                  probe new parameter space and therefore have good discovery potential for new physics.
                                                  Finally, we investigate whether the discrepancy between the theoretical calculation of the
                                                              F =2
                                                  2sF =1
                                                    1/2 − 2p3/2 transition in muonic hydrogen and its recent experimental measurement at
                                                  PSI can be explained by the existence of a hidden photon. This explanation is ruled out by
                                                  measurements of the Lamb shift in ordinary hydrogen.


                                        1        Introduction
                                        Precision spectroscopy has a long standing record of providing insights into fundamental physics.
                                        In particular, the discrete nature of spectral lines has led to the discovery of quantum mechanics
                                        and the discovery of the Lamb shift was one of the first confirmations of quantum electrody-
                                        namics. With its ever increasing precision, spectroscopy can continue to provide a powerful
                                        probe of new physics.
                                            Concretely, in this paper we want to use spectroscopy to test Coulomb’s law with high
                                        precision on atomic length scales [1–3]. This in turn allows us to obtain constraints on new
                                        particles such as hidden photons [1, 4, 5] or minicharged particles [6, 7] which arise naturally in
                                        a variety of extensions of the standard model [4, 8–13] (see also [14] for a review)1 .
                                            At this point let us note that tests of Coulomb’s law are an especially clean and model
                                        independent probe of such new particles as the sensitivity does not depend on the stability of
                                        the particles or the presence/absence of certain decay channels. To illustrate this point, let
                                        us take fixed target experiments (see, e.g. [16]) as an example. These experiments typically
                                        rely on a displaced vertex and therefore on a relatively long decay length of a hidden photon
                                        produced in electron-nucleus collision. Now, let us assume that there is also matter charged
                                        under the hidden U(1) (i.e., it couples directly to the B µ field in Eq. (2.1)). If this additional
                                        “hidden matter” is lighter than mγ ′ /2, the hidden photon decays quickly into a pair of these
                                            1
                                                Spectroscopy can even be useful for constraining Unparticles (see e.g. [15]).


                                                                                                    1
particles, dramatically shortening the decay length and possibly invalidating the bound. Tests
of Coulomb’s law therefore provide interesting complementary information.
    In the following our prime example will be hidden photons which (as we will briefly recall
below) cause a deviation of Coulomb’s law of the form
                                                Zα
                                    V (r) = −      (1 + e−mγ′ r χ2 )                        (1.1)
                                                 r
where mγ ′ is the mass of the hidden photon and χ is a so-called kinetic mixing [8]. Independent
of this particle interpretation, our bounds can also be taken as a parametrisation of a deviation
from Coulomb’s law by a Yukawa type potential with a characteristic length scale ∼ 1/mγ ′ .
The length scale of ordinary atoms are typically of the order of the Bohr radius and correspond
to masses of the order of keV. Exotic atoms, such as muonic hydrogen where the electron is
replaced by a muon are even smaller, being most sensitive to masses of order MeV or above.
To complement existing spectroscopic tests [1–3] we will pay particular attention to the latter
regime.
    The paper is set up as follows. In the next section we will briefly recall how new particles
can modify Coulomb’s law focusing on our main example, the hidden photon. Minicharged
particles are discussed in App. A. In section 3 we give a detailed explanation of the method we
use to constrain hidden photons, including a discussion of how to obtain the proper behaviour
for small (and large) hidden photon masses (section 3.1.2). In section 4 we apply this method
to construct bounds from a variety of atomic spectra. Sections 4.1 and 4.2 deal with ordinary
hydrogenic atoms, whereas sections 4.3, 4.4, and 4.5 deal with exotic atoms. Particularly inter-
esting speculative bounds are calculated for true muonium and muonic hydrogen. In sections
4.4.2 and 4.5 we show that future measurements of true muonium and muonic atoms promise
significant discovery potential for new physics. Finally, in section 5 we discuss whether the
hidden photon can be used to explain an anomaly recently observed in muonic hydrogen. We
conclude in section 6.


2    Hidden photons and deviations from Coulomb’s law
Hidden photons can interact with the photon via a so-called kinetic mixing [4, 8],
                         1          1          χ          1
                    L = − Fµν F µν − Bµν B µν + Bµν F µν + m2γ ′ Bµ B µ                     (2.1)
                         4          4          2          2
where Fµν and Bµν are the photon (Aν ) and hidden photon (B ν ) field strengths. Both Fµν
and Bµν are individually gauge invariant, so the third mixing term is allowed. Since the mixing
term has a mass dimension of 4, the kinetic mixing parameter χ has a mass dimension of zero
and therefore is a renormalisable coupling. This means that it is not suppressed by any higher
mass scales and should be observable (even if small) at lower energies. We also note the fourth
term which indicates that the hidden photon has a non zero mass. From the point of view of
low energy effective theory, χ and mγ ′ are simply free parameters which are not constrained by
any particular physical mechanism. However, extensions of the standard model based on, for
example, string theory predict values in the range [9, 12, 13],

                                         10−12 . χ . 10−3 .                                 (2.2)

A summary of the current bounds on the parameter χ can be found in Fig. 1.
   The kinetic mixing term in Eq. (2.1) causes a tree level insertion to the photon propagator as
shown in Fig. 2. An important physical implication of this is the addition of a new Yukawa-type
term to the Coulomb potential,
                                  Zα
                      V (r) = −      (1 + e−mγ′ r χ2 ) ≡ VCoulomb (r) + δV (r),             (2.3)
                                   r

                                                   2
Figure 1: Summary of the current bounds on hidden photons (compilation from [14,17] updated
with [2, 3]). We note that in addition to the bound labelled “Coulomb”, the bounds labelled
“Earth”, “Jupiter” and “Rydberg” also originate from tests of Coulomb’s law. The best bounds
that we derive from atomic spectra are represented by the black lines. The dashed black line is
from the Lamb shift in atomic hydrogen. The dotted black line is a combined bound from the
1s1/2 − 2s1/2 and 2s1/2 − 8s1/2 transitions in atomic hydrogen. The solid black line is the bound
obtained from the Lamb shift in hydrogen-like helium ions. The light orange areas correspond
to regions suggested by astrophysical and cosmological puzzles [18–22]. The brown region is
derived from measurements of the Rydberg constant, and represents bounds already obtained
from atomic spectra [1–3].




                                                        γ

                                      γ                 γ′

                                                        γ


Figure 2: Feynman diagrams for the potential between two charged particles, Eq. (2.3). In
particular the second diagram gives the hidden photon contribution to the interaction between
two charged particles, leading to a modification of Coulomb’s law.




                                               3
where Z is the charge of the massive central particle which causes the potential and α is the
fine structure constant.
    Note the following limits,

    • mγ ′ → 0:
      Here the exponential term tends to unity and we recover the original Coulomb potential
      up to a factor (1 + χ2 ). This can be absorbed in the definition of α, making it unobserv-
      able. Physically this is sensible, since in the zero mass limit our hidden photon becomes
      indistinguishable from the standard model photon, at least as far as the electromagnetic
      force is concerned. Therefore no physical effects, such as a deviation from Coulomb’s law,
      should be observable.

    • mγ ′ → ∞:
      Here the second exponential term dies off and leaves us with the original Coulomb po-
      tential. Again this makes sense, since in the large mass limit the hidden photon becomes
      impossible to excite as a virtual particle and therefore should not contribute to the elec-
      tromagnetic force.

    • Intermediate mγ ′ :
      We expect non zero deviations from Coulomb’s law in this region. In particular, we will
      find that the most significant deviation occurs for mγ ′ ∼ l10 where l0 is the length scale of
      the relevant physical process.

    Therefore any constraints on hidden photons based on deviations from Coulomb’s law will
be strongest around mγ ′ ∼ l10 and drop off on either side in the low and high mass limits. Here,
l0 will be given by the length scale of the atom in question. There exist a range of different
atomic systems, including ordinary hydrogen, muonic atoms, and more exotic atoms. Therefore
we can test a wide range of masses, from keV to larger than MeV.


3    Obtaining constraints using atomic spectra
To obtain our constraints we adapt the method presented in Ref. [6], where the measurement
of the Lamb shift is used to derive a bound on minicharged particles.
    At first order in perturbation theory the energy shift of a state |ψn i is given by

                             δEn(1) = hψn | H ′ | ψn i = hψn | δV | ψn i                       (3.1)

where the |ψn i are taken to be the 0th order wave functions. For this to be a good approximation
the energy shift should be small. This is consistent with what we expect, since so far no large
deviations from the standard QED predictions have been observed. If the standard prediction
                                                                                (1)
and the experimentally measured values agree, then we can impose that δEn must be smaller
than the uncertainty in the transition. This will result in a bound on δV .
    Let us briefly comment on some points relating to these uncertainties that will be relevant
for our discussion.

    • “Same n” and “different n” transitions
      We can write the theoretical energy of an arbitrary state as;
                                                   D,R
                                         En,l,j = En,j + Ln,l,j                                (3.2)

      where the first term is the sum of energies from the Dirac equation plus recoil corrections
      (effectively the 0th order energy). The second term is the Lamb shift (defined as any
      contribution which separates states of the same n,j).


                                                 4
  The first term is proportional to the Rydberg constant R∞ and therefore will have an
  uncertainty of approximately 10−10 eV [23]. This means that any transitions between
  states of different n in atomic hydrogen will have a theoretical error contribution of around
  10−10 eV from R∞ .
  The situation is worse in exotic atoms, as the effective Rydberg constant is modified by a
  factor proportional to the reduced masses µH , µexotic of atomic hydrogen and the exotic
  atom respectively,
                                              µexotic
                                      Ref f =         R∞ .                             (3.3)
                                                µH
  So that in, for example, muonic hydrogen, there would be a fractional uncertainty of
  around 10−7 due to the mass of the muon, which would cause an overall uncertainty of at
  least 10−4 eV.
  Note that transitions between same n states do not have a 0th order energy and are
  limited only by uncertainties in the Lamb shifts of the states.

• Definition of “uncertainty”

  To be very conservative when forming bounds, we estimate the total uncertainty of a
  transition by adding together the absolute values of the theoretical and experimental
  errors, i.e. for a given measurement M we use

                                 ∆M = |∆M (th)| + |∆M (exp)|                               (3.4)

  The theoretical contribution to ∆M will come mainly from uncertainties in the finite
  nuclear size, with an additional contribution from the Rydberg constant in the case of
  different n transitions. For most of the atoms we consider, data for the finite nuclear size is
  coherent. For example the hydrogenlike helium ion has three different electron scattering
  determinations, and also a muonic helium ion determination, of the alpha particle charge
  radius. These values all agree within 1 σ [24], meaning that to a good approximation we
  can calculate the theoretical value for a transition by assuming one particular value of the
  nuclear radius. We can estimate the uncertainty from finite nuclear size effects simply by
  considering the uncertainty in this one value of the nuclear radius. This is indeed what is
  done in theoretical calculations to which we refer, and the corresponding error is included
  in |∆M th |.
  However when we consider atoms with a proton nucleus things become more compli-
  cated. The recent muonic hydrogen determination of rp = 0.84184(67) fm [25] gives us
  the most precise measurement from atomic spectra. This disagrees with our best previous
  atomic spectra determination of rp = 0.8768(69) fm from [23] by around 5 σ. The muonic
  hydrogen extraction also deviates by around 2.5 σ from the best electron scattering de-
  termination of rp = 0.897(18) fm [26]. To be conservative we therefore modify our error
  analysis to take into account the large variation in rp . We do this by adding an additional
  term |∆M (rp )|, accounting for the discrepancies in the rp measurements,

                         ∆M ∗ = |∆M (th)| + |∆M (exp)| + |∆M (rp )|.                       (3.5)

  To leading order the proton radius contribution to a given state is

                                                   2m3o α4 rp2
                                    EN S (rp ) =               δl0 ,                       (3.6)
                                                     3n3
  where mo is the mass of the orbiting particle. In atomic hydrogen mo = me , and in
  muonic hydrogen mo = mµ . We make a rough estimate for |∆M (rp )| by considering

                                             5
        two widely separated values of the proton radius. Denoting rp,µ = 0.84184(67) fm as
        the muonic hydrogen determination, and rp,e = 0.897(18) fm as the electron scattering
        determination, we set

                                    |∆M (rp )| = |EN S (rp,e ) − EN S (rp,µ )|.               (3.7)

        To form bounds we use ∆M ∗ for atoms with a proton nucleus, which in our paper are
        atomic hydrogen and muonic hydrogen. We use ∆M for all other atoms.
        Note that errors quoted in the text will always be at the 1 σ (∼ 68% confidence level).
        However, unless otherwise stated we will consider 2σ errors (∼ 95% confidence level) for
        the bounds produced in the figures. This essentially means that all terms on the right
        hand side of (3.5), (3.4) are multiplied by a factor of 2.

   • Radius of the proton and other nuclei
     As already discussed the (charge) radii of the nuclei are a major source of uncertainty. In
     addition, we have to take care that our determination of the radii is from an independent
     source. For example we can not take a measurement of the Lamb shift in ordinary
     hydrogen to measure both the radius of the proton and put a bound on deviations from
     Coulomb’s law. Two independent measurements are needed. Moreover to avoid even
     partial degeneracies (which tend to weaken the bound in particular at short length scales),
     it is best if the determination of the radius is obtained at relatively high momentum
     transfer, corresponding to a short length scale. For this reason we will mainly use the
     values obtained from electron scattering data.

3.1     Searching for deviations from Coulomb’s law
3.1.1     Naive bounds
Let us briefly demonstrate how this method works by using the Lamb shift, i.e. the 2s1/2 −2p1/2
transition in atomic hydrogen to constrain the hidden photon. We use δV given by Eq. (2.3).
   For this case Eq. (3.1) evaluates,

                                                                            α a m2γ ′
                          Z ∞
                                dr r 2 δV (r) R20
                                              2         2
                                                            (r) = −χ2
                                                               
                   δE =                           (r) − R21                               .   (3.8)
                          0                                              2(1 + amγ ′ )4

where we have used the normalised radial hydrogen wave functions Rnℓ given by
                    1    1      ρ                         1     1
         R20 (r) = √     3/2
                             1 −    exp(−ρ/2) , R21 (r) = √      3/2
                                                                     ρ exp(−ρ/2)              (3.9)
                     2 a         2                         2 6 a

and where ρ = r/a and a−1 = αme .
    We use an experimental uncertainty of 3 kHz [27] and theoretical uncertainty of 6 kHz [28],
as well as a contribution of 17 kHz from |∆M (rp )| (3.7). We use (3.5) to get ∆M ∗ = 10−10 eV
at the 1 σ level. Note that the (blue) curve for the 2s1/2 − 2p1/2 transition (Fig. 3) is at the 2
σ level.
    This has the correct shape; the bound dies off the in the limits mγ ′ → 0 and mγ ′ → ∞, and
is strongest at mγ ′ ∼ a1 , where the Bohr radius a is the typical length scale involved.
    We can do the same for the 1s1/2 − 2s1/2 transition in atomic hydrogen. The experimental
value has a relative uncertainty 2.8 × 10−14 and represents the most precise measurement of
atomic hydrogen [29]. However, the bounds are limited by a much larger theoretical uncertainty.
As already discussed above there are uncertainties of around 10−10 eV from the Rydberg con-
stant as well as a similar contribution from the Lamb shifts of the states [30]. We also need to
add the |∆M (rp )| contribution of ∼ 7 × 10−10 eV to get ∆M ∗ = 1 × 10−9 eV at the 1 σ level.


                                                     6
Figure 3: The blue curve denotes the bound on hidden photons obtained from the 2s1/2 − 2p1/2
transition in atomic hydrogen. We use a conservative error of ∆M ∗ = 2 × 10−10 eV at the 2
σ level where ∆M ∗ is defined in (3.5). Note that for same n transitions χ dies off correctly
for both small and large mγ ′ . The red curve shows the naive bound from the 1s1/2 − 2s1/2
transition in atomic hydrogen. It has an incorrect behaviour at small mγ ′ . The green curve
gives the correct bound obtained by combining the 1s1/2 −2s1/2 with the 2s1/2 −8s1/2 transition,
according to the procedure described in Sect. 3.1.2. The green and blue bounds will turn out
to be the best ones that we can derive from atomic spectra, and are combined together in Fig.
1. For comparison we depict earlier bounds on hidden photons as the colour filled regions.
Those corresponding to pure tests of Coulomb’s law (also obtained from atomic spectra) are
highlighted in brown [1–3]. The remaining white region corresponds to unexplored parameter
space.



   For the first order energy shift we have
                         Z ∞
                                                       2
                             dr r 2 δV (r) R20
                                           2                
                δE =                           (r) − R10 (r)                              (3.10)
                          0
                                                                                  
                          2    12 + amγ ′ (60 + amγ ′ (87 + 14amγ ′ (4 + amγ ′ )))
                     = χ α                                                           ,
                                           4a(1 + amγ ′ )4 (2 + amγ ′ )2

where
                                                   2
                                      R10 (r) =          exp(−ρ).                         (3.11)
                                                  a3/2
    The result is shown in Fig. 3 as the red curve. This bound does not have the correct drop
off for small masses. We can understand why by looking at δV (r) in Eq. (2.3), which dies
off at large masses but grows at small masses. Therefore we get a bound which saturates at
small masses, which is not physically correct. This is simply an artefact of the splitting of
the potential that we have chosen to set up our perturbation theory. At small masses our
perturbation reduces to a term that has the form of a Coulomb potential, but with an extra
factor (1 + χ2 ). This effectively increases the strength of the electromagnetic coupling and
therefore the energy difference between the two states. In other words we have forgotten to
properly (re-)normalise the coupling α, i.e. we have not absorbed the factor (1 + χ2 ) into our
definition of α. In the following we will show explicitly how this can be remedied.
    One might wonder why this problem does not affect the Lamb shift bound. The reason
is simply that for a perfect Coulomb’s law the energies of 2s1/2 and the 2p1/2 are degenerate.
Therefore, adding a term of the Coulomb’s law form does not produce an energy shift between
the two states at lowest order. This is true for all same n transitions.



                                                   7
3.1.2   Bounds including a proper renormalisation of α
As we have seen above, the problem is that for both mγ ′ → ∞ and mγ ′ → 0 the potential
Eq. (2.3) has exactly the 1/r behaviour of a Coulomb potential. However the coupling constant
differs by a factor (1 + χ2 ). α becomes a function of χ and mγ ′ , i.e the hidden photon alters
the coupling constant itself. In that sense α becomes an unknown quantity that needs to be
fixed by experiment. Since we now have two unknowns, χ and α, we need two measurements to
solve for them (of course the same strategy also works if we allow other/additional parameters
to vary). We will briefly sketch how we do this.
    Let us assume we have two observables M1 and M2 . Theoretically these are functions of α,
  2
χ and mγ ′ . To keep the notation transparent we will suppress the dependence on mγ ′ in the
following. Therefore, we have M1 (α, χ2 ) and M2 (α, χ2 ).
    Now we have two measurements and results are often quoted in the form

                                M1 |exp − M1 |th = δM1 ± ∆M1 ,                                  (3.12)
                                M2 |exp − M2 |th = δM2 ± ∆M2 ,                                  (3.13)

without considering a hidden photon. Therefore, in our setup this means

                              M1 |exp − M1 (α0 , 0) = δM1 ± ∆M1 ,                               (3.14)
                              M2 |exp − M2 (α0 , 0) = δM2 ± ∆M2 ,                               (3.15)

with some value α0 such that both δM1 and δM2 are small. If α0 can be chosen that δM1 and
δM2 are compatible with 0 within the errors, then the measurements are consistent with the
standard model and no hidden photon is required.
   Now, what happens if we include a hidden photon? As we are interested in small corrections,
we can expand about (α, χ) = (α0 , 0). Hence we obtain

                  ∂M1                    ∂M1
                      |α=α0 ,χ2 =0 δα +      |      2   χ2 = δM1 ± ∆M1 ,                        (3.16)
                   ∂α                    ∂χ2 α=α0 ,χ =0
                   ∂M2                    ∂M2
                       |α=α0 ,χ2 =0 δα +       |     2   χ2 = δM2 ± ∆M2 .                       (3.17)
                    ∂α                    ∂χ2 α=α0 ,χ =0
In matrix notation this linear system of equations reads,
                                                        !
                 ∂M1                 ∂M1
                     |                    |
                                                                          
                  ∂α  α=α  0 ,χ 2 =0
                                     ∂χ 2  α=α0 ,χ 2 =0    δα     δM1 ± ∆M1
                 ∂M2                                           =                                (3.18)
                  ∂α |α=α0 ,χ2 =0
                                     ∂M2
                                     ∂χ2 |α=α0 ,χ2 =0
                                                           χ2     δM2 ± ∆M2

which can be easily solved
                                                                    !−1 
                              ∂M1                ∂M1
                               ∂α |α=α0 ,χ2 =0   ∂χ2 |α=α0 ,χ2 =0
                                                                                      
                 δα                                                         δM1 ± ∆M1
                          =                                                                 .   (3.19)
                 χ2           ∂M2
                               ∂α |α=α0 ,χ2 =0
                                                 ∂M2
                                                     |
                                                 ∂χ2 α=α0 ,χ2 =0
                                                                            δM2 ± ∆M2

From this we can directly read off the allowed values of χ2 .
   For the cases of interest to us it is typically sufficient to determine the derivatives ∂Mi /∂α,
∂Mi /∂χ2 to lowest order in α and χ2 . For example, in the previous subsection we have used first
order perturbation theory, and determined the shift in energy to be δE = χ2 f (mγ ′ ), accordingly
∂E/∂χ2 = f (mγ ′ ).
   Let us confirm that this procedure corrects the behaviour of bounds for small m2γ ′ . We
consider a simple example where, in absence of hidden photons, both observables behave as
simple power laws, ∼ αn1 and ∼ αn2 , respectively,

                   Mi = Mi |χ2 =0 + δχ2 Mi = ci αni + ci αni χ2 fi (mγ ′ ) + O(χ4 ).            (3.20)

                                                    8
The term in δχ2 Mi is the hidden photon contribution calculated in first order perturbation
theory (3.1) using the potential (2.3). Note that for convenience we have written the correction
with ci and χ2 factored out, with the remaining factor represented by a function fi (mγ ′ ).
    From Eq. (2.3) we can see that δV (r) term dies off at large mγ ′ . Hence the function
fi (mγ ′ ) → 0 as mγ ′ → ∞. However, the perturbation actually grows towards smaller masses,
and fi (mγ ′ ) tends to a constant limit. Before addition of the hidden photon we can write the
Coulomb potential as
                                                      Zα
                                           V0 (r) = −                                      (3.21)
                                                       r
and after the hidden photon is added we can write
                                                      Zα
                                          V (r) = −      (1 + χ2 )                                 (3.22)
                                                       r
where we have taken the limit mγ ′ → 0. Hence the fine structure constant has essentially been
redefined
                                       α → α(1 + χ2 ).                                   (3.23)
   Therefore, for mγ ′ → 0, we have an alternative way to obtain the perturbation: we can
simply insert the redefined α into the unperturbed expression. This yields,

                                  Mi = ci αni + ni ci αni χ2 + O(χ4 ).                             (3.24)

Comparing (3.20) with (3.24) we can see that fi (mγ ′ ) → ni as mγ ′ → 0.
  Inserting (3.20) into our general expression (3.19) we find,
                                               n1 δM2       n2 δM1
                                              M2 (α0 ,0) − M1 (α0 ,0)
                                   χ2 =                                     .                      (3.25)
                                          (n1 f2 (mγ ′ ) − n2 f1 (mγ ′ ))

   If both δMi are consistent with 0 we can obtain a bound on χ2 . To be conservative we
simply add the moduli of the two individual errors,
                                               n1 |∆M2 |
                                                   M2    + n2 |∆M
                                                               M1
                                                                  1|

                                  χ2 ≤                                          .                  (3.26)
                                          |(n1 f2 (mγ ′ ) − n2 f1 (mγ ′ ))|

where |∆M | is defined in (3.4). For transitions in atomic hydrogen and muonic hydrogen we
use |∆M ∗ | defined in (3.5).
   There are two interesting limits2

      • mγ ′ → ∞: Here f1 (mγ ′ ), f2 (mγ ′ ) → 0 so the upper bound on χ2 increases and the bound
                                                                             −(2+2l)
        dies off. Indeed one finds that the functions f (mγ ′ ) decay as mγ ′        at high masses
        where l is the lowest angular momentum value involved in the transition. A 2s − 2p
        transition would have l = 0 and a 3p − 3d transition would have l = 1 etc. Our bounds
        effectively die off as
                                                         (1+l)
                                                   χ ∼ mγ ′ .                                (3.27)
        Therefore, if we use transitions with higher values of l the bounds die off more quickly.

      • mγ ′ → 0: Here f1 (mγ ′ ) → n1 , f2 (mγ ′ ) → n2 so the denominator tends to zero. Again the
        upper limit on χ2 increases and the bound dies off.
  2
    We note, that in the regions where the bounds become very weak and χ = O(0.1 − 1), perturbation theory
breaks down. But these regions are typically excluded anyway.




                                                      9
Overall, we obtain the expected behaviour in the small and large mass limits.
    In Fig. 3 we show the correctly renormalised 1s1/2 − 2s1/2 (green) versus the naive bound
(red). Here, and unless otherwise stated we will take M1 to be the 2s1/2 − 8s1/2 transition
in atomic hydrogen, simply because it is experimentally measured to a high precision of 3 ×
10−11 eV [31]. This is similar to the theoretical error of 4.5×10−11 eV from R∞ and 5×10−11 eV
from the Lamb shift of the 2s1/2 state. Added together with the ∆M (rp ) contribution we get
an overall uncertainty of 2 × 10−10 eV at the 1 σ level.
    The measurements themselves do not need to be from atomic spectra. The same technique
works for any process which is affected by the hidden photon.
    Also note that this renormalisation procedure works trivially for same n transitions. If we
consider just one measurement M , and note that the 0th order energy M0 vanishes,

                                  M = cα2 χ2 f2 (mγ ′ ) + O(χ4 ).                            (3.28)

M ∝ χ2 , so that δα corrections obtained from a second measurement would produce negligible
terms of O(χ4 ). Therefore information from the second measurement is suppressed. This
means that we can form properly renormalised bounds for same n transitions using only one
measurement M and with only one error ∆M .


4     New bounds
4.1   Ordinary atomic hydrogen
The bounds from 2s1/2 − 2p1/2 (blue) and the properly renormalised 1s1/2 − 2s1/2 bound (green)
are shown in Fig. 3. We can see that neither of these penetrate new parameter space for hidden
photons. However, they constitute the best pure tests of Coulomb’s law in this region of
parameter space.
    So far, all of our transitions have involved the 1s1/2 or 2s1/2 states. These have Lamb shifts
with high theoretical uncertainty due to finite nuclear size effects. This is because the 0th order
wavefunctions for s states are non zero at the origin and therefore penetrate the nucleus deeply,
leading to large uncertainties from finite nuclear size effects. This will also be true for s states
with n > 2. States with l > 0 have 0th order wavefunctions which are zero at the origin and
therefore have a small overlap with the nucleus. This means that the Lamb shift uncertainties
are small. Therefore transitions between same n states with l > 0 (for example 3p1/2 − 3d1/2 )
will have extremely small theoretical uncertainties. Unfortunately, these kinds of excited states
are unstable and the experimental measurements have large uncertainties. We also note that
the bounds in these transitions decay more quickly with energy (3.27), causing them to die off
well before they reach unknown parameter space. Therefore, barring significant technological
advances, transitions between states with l > 0 are not very useful for constraining χ.

4.2   Ions with Z > 1
The Lamb shift bound for atomic hydrogen almost penetrates the unknown region, so we can
look at hydrogenic ions with Z>1. The advantage here is that the characteristic energy of
transitions scales as Z, so higher values of Z will move our bounds towards the right and towards
the white region. The disadvantage is the higher theoretical uncertainties involved. This is due
to an increase in the size of the nucleus, as well as a decrease in the Bohr radius (which scales
as Z1 and gives the characteristic length scale of the electron orbit). Unfortunately, this also
causes the electron to penetrate the nucleus more deeply, which leads to greater theoretical
uncertainties from finite nuclear size effects. Our bounds then move upwards and away from
the white region. We can produce bounds for different values of Z to see which of these effects
wins out.


                                                10
Figure 4: χ bounds for the 2s1/2 − 2p1/2 transition in hydrogenic ions with Z = 2 (black),
Z = 15 (green), and Z = 110 (yellow dashed, speculative). At the 2 σ level the uncertainties
are 3 × 10−9 eV [24], 6 × 10−4 eV [32, 33] and 8 eV [33] respectively. We can see that as Z
increases our bounds move away from the white region and therefore become less useful.



    Ref. [24] gives experimental and theoretical errors for the helium ion 2s1/2 − 2p1/2 transition
of 0.16 MHz and 0.2 MHz respectively, giving ∆M = 1.5× 10−9 eV at the 1 σ level. (Remember
that for atoms without a proton nucleus, we do not have to consider large variations in nuclear
size, and therefore use (3.4).) For Z = 15 the experimental [32] and theoretical errors [33]
combine to give a value of ∆M = 3 × 10−4 eV at the 1 sigma level. Finally we can go to the
largest value of Z for which data is available. Ref. [33] gives a theoretical uncertainty for the
Z = 110 transition of ∼ 4 eV. As no experimental data exists we can only derive a speculative
bound. Also, if we were to take into account hypothetical experimental data, then the errors
would increase and the bound would weaken. The estimated sensitivity shown in yellow in
Fig. 4 is therefore an optimistic one, but it is still adequate to demonstrate the trend which we
are trying to identify.
    We can see that as we go to higher values of Z, the increase in uncertainties cause our
bounds to move up and away from the untested region, with our bounds actually becoming less
and less stringent. We should expect this trend to be similar for other possible transitions, for
example 1s1/2 − 2s1/2 .
    Note that due to the increase in the uncertainty of the Lamb shift in atomic hydrogen caused
by the inconsistent values of the proton radius, the bound from hydrogen-like helium is actually
slightly better. As soon as this inconsistency is clarified the trend identified above will probably
hold again.

4.3   Exotic atoms
Exotic atoms have certain advantages over atomic hydrogen:

   • Pure QED systems like muonium and positronium may have smaller fractional theoretical
     uncertainties, as all experimental data is consistent with pointlike leptons [34]. This
     enables us to assume a pointlike effective nucleus, which eliminates the major source of
     theoretical uncertainty.

   • Most exotic atoms have larger reduced masses than atomic hydrogen, shifting our bounds
     to higher energies and towards the untested region.

   Disadvantages:



                                                11
   • Higher mass systems often have greater theoretical uncertainty (leptonic systems ex-
     cluded). This is because the larger reduced mass leads to a smaller Bohr radius of the
     system. Bound state orbits then penetrate the nucleus more deeply, which then leads to
     greater corrections due to finite nuclear size effects.

   • Similarly, hadronic atoms and atoms with Z>1 have larger nuclei than atomic hydrogen,
     again causing larger finite nuclear size effects.

   • Hadronic orbiting particles also interact with the nucleus via the strong interaction,
     which causes huge theoretical and experimental uncertainties.They do not produce strong
     bounds, but for completeness we briefly review them in App. C.

4.4     Leptonic atoms
4.4.1    Positronium
We briefly note that positronium is not useful as the reduced mass is actually smaller than that
of atomic hydrogen, and the uncertainties are much higher. For example the 1s − 2s and 2s − 2p
transitions are limited by large experimental uncertainties, which are caused by complications
such as annihilation [35–37]. The uncertainties are around two orders larger, which gives a
bound on χ around one order of magnitude weaker.

4.4.2    Muonium
Ordinary muonium (µ+ e− ) and true muonium (µ+ µ− ) are more interesting.
    Experimental results have already been produced for the 1s1/2 − 2s1/2 and 2s1/2 − 2p1/2
transitions in ordinary muonium, but the resulting bounds do not improve on atomic hydrogen.
We note that the reduced mass of ordinary muonium is almost the same (in fact slightly smaller)
than atomic hydrogen, so we could only get better bounds if uncertainties were reduced.
    In fact the 1s1/2 − 2s1/2 transition suffers from large theoretical errors associated with the
effective Rydberg constant (3.3). This produces a fractional error larger than that of atomic
hydrogen and consequently a weaker bound.
    The 2s1/2 − 2p1/2 transition suffers from no such 0th order uncertainties, and indeed we
expect the theoretical uncertainty to be smaller than atomic hydrogen since there are no finite
nuclear size effects. However the experimental situation is not yet very good. Only 1s1/2 states
can be produced in large quantities, whereas the production of metastable 2s1/2 states is much
lower [38]. This means that the 2s1/2 − 2p1/2 transition has only been experimentally measured
to a fractional precision of 1.5 × 10−2 at the 1 σ level, leading to weak bounds.
    A recent article [39] suggests that true muonium can be produced and studied in the near
future. This atomic system would be extremely useful, as it has a reduced mass of around
2 orders of magnitude greater than atomic hydrogen, and we expect the theoretical errors to
be low due to the absence of finite nuclear size effects. Since no experimental data has been
produced yet, there has been no motivation for precise theoretical calculations. However, we
can put together a rough theoretical estimate (see App. B for details) to form a speculative
bound. This is shown as the black line in Fig. 5. This is encouraging as it penetrates new
parameter space. However, one still needs to obtain a coherent experimental result, and hope
that the experimental error is not so large that it causes the bound to significantly deteriorate.

4.5     Muonic atoms
The reduced mass of these systems is around 200 times larger than atomic hydrogen, shifting
our bounds towards larger masses.



                                               12
Figure 5: The black dashed curve shows a speculative bound on χ for the 2s1/2 −2p1/2 transition
in true muonium. This is formed using only an estimate of the theoretical uncertainty of ∼ 0.1
GHz (see appendix B). If the experimental result is measured to a similar precision and agrees
with theory, we will be able to form a bound similar to this and penetrate new parameter
space. The green solid curve shows an actual bound formed from the 2sF1/2  =1 − 2pF =2 transition
                                                                                  3/2
in muonic hydrogen. There is a large theoretical error ∆M ∗ = 1.2 × 10−3 eV at the 2 σ level.
This is caused by the wide range of possible values of rp . The red dashed curve uses the muonic
hydrogen transition to form a speculative bound. The error here is taken to be just the 2 σ
experimental uncertainty of 6 × 10−6 eV [25]. Finally, the blue curve shows a bound obtained
by combining the measurement of the Lamb shift in ordinary hydrogen and the 2sF1/2    =1 − 2pF =2
                                                                                             3/2
transition in muonic hydrogen. Using these two measurements we do not need an additional
determination of the proton radius.



   The 2sF1/2
            =1 − 2pF =2 difference in muonic hydrogen is calculated to be [25, 40–45]
                   3/2
                                             r 2           r 3 
                                                p               p
                 E = − 209.9779(49) − 5.2262        + 0.0346          meV.                  (4.1)
                                               fm              fm

    If we substitute in the most precise current value of rp = 0.8768(69) fm which is obtained
from atomic spectra [23], we obtain a theoretical value of E = −205.984(062) meV. The theo-
retical uncertainty alone is quite high. Moreover, the theoretical value also deviates from the
recently measured experimental value of −206.295000(3) meV [25] by around 5σ. This large
discrepancy is bad for producing bounds, but it could be taken as a potential signal for new
physics. We will consider this in the final Sect. 5. However, we can still form a bound if
we use the (inflated) error given in (3.5). The rp variation increases the uncertainty to give
∆M ∗ = 6 × 10−4 eV at the 1 σ level. The solid green curve shows the corresponding bound at
the 2 σ level. In the large mass region this bound is of comparable strength to the one from
the Lamb shift in ordinary hydrogen.
    However if we just use the experimental uncertainty we can form a speculative bound Fig. 5.
This bound covers a similar region to the speculative bound obtained from true muonium (black
curve) and penetrates the unknown region.
    If an independent and sufficiently precise value of rp could be determined – consistent
with the muonic hydrogen extraction – the speculative bound could be turned into a real
one. This provides us with motivation for seeking more precise, independent determinations
of the proton radius. However, as we have discussed in Sect. 3, in order to avoid degeneracies
this measurement should preferably originate from measurements at relatively high momentum
transfer. At the moment the only obvious candidate process is electron scattering, although an
increase in the precision by an order of magnitude may be challenging.

                                               13
5       Muonic hydrogen anomaly∗
As already mentioned above a recent measurement [25] of the Lamb shift in muonic hydrogen,
or more precisely the 2sF1/2=1 − 2pF =2 transition, deviates by more than 5σ from theoretical
                                    3/2
calculations combined with atomic spectra measurements of the proton radius. It is tempting
to speculate that this deviation is due to a hidden photon [46]. In this section we will briefly
investigate if such an interpretation is possible.
    The first observation is that the addition of the hidden photon increases the binding energy
of the s-state compared to the p-state. This makes the Lamb-shift in muonic hydrogen more
negative, in line with the observed effect.
    Encouraged by this we would like to do a fit using the Lamb shift in ordinary and muonic
hydrogen to fit the proton radius and the kinetic mixing parameter χ2 of the hidden photon.
We can use the same strategy as outlined in Sect. 3, just including the proton radius as an
additional parameter3 . The hidden photon contribution to the Lamb shift is already given in
Eq. (3.8). For muonic hydrogen we just have to replace the electron mass with the muon mass.
The lowest order dependence of the Lamb shift on the proton radius is given in Eq. (3.6).
    Unfortunately, the required values for χ2 are smaller than zero and since χ is a real parameter
this rules out a hidden photon explanation. Why is this the case? From Eqs. (3.6) and (3.8)
we see that from the perspective of the (n = 2) Lamb shifts a shift in the proton radius by ∆rp2
is equivalent to a non-vanishing χ2 for

                                                               a4o m2γ ′
                                           ∆rp2 = −6χ2                       .                                    (5.1)
                                                           (1 + ao mγ ′ )4

where ao = 1/(αmo ) is the Bohr radius of the orbiting particle.
    This means that if we have non-vanishing χ2 > 0 we measure effectively measure a smaller
proton radius in the Lamb shift measurement. Obviously both the ordinary and the muonic
hydrogen measurements are affected in the same direction. Now, one can easily check that the
effect is actually always bigger for larger ao . In other words if there is a non-vanishing χ2 > 0
then the observed proton radius in the Lamb shift of ordinary hydrogen should be even smaller
than the one observed in muonic hydrogen. This is exactly the opposite of what is observed in
Ref. [25].
    Finally, we can use the same two measurements to form a bound, independent of electron
scattering determinations of the proton radius. However, in light of the fact that the two
measurements are not consistent with each other we need to inflate our uncertainty similar to
Eq. (3.5). Taking M1 as the Lamb shift in atomic hydrogen and using Refs. [27, 28] we have4
δM1 = 3× 10−11 eV and ∆M1⋆ = 10−10 eV at the 1 σ level5 . Taking M2 as the muonic hydrogen
case, and using the experimental and theoretical values from 4.5 we get δM2 = −3.11 × 10−4
eV and ∆M2⋆ = 6 × 10−4 eV. The corresponding bound is shown as the solid blue line in Fig. 5.


6       Conclusions
Atomic spectra can provide a powerful and clean probe of Coulomb’s law at atomic length scales.
In this paper we have considered a variety of transitions in atomic hydrogen, hydrogenlike ions
    ∗
      We are deeply indebted to B. Batell and M. Pospelov for noting a sign error in a previous version of this
paper which led to different results. In the following discussion of the effects of hidden photons on measurements
of the proton radius we will use an argument similar to theirs.
    3
      As we are dealing with Lamb shifts (i.e transitions between states of the same n), changes in α are a
subdominant effect (see Sect. 3.1.1).
    4
      The δMi are calculated using the CODATA [23] mean value for the proton radius of rp = 0.8768 fm.
    5
      Note that since in this section we explicitly consider variations in rp in the bound, we could in principle ignore
any contributions from variations in rp when calculating the theoretical uncertainty. However, as mentioned
before, we will inflate our error to account for the inconsistency of the two measurements.


                                                          14
and exotic atoms, probing a wide range of different length scales. Currently, the best bounds are
obtained from the measurements of the Lamb shift in ordinary hydrogen, a combination of the
1s1/2 − 2s1/2 and the 2s1/2 − 8s1/2 transitions in atomic hydrogen, as well as the Lamb shift in
hydrogen-like helium ions. These bounds are shown in Fig. 1 and can be taken more generally
as a constraint on deviations from Coulomb’s law of the form Eq. (2.3). This significantly
increases the range of pure Coulomb’s law tests.
    Future measurements of true muonium (µ+ µ− ) could significantly increase the tested area
towards shorter length scales and smaller deviations. Similarly, a bound from the 2sF1/2
                                                                                       =1 −2pF =2
                                                                                             3/2
transition in muonic hydrogen could penetrate new parameter space, provided that a suitable
independent value of the proton radius is determined. This gives additional motivation to seek
further high precision determinations of the proton radius.
    The deviation from Coulomb’s law, Eq. (2.3), and the bounds we obtain can also be in-
terpreted as a probe of massive hidden photons kinetically mixing with the ordinary photon.
With currently available data we find no improvement over existing bounds. We note, however,
that these bounds are especially clean and model independent as they do not depend on the
stability of the hidden photon or the presence/absence of certain decay channels. Moreover,
above mentioned future measurements also have good potential to probe new parameter space
for hidden photons, giving them significant discovery potential for new physics.
    Finally, we have briefly investigated a recent measurement of the 2sF1/2
                                                                           =1 − 2pF =2 transition
                                                                                   3/2
in muonic hydrogen which found a value inconsistent with theoretical calculations and previous
measurements of the proton radius. We have considered the hidden photon as a mechanism
to explain this discrepancy and found that the measurements of the Lamb shift in ordinary
hydrogen are in conflict with this hypothesis.


Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank A. Lindner, J. Redondo and A. Ringwald for interesting dis-
cussions and useful comments. Moreover, the authors are grateful to B. Batell and M. Pospelov
for pointing out a crucial sign error in the discussion of the muonic hydrogen anomaly.


A     Bounds on minicharged particles from atomic spectra
Here we briefly examine bounds on minicharged particles (MCPs) produced by using atomic
spectra. The existing bounds for MCPs are presented in Fig. 6.
   As noted in [7] the vacuum polarization caused by minicharged particles (shown in Fig. 7)
causes a modification to the Coulomb potential

                               V (r) = VCoulomb (r) + δV (r)M CP                           (A.1)

where the additional term is the Uehling Potential,
                               "                      s                 #
                            Zα 2αǫ2 ∞                     4m2ǫ     2m2ǫ
                                                               
                                             exp(−qr)
                                      Z
             δV (r)M CP =                 dq            1− 2     1+ 2                      (A.2)
                             r    3π 2mǫ          q        q        q

Here mǫ is the mass of the minicharged particle, and ǫ the charge in units of e. In the limits of
high and low mass δV(r) reduces as follows;
                        "                   #
                    Zα αǫ2 exp(−2mǫ r)
       δV (r)M CP ≈         √                                       for mǫ r ≫ 1,          (A.3)
                     r 4 π (mǫ r) 23
                             2αǫ2                        2αǫ2
                                               
                     Zα
                  ≈        −      log(2mǫ r) − a , a ≈        γ      for mǫ r ≪ 1,
                      r       3π                          3π

                                               15
Figure 6: Existing bounds for MCPs (see, e.g. [14]). Note that the Lamb shift bound is produced
using the method from [6]. We modify this method to consider other atomic spectra.




Figure 7: Vacuum polarization diagram leading to a deviation from Coulomb’s law in the
presence of minicharged particles.




                                              16
Figure 8: The 1s1/2 − 2s1/2 (black) and 2s1/2 − 2p1/2 [6] (green) bounds, both at the 2 σ level.
The 1s1/2 − 2s1/2 transition is renormalised using 2s1/2 − 8s1/2 as in the hidden photon case.
For comparison we show previous bounds from purely laboratory experiments in orange. Our
bounds do not penetrate new parameter space.



and where γ is Euler’s constant.
    The potential decays exponentially in the high mass limit, as in the hidden photon case.
However δV (r)M CP does not die off in the low mass limit. This makes sense physically, as
a massless MCP will still be distinguishable from the photon and therefore will constitute a
non-trivial modification to the photon propagator, which will result in observable effects. In
fact we find that the strongest effects are observed in the low mass limit. This can be seen from
saturation of the bounds in Fig. 6. Hence we obtain strong bounds for
                                                    1
                                            mǫ ≪                                           (A.4)
                                                    l0
where l0 is the length scale of the experiment.
   From A.3 we can see that the potential actually diverges logarithmically. We apply the
same renormalisation procedure as we did with the hidden photon in Sect. 3.1.2 to get
                                      v
                                      u n |∆M | n |∆M |
                                      u 1        2
                                                     + 2 M1 1
                                              M2
                                  ǫ≤                               .                  (A.5)
                                      t
                                         n1 f2 (mǫ ) − n2 f1 (mǫ )

   Note the following limits;

   • mǫ → ∞: Here f1 (mǫ ), f2 (mǫ ) → 0 so ǫ increases and the bound dies off.

   • mǫ → 0: Here f1 (mǫ ) and f2 (mǫ ) both diverge logarithmically, but the divergences cancel
     and the denominator approaches a finite value as mǫ → 0, giving us a saturated bound.
     This shows that, as expected, effects of the MCP are maximised in the low mass limit.

   We now apply this method to different atomic transitions. The analysis here is much briefer
than in the hidden photon case, as we only consider transitions in atomic hydrogen. (The bounds


                                               17
from systems with higher Z and exotic atoms are considerably weaker.) As noted before, higher
excited states (i.e states which do not involve 1s1/2 or 2s1/2 ) are difficult to measure and have
high experimental uncertainties. Therefore we only consider transitions involving the 1s1/2 and
2s1/2 states. In Fig. 8 we plot the Lamb shift 2s1/2 − 2p1/2 6 , and also a renormalised bound
using the 1s1/2 − 2s1/2 and 2s1/2 − 8s1/2 transitions. The errors are the same as quoted in
section 3.1. We see that no improvement is found over existing bounds.


B         Estimate for the theoretical uncertainty in the 2s1/2 − 2p1/2
          transition in true muonium
The leading order contribution to the Lamb shift is proportional to the mass of the orbiting
particle mo . Therefore to get an approximate value of this transition we scale the atomic
                                  m
hydrogen value of by a factor ∼ mµe to get ∼ 1GHz.
    We note that the major part of the uncertainty in the atomic hydrogen case comes from finite
nuclear size effects, and that these are absent in true muonium. We can therefore get a naive
estimate of the uncertainty in true muonium by subtracting the finite nuclear size contribution
                                                         m
from the atomic hydrogen value 7 and scaling it up by mµe to get ∼ 200 kHz.
    However this naive estimate is inadequate. The reduced mass of the system is now larger,
so that hadronic and muonic vacuum polarization contributions are now much more important.
These effects must receive more careful treatment. To leading order [47]
                                                                  2
                                                              mo
                                                 EV P ∝                 mo                     (B.1)
                                                              me

so that we need to scale up vacuum polarization contributions in atomic hydrogen by a factor
  m
( mµe )3 which gives us a much larger contribution of ∼ 0.1 GHz. We therefore take this as our
theoretical uncertainty, and set ∆M ∼ 0.1 GHz.


C         Bounds from hadronic atoms
We review this option briefly, and argue that hadronic atoms currently do not produce strong
bounds.
    The existing candidates involve the π − , K − , p+ , and K − particles orbiting a proton nucleus.
In each case we find significant experimental uncertainties which immediately destroy bounds.
For example with pionic hydrogen the experimental strong interaction shift of the 1s1/2 ground
state [48],
                                ǫ1s = (7.120 ± 0.008 ± 0.007) eV                               (C.1)
where the errors are systematic and statistical respectively. This essentially means that, for
example, the 3p1/2 − 1s1/2 transition would have an error of at least 10−2 eV, which does not
produce a useful bound.
    All transitions in kaonic and sigmaonic hydrogen have large uncertainties due to the deter-
mination of the particle masses alone [49].
    Transitions in antiprotonic hydrogen have large uncertainties due to both strong interaction
shifts and annihilation [50].
    This is before we take into account theoretical uncertainties, for example finite size effects
from both nucleus and orbiting particle, which we also expect to be large.
    Overall we conclude that any benefits from the larger reduced masses of hadronic atoms are
washed out by experimental uncertainties and QCD effects.
    6
        Note that this has already been considered in Ref. [6]
    7
        For values of the Lamb shift contributions in atomic hydrogen see, e.g. Ref. [30].


                                                           18
References
 [1] V. Popov, Tr. J. of Physics 23, 943 (1999).

 [2] S. G. Karshenboim, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 220406 (2010), 1005.4859.

 [3] S. G. Karshenboim, (2010), 1005.4872.

 [4] L.B.Okun, Sov. Phys 56, 502 (1982).

 [5] M. Pospelov, Phys. Rev. D80, 095002 (2009), 0811.1030.

 [6] M. Gluck, S. Rakshit, and E. Reya, Phys. Rev. D76, 091701 (2007), hep-ph/0703140.

 [7] J. Jaeckel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 080402 (2009), 0904.1547.

 [8] B. Holdom, Phys. Lett. 57 (1986).

 [9] K. R. Dienes, C. Kolda, and J. March-Russell, Nuclear Physics B 492, 104 (1997).

[10] S. A. Abel and B. W. Schofield, Nucl. Phys. B685, 150 (2004), hep-th/0311051.

[11] S. A. Abel, J. Jaeckel, V. V. Khoze, and A. Ringwald, Phys. Lett. B666, 66 (2008),
     hep-ph/0608248.

[12] S. A. Abel, M. D. Goodsell, J. Jaeckel, V. V. Khoze, and A. Ringwald, JHEP 07, 124
     (2008), 0803.1449.

[13] M. Goodsell, J. Jaeckel, J. Redondo, and A. Ringwald, JHEP 11, 027 (2009), 0909.0515.

[14] J. Jaeckel and A. Ringwald, (2010), 1002.0329.

[15] A. M. Thalapillil, Phys. Rev. D81, 035001 (2010), 0906.4379.

[16] J. D. Bjorken, R. Essig, P. Schuster, and N. Toro, Phys. Rev. D80, 075018 (2009),
     0906.0580.

[17] J. Redondo, private communication.

[18] J. Jaeckel, J. Redondo, and A. Ringwald, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 131801 (2008), 0804.4157.

[19] M. Pospelov, A. Ritz, and M. B. Voloshin, Phys. Lett. B662, 53 (2008), 0711.4866.

[20] J. Redondo and M. Postma, JCAP 0902, 005 (2009), 0811.0326.

[21] N. Arkani-Hamed, D. P. Finkbeiner, T. R. Slatyer, and N. Weiner, Phys. Rev. D79, 015014
     (2009), 0810.0713.

[22] A. Ibarra, A. Ringwald, and C. Weniger, JCAP 0901, 003 (2009), 0809.3196.

[23] P. J. Mohr, B. N. Taylor, and D. B. Newell, Codata recommended values of the fundamental
     physical constants: 2006, 2007.

[24] A. van Wijngaarden, J. Kwela, and G. W. F. Drake, Phys. Rev. A 43, 3325 (1991).

[25] R. Pohl et al., Nature 466, 213 (2010).

[26] P. G. Blunden and I. Sick, Phys. Rev. C 72, 057601 (2005).

[27] C. Schwob et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 4960 (1999).


                                               19
[28] G. G. Simon, C. Schmitt, F. Borkowski, and V. H. Walther, Nucl. Phys. A333, 381 (1980).

[29] M. Fischer et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 230802 (2004).

[30] F. Biraben,    The European Physics Journal - Special Topics 172, 109 (2009),
     arXiv:0809.2985v1.

[31] B. de Beauvoir et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 440 (1997).

[32] D. Mueller et al., EPL (Europhysics Letters) 5, 503 (1988).

[33] W. R. Johnson and G. Soff, Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables 33, 405 (1985).

[34] K. P. Jungmann, (2004), nucl-ex/0404013.

[35] D. Hagena et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 2887 (1993).

[36] R. Ley et al., Hyperfine Interactions 89, 327 (1994), 10.1007/BF02064517.

[37] R. Ley, Applied Surface Science 194, 301 (2002).

[38] K. Jungmann, Hyperfine Interactions 127, 189 (1999).

[39] S. J. Brodsky and R. F. Lebed, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 213401 (2009), 0904.2225.

[40] M. I. Eides, H. Grotch, and V. A. Shelyuto, Phys. Rept. 342, 63 (2001), hep-ph/0002158.

[41] K. Pachucki, Phys. Rev. A 53, 2092 (1996).

[42] K. Pachucki, Phys. Rev. A 60, 3593 (1999).

[43] E. Borie, Phys. Rev. A 71, 032508 (2005).

[44] A. P. Martynenko, Phys. Rev. A 71, 022506 (2005).

[45] A. P. Martynenko, Physics of Atomic Nuclei 71, 125 (2008).

[46] A. Falkowski, RESONAANCES blog, http://resonaances.blogspot.com/.

[47] J. L. Friar, J. Martorell, and D. W. L. Sprung, Phys. Rev. A 59, 4061 (1999).

[48] J. Marton, Nuclear Physics A 790, 328c (2007), Few-Body Problems in Physics - FB 18,
     18th International IUPAP Conference on Few-Body Problems in Physics.

[49] W.-M. Yao et al., Journal of Physics G 33, 1+ (2006).

[50] M. A. et. al., Hyperfine Interactions 118, 59 (1999).




                                              20
