                                             The Dark Photon




arXiv:2005.01515v3 [hep-ph] 16 Oct 2020
                                          Marco Fabbrichesi
                                          INFN, Sezione di Trieste,
                                          Via A. Valerio 2, 34127 Trieste, Italy
                                          email: marco.fabbrichesi@ts.infn.it




                                          Emidio Gabrielli
                                          Dipartimento di Fisica Teorica, Università di Trieste,
                                          Strada Costiera 11, 34151 Trieste, Italy
                                          and NICPB, Rävala 10, 10143 Tallinn, Estonia
                                          email: emidio.gabrielli@cern.ch




                                          Gaia Lanfranchi
                                          INFN, Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati,
                                          Via E. Fermi 40, 00044 Frascati, Roma, Italy
                                          email:gaia.lanfranchi@lnf.infn.it
2




Abstract


          he dark photon is a new gauge boson whose existence has been conjectured.
    T     It is dark because it arises from a symmetry of a hypothetical dark sector comprising
    particles completely neutral under the Standard Model interactions. Dark though it is, this new
    gauge boson can be detected because of its kinetic mixing with the ordinary, visible photon.
    We review its physics from the theoretical and the experimental point of view. We discuss
    the difference between the massive and the massless case. We explain how the dark photon
    enters laboratory, astrophysical and cosmological observations as well as dark matter physics.
    We survey the current and future experimental limits on the parameters of the massless and
    massive dark photons together with the related bounds on milli-charged fermions.
                                                                                    Contents




1 Introduction                                                                                     5
  1.1 Massless and massive dark photons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      7
       1.1.1 Kinetic mixing: Electric or hyper-charge? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     9
       1.1.2 Embedding in a nonAbelian group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        10
  1.2 UV models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10
       1.2.1 Massive dark photon: Origin and size of the mixing parameter . . . . . . . .         11
       1.2.2 Massless dark photon: Higher-order operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       11
  1.3 Dark matter and the dark photon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     12
       1.3.1 Massless dark photon and galaxy dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         12
       1.3.2 Massless dark photon and dark-matter relic density . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       13
       1.3.3 Massive dark photon and light dark matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      14
       1.3.4 Massive dark photon as dark matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15

2 Phenomenology of the massless dark photon                                                       17
  2.1 Limits on the dark dipole scale dM /Λ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
                                              2

      2.1.1 Astrophysics and cosmology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
      2.1.2 Precision, laboratory and collider physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
      2.1.3 Can the massless dark photon be seen at all? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
  2.2 Limits on milli-charged particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
  2.3 A minimal model of the dark sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
      2.3.1 Constraints on the UV model parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
  2.4 Future experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

3 Phenomenology of the massive dark photon                                                    33
      3.0.1 Production, decays and detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
      3.0.2 Visible and invisible massive dark photon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
  3.1 Limits on the parameters ε and mA0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
      3.1.1 Constraints for mA0 > 1 MeV with A0 decays to visible final states . . . . . . 36
      3.1.2 Constraints for mA0 > 1 MeV with A0 decays to invisible final states . . . . . 39
      3.1.3 Constraints for mA0 < 1 MeV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
  3.2 Limits on the parameters y and mχ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

4 Outlook                                                                                         47

                                                 3
4

5 Appendix                                                                                      51
  5.1 Dark sector portals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
  5.2 Boltzmann equation and relic density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
  5.3 Thermal field theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
                                                                                   Introduction
                                                                                                    1
        ew particles beyond the Standard Model have always been thought to be charged
N       under at least some of the same gauge interactions of ordinary particles. Although this assump-
tion has driven the theoretical speculations as well as the experimental searches of the last 50 years, it
has also been increasingly challenged by the negative results of all these searches—and the mounting
frustration for the failure to discover any of these hypothetical new particles.
     As the hope of a breakthrough along these lines is waning, interest in a dark sector —dark because
not charged under the Standard Model gauge groups—is growing: Maybe no new particles have been
seen simply because they do not interact through the Standard Model gauge interactions.
     The dark sector is assumed to exist as a world parallel to our own. It may contain few or many
states, and these can be fermions or scalars or both, depending on the model. Dark matter proper—
the existence of which is deemed necessary to explain astrophysical data—is found among these
states. Its relic density can be computed and constrained by observational data. In addition, the dark
states can interact; their interactions can be Yukawa-like or mediated by dark gauge bosons or both
depending on the model.
     If the dark and the visible sectors were to interact only gravitationally—which they cannot avoid—
there would be little hope of observing in the laboratory particles belonging to the dark sector. A
similar problem exists for dark matter: Although its presence is motivated by gravitational physics,
it is searched mostly through its putative weak interactions—as in the direct- and indirect-detection
searches of a weakly interacting massive particle. For the same reason, we must pin our hopes on
assuming that dark and ordinary sectors also interact through a portal —as the current terminology
has it—that is, through a sallow glimmer, in a manner that, though feeble, is (at least in principle)
experimentally accessible.
     The portal may take various forms that can be classified by the type and dimension of its oper-
ators. The best motivated and most studied cases contain relevant operators taking different forms
depending on the spin of the mediator: Vector (spin 1), Neutrino (spin 1/2), Higgs (scalar) and
Axion (pseudo-scalar).
     Among these possible portals, the vector portal is the one where the interaction takes place
because of the kinetic mixing between one dark and one visible Abelian gauge boson (nonAbelian
gauge bosons do not mix). The visible photon is taken to be the boson of the U (1) gauge group of
electromagnetism—or, above the electroweak symmetry-breaking scale, of the hyper-charge—while
the dark photon comes to be identified as the boson of an extra U (1) symmetry.
     The names para- [1], hidden-sector, secluded photon and U-boson [2] have also being used to
indicate the same particle. The idea of adding to the SM a new gauge boson similar to the photon
was first considered in the context of supersymmetric theories in [3, 4]. It was discussed more in
general shortly after in [5, 6].
     Dark though it is, the dark photon can be detected because of its kinetic mixing with the ordinary,

                                                    5
6                                                                    CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

visible photon. This kinetic mixing is always possible because the field strengths of two Abelian gauge
fields can be multiplied together to give a dimension four operator. The existence of such an operator
means that the two gauge bosons can go into each other as they propagate. This kinetic mixing
provides the portal linking the dark and visible sectors. It is this portal that makes possible to detect
the dark photon in the experiments.
     The concept of a portal—which at first blush might seem rather harmless—actually represents a
radical departure from what is the main conceptual outcome of our study of particle physics, namely,
the gauge principle and idea that all interactions must be described by a gauge theory. The portal,
and the new interactions that it brings into the picture, adds a significant exception to this principle.
Among the possible portals, the vector case deviates the least from the gauge principle as it only
introduces a mixing for the gauge bosons while the interaction to matter remains of the gauge type
(albeit with an un-quantized charge). Instead, the other kinds of portal imply a manifest new violation
to the gauge principle, the other’s being the notable case of the Yukawa and self-interactions of the
Higgs boson—which are themselves, exactly because of their not being gauge interactions, the least
understood part of the Standard Model.
     There is an additional and important reason to study the dark sector in general, and the dark
photon in particular: The main motivation in introducing new-physics scenarios is to use them as a
foil for the Standard Model in mapping possible experimental discrepancies. In the absence of clearly
identified new states, the many parameters, for instance, of the supersymmetric extensions to the
Standard Model or even of the effective field theory approach to physics beyond the Standard Model,
are working against their usefulness. Instead, each dark sector can be reduced to few parameters—to
wit, just two in the case of the dark photon—in terms of which the possible discrepancies with respect
to the Standard Model are more effectively mapped in the experimental searches and the potential
discovery more discernible.
     In this primer, we review the physics of this new gauge boson from the theoretical and the
experimental point of view. We explain how the dark photon enters laboratory, astrophysical and
cosmological observations as well as dark matter physics.
     As explained in detail in section 1.1, there are actually two kinds of dark photons: The massless
and the massive—whose theoretical frameworks as well as experimental signatures are quite distinct.
They give rise to dark sectors with different features; their characteristic physics and experimental
searches are best reviewed separately. The massive dark photon has been receiving so far most of
the attention because it couples directly to the SM currents and is more readily accessible in the
experimental searches. The massless dark photon arises from a sound theoretical framework and,
as we shall argue, provides, with respect to the massive case, a comparably rich, if perhaps more
challenging, experimental target.
     We look into the ultraviolet (UV) completion of models of the dark photon in section 1.2 to
better understand the origin of their interactions with the SM particles.
     Section 1.3 describes the interplay between the dark photon and dark matter and introduces many
of the definitions used in the experimental searches.
     We survey the current and future experimental limits on the parameters of the massless and
massive dark photons together with the related bounds on milli-charged fermions. We discuss all
these constrains for the massless case in section 2 and for the massive case in section 3. At the best
of our knowledge, these two sections provide the reader with a comprehensive review of the physics
of the dark photon.
     We collect in three appendices a number of definitions and equations, which the reader may find
useful to better follow the discussion in the main text.
     In the past few years a number of reports on the dark sector (and the massive dark photon within
it) have been published [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. The interested reader can therein find different
points of view to complement the present review as well as additional details on the other portals.
A previous discussion of the astrophysical, cosmological and other constraints for the massless dark
photon can be found in [15].
1.1. MASSLESS AND MASSIVE DARK PHOTONS                                                                       7




Figure 1.1: Scheme of the coupling of the ordinary (Aµ ) and dark (A0µ ) photon to the SM and dark-sector
(DS) particles for the two choices of the angle θ discussed in the main text. e and e0 are the couplings of the
ordinary and dark photons to their respective sectors.



1.1      Massless and massive dark photons
The most general kinetic part of the Lagrangian of two Abelian gauge bosons, described by two gauge
groups U (1)a and U (1)b , is given by

                                   1           1           ε
                             L0 = − Faµν Faµν − Fbµν Fbµν − Faµν Fbµν .                                  (1.1)
                                   4           4           2
    The gauge boson Aµb is taken to couple to the current Jµ of ordinary SM matter, the other, Aµa ,
to the current Jµ0 , which is made of dark-sector matter, to give the Lagrangian

                                          L = e Jµ Aµb + e0 Jµ0 Aµa ,                                    (1.2)

with e and e0 the respective coupling constants.
    To discuss the physics arising from the Lagrangians in Eq. (1.1) and Eq. (1.2), it is useful to
identify from the very beginning two kinds of dark photons:

    - the massless kind, which, as we are about to show, does not couple directly to any of the SM
      currents and interacts instead with ordinary matter only through operators of dimension higher
      than four;

    - the massive kind, which couples to ordinary matter through a current (with arbitrary charge),
      that is, a renormalizable operator of dimension four. The massless limit of this case does not
      correspond to the massless case above.

Because of their different coupling to SM particles, the two kinds are best discussed separately.
    Let us first consider the massless case.
    As first discussed in [1] in this case the classical Lagrangian can be diagonalized. What happens
at the quantum level and how the mixing manifests itself has been analyzed in detail in [16] for the
unbroken gauge theory as well as the spontaneously broken case (see, also, the appendix of [17] which
we mostly follow).
    The kinetic terms in Eq. (1.1) can be diagonalized by rotating the gauge fields as

                                          1
                                                    
                       µ            √           0                       0µ 
                        Aa              1 −  ε 2      cos θ − sin θ         A
                          µ =                                                    ,              (1.3)
                                 
                        Ab                 ε         
                                                           sin θ cos θ       Aµ
                                     −√           1
                                         1 − ε2

where now we can identify Aµ with the ordinary photon and A0µ with the dark photon. The additional
orthogonal rotation in Eq. (1.3) is always possible and introduces an angle θ which is arbitrary as
long as the gauge bosons are massless.
8                                                                           CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

    After the rotation in Eq. (1.3), the interaction Lagrangian in Eq. (1.2) becomes
                                0                                   
                                  e cos θ 0                 ε cos θ
                      L =0
                                 √         Jµ + e sin θ − √              Jµ A0µ
                                   1 − ε2                    1 − ε2
                                    e0 sin θ 0
                                                                        
                                                               ε sin θ
                           + −√               Jµ + e cos θ + √             Jµ Aµ .              (1.4)
                                      1−ε   2                   1−ε    2

By choosing sin θ = 0 (cos θ = 1) (see right-side of Fig. 1.1) we can have the ordinary photon Aµ
coupled only to the ordinary current Jµ while √
                                              the dark photon couples to both the ordinary and the
dark current Jµ , the former with strength εe/ 1 − ε2 proportional to the mixing parameter ε. The
               0

Lagrangian is therefore:

                                 e0
                                                     
                               0              eε
                          L = √         0
                                       Jµ − √       Jµ A0µ + eJµ Aµ .                           (1.5)
                                1 − ε2       1 − ε2
                                                      √
    Vice versa, with the choice sin θ = ε and cos θ = 1 − ε2 (see left-side of Fig. 1.1), we have the
opposite situation with the dark photon
                                     √     only coupled to the dark current and the ordinary photon
to both currents, with strength εe/ 1 − ε2 to the dark one. This latter coupling between the dark-
sector matter to the ordinary photon is called a milli-charge. Its value is experimentally known to
be small [18]. The dark photon sees ordinary matter only through the effect of operators like the
magnetic moment or the charge form factors (of dimension higher than four). This is the choice
defining the massless dark photon proper:

                                                            e0 ε
                                                                                
                           0                                              e
                         L         = e0 Jµ0 A0µ +       −√         0
                                                                  Jµ + √       Jµ Aµ            (1.6)
                                                           1 − ε2       1 − ε2

   If the gauge symmetry is spontaneously broken, the diagonalization of the mass terms locks the
angle θ to the value required by the rotation of the gauge fields to the mass eigenstates and we
cannot have that one of the two currents only couples to one of the two gauge bosons.
   This is also the case when the U (1) gauge bosons acquire a mass by means of the Stueckelberg
Lagrangian (see [19] for a review and the relevant references)
                              1             1
                      LStu = − Ma2 Aaµ Aµa − Mb2 Abµ Aµb − Ma Mb Aaµ Aµb .                      (1.7)
                              2             2
In this case, as in the spontaneously broken case, the angle θ is fixed and equal to
                                       √
                                      δ 1 − ε2                   1 − δε
                           sin θ = √                cos θ = √                                   (1.8)
                                     1 − 2δε + δ 2             1 − 2δε + δ 2
where δ = Mb /Ma , and we have no longer the freedom of rotating the fields as in Eq. (1.3). The
Lagrangian in Eq. (1.4) is now
                                              0                           
                     00             1          e (1 − δε) 0    e (δ − ε)
                    L = √                       √        Jµ + √          Jµ A0µ
                               1 − 2δε + δ 2      1−ε  2          1−ε  2
                                    1                  0 0
                                                                                            (1.9)
                                                           µ
                         + √                  eJµ − δe Jµ A .
                               1 − 2δε + δ 2
    The case of spontaneously broken symmetry can be distinguished from the Stueckelberg mass
terms because the former will give rise to processes in which the dark photon is produced together
with the dark Higgs boson, the vacuum expectation value of which hides the symmetry.
    Whereas the Lagrangian in Eq. (1.9) is the most general, the simplest and most frequently
discussed case consists in giving mass directly to only one of the U (1) gauge bosons so that, for
instance, Mb = 0 in Eq. (1.7), the mass states are already diagonal. Even in this simple case, the
mass term removes the freedom of choosing the angle θ in Eq. (1.3). With this choice, δ = 0
1.1. MASSLESS AND MASSIVE DARK PHOTONS                                                                    9

in Eq. (1.9), the ordinary photon couples only to ordinary matter and the massive dark photon is
characterized by a direct coupling to the electromagnetic current of the the SM particles (in addition
to that to dark-sector matter) and described by the Lagrangian
                                            eε
                                 L ⊃ −√           Jµ A0µ ≃ −e ε Jµ A0µ ,                             (1.10)
                                           1 − ε2
as in Eq. (1.5) above. This is the choice defining the massive dark photon. The coupling of the
massive dark photon to SM particles is not quantized—taking the arbitrary value eε. Because of this
direct current-like coupling to ordinary matter, it is the spontaneously broken or Stueckelberg massive
dark photon that is mostly discussed in the literature and considered in the experimental proposals.
    Notice that the massive dark photon has the same couplings as the massless dark photon after
choosing sin θ = 0 (right-side of Fig. 1.1); this case therefore represents the limit of vanishing mass
of the massive darkh photon. On   i the contrary, the massless dark photon proper—corresponding to
                        √
the choice tan θ = ε/ 1 − ε —is not related to any limiting case of the massive dark photon.
                                2

    There are no electromagnetic milli-charged particles in the massive case; they are present only
if both U (1) gauge groups are spontaneously broken (or equivalently Mb 6= 0 in the Stueckelberg
Lagrangian in Eq. (1.7))—which is not the case of our world where the photon is massless.

1.1.1    Kinetic mixing: Electric or hyper-charge?
There seems to be the choice in the kinetic mixing in Eq. (1.1) between the U (1)e.m. group of electric
charge and the U (1)Y group of the hyper-charge, with mixing parameter ε defined as in Eq.(1.1).
Concerning the massless dark photon, these two choices give rise to the same physics, since the
dark photon remains decoupled from the SM fields at the tree-level. The only difference
                                                                                    √          is that the
photon
     √  and Z-boson  are now both  coupled  to the dark-sector   current, with eD ε/  1 − ε 2 cos θ
                                                                                                    W and
eD ε/ 1 − ε sin θW strength, respectively.
            2

    Let now consider the massive dark-photon coupling to hyper-charge. In this case it is convenient
to parametrize the coupling of the dark photon to the hyper-charge as
                                                 ε
                                      L̃ = −           F̃ 0 B µν .                                  (1.11)
                                             2 cos θW µν
The usual diagonalization of the gauge bosons Wµ3 and Bµ now includes also the dark photon Ã0µ
(in the non-diagonal basis) so that the physical gauge bosons Zµ and Aµ also contain a dark-photon
component A0µ in the mass eigenstate basis. In particular, at the O(ε) in the expansion, we have

                             Wµ3
                                                                   
                                           cW sW −sW ε             Zµ
                          Bµ  =  −sW cW −cW ε   Aµ  ,                                  (1.12)
                               0                                   A 0
                             Ãµ          tW  ε    0     1           µ

where cW , sW and tW are the usual cosine, sine, and tangent of the Weinberg angle θW , respectively.
New couplings of the massive dark photon to the SM fermions appear for the photon and the Z gauge
boson up to O(ε2 ):
                           L ⊃ −e εJ µ A0µ + e0 ε tW J 0µ Zµ + e0 J µ0 A0µ ,                  (1.13)
where Jµ is the EM current, while Jµ0 and e0 are the matter current and coupling of the dark-photon
in the dark sector, respectively. After integrating out the Z boson, we see that the coupling of the
massive dark photon to the SM fermions is recovered as −eε.
    Which coupling is used depends then only on the energy of the processes considered, with the
direct coupling to the photon for all processes below the electroweak scale breaking, and the hyper-
charge above it. Since all limits are to be considered approximately within the order of magnitude,
the presence of the factor cW in the definition in Eq. (1.11) does not matter. The Lagrangian in
Eq. (1.13) shows that, if the mixing is between the dark photon and the hyper-charge, the Z gauge
boson acquires a milli-charged coupling strength e0 tW ε to the dark sector current.
    For completeness, let us also recall two other possibilities that have been discussed in the literature:
10                                                                    CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

     - There is no kinetic mixing as in Eq. (1.1) but the mass term between the dark photon and
       the Z-boson is taken non-diagonal and therefore giving a mixing between these two states
       [20, 21, 22, 23, 24]. The dark photon is named the dark Z and there are characteristic
       experimental signatures in parity violating processes and the coupling to neutrinos;

     - The B − L global symmetry (or other conserved flavor symmetries) are gauged and taken to
       be the U (1) group of the dark photon, which mixes with the hyper-charge [25, 26, 27]. There
       is direct coupling to the SM fermions in this case and the dark photon is no longer dark.

    Although their implementation is not discussed in this review, other interesting generalizations—
as, for instance, the dark photon to be considered a Kaluza-Klein state in a model with large extra-
dimensions [28] or the interplay between the neutrino see-saw mechanism and the dark photon [29]—
should be borne in mind.


1.1.2    Embedding in a nonAbelian group
In the massless case, the ordinary photon still couples to the dark sector with a milli-charge εe. As
reviewed in the next section, there are very stringent limits on the size of such a milli-charge, at least
for reasonably light dark states. To avoid the necessity of assuming a very small milli-charge, one can
assume that the dark U (1) group is a symmetry left over after the spontaneous breaking of a larger
nonAbelian group.
    The simplest realization of this symmetry breaking is provided by the group SU (2) spontaneously
broken to U (1) by the vacuum expectation value of the neutral component of a scalar field in the
adjoint representation.
    In this scenario, the mixing term in Eq. (1.1) cannot be written because the larger group has
traceless generators. The absence of mixing is in this case protected against radiative corrections and
the dark and the ordinary photons see only their respective sectors (at least through renormalizable
operators).
    This scenario is also suggested by the extra Landau pole that otherwise would be present—
assuming that the Landau pole of the ordinary U (1) is removed by the embedding of the SM in a
scenario of grand unified theory.
    If we assume that the dark photon arises from a nonAbelian group, there is no milli-charged
coupling of the dark sector to ordinary photons. On the other hand, all states in the dark sector
must come as multiplets of the nonAbelian group and the possible experimental signatures of this
additional structure can be searched for.


1.2      UV models
Because the massive dark photon couples directly to the SM electromagnetic current, its phenomenol-
ogy is rather independent of the details of the underlaying UV completion. The two parameters ε
and mA0 suffice to fully describe the experimental searches.
    The case of the massless dark photon is more complicated because the coupling to the SM
particles only takes place through higher order operators whose structure heavily depends on the
underlaying UV model. Even though it is possible to frame the experimental search in terms of the
effective scale of these operators (as we do in section 2), the limits thus found begs to be framed in
terms of the UV model parameters, namely the masses and the coupling of the dark sector states, in
addition to the dark photon itself. For this reason, it is useful in this case to introduce a minimal UV
model (as we do in section 2.3) to provide the relationships among the parameters of the model and
thus possible to relate different limits that are instead independent or not present under the portal
interaction.
1.2. UV MODELS                                                                                        11

1.2.1    Massive dark photon: Origin and size of the mixing parameter
The size of the mixing parameter ε is arbitrary. It is this feature that makes the charge not quantized.
At the same time, it cannot be O(1) because, if so, the massive dark photon would have already
been discovered.
     A natural suppression of ε is achieved if the mixing only comes as a correction at one- or two-loop
level in some UV completion. This is achieved in a natural manner if the tree-level mixing is set to
zero. One looks for the renormalization of the model and introduces the necessary counter-terms,
of which the mixing in Eq. (1.1) is one. If there are states in the UV completion carrying both
ordinary and dark charges, the loop of these states generates the mixing but it comes suppressed by
the loop factor (neglecting logarithmic terms) and therefore of order, say, 1/(16π 2 ) times the square
of the coupling constant and therefore approximately O(10−3 ), for a perturbative value of such a
coupling. One can further suppress such a term by assuming that the states carrying both charges
come in doublets of opposite dark charges. In this case, the first contribution is at the two-loop level,
and approximately of order O(10−5 ). If the mixing originates in the exchange of heavy messenger
fields [30] or in a multi-loop contribution [31, 32], its value can be smaller.
     Even smaller values of the parameter ε are expected if the origin of the mixing is non-perturbative;
for example, values between O(10−12 ) and O(10−6 ) have been discussed—mostly within the broad
heading of string compactification [33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38], or in scenarios of SUSY breaking [39]
and hidden valley [40]. These arguments are often cited to motivate experimental searches in the
region of small mixing parameter ε in the case of the massive dark photon—regardless of the large
uncertainties in the predictions of the corresponding theoretical approaches.

1.2.2    Massless dark photon: Higher-order operators
The massless dark photon does not interact directly with the currents of the SM fermions. The
higher-order operators through which the interaction with ordinary matter ψ i takes place start with
the dimension-five operators in the Lagrangian
                                   eD i                      
                             L=       ψ σµν Dij M  + iγ 5 Dij
                                                           E ψ F
                                                                j 0µν
                                                                      ,                       (1.14)
                                  2Λ5

where Fµν 0 is the field strength associated to the dark photon field A0 , and σ
                                                                        µ        µν = i/2 [γµ , γν ]. The
operator proportional to the coefficient DM is the magnetic dipole moment and that proportional to
the coefficient DE is the electric dipole moment. The indices i and j in the fermion fields keep track
of the flavor and thus allow for flavor off-diagonal transitions.
     The dimension-five operators in Eq. (1.14) are best seen as operators of dimension six with the
gauge group SU (2)L taken as the unbroken symmetry of the Lagrangian and the SM fermion grouped,
like in the SM, into doublets ψL and singlets ψR . In this case, the operators contain the Higgs boson
field and can be written as

                                eD i     
                                             ij          ij
                                                            
                                                              j  0µν
                         L=       ψ  σµν   D    + iγ 5 D E HψR F     + H.c.                       (1.15)
                               2Λ2 L         M



The effective scale is accordingly modulated by the vacuum expectation value (VEV) vh of the Higgs
boson. This VEV keeps track of the chirality breaking, with the whole operator vanishing as vh goes
to zero.
    In this review we shall only retain the magnetic dipole DM term and set to zero the electric dipole
term proportional to DE . The inclusion of the latter would require the further assumption of CP-odd
physics which is, we believe, premature at the moment.
    Next, we have the dimension-six operators
                                     eD i
                             L0 =       ψ γµ (Rij       ij     j 0µν
                                               r + iγ5 Ra )Dν ψ F    ,                            (1.16)
                                    2Λ2
12                                                                             CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

where the form factor Rr is related to the charge radius of the fermion; the term Ra is sometime
referred to as the anapole.
     The operator in Eq. (1.16) contributes, via the equations of motion, to four-fermion operators—
which are accounted for in the effective field theory of the dimension-six operators [41] but are not
relevant for the massless dark photon interaction to ordinary matter—and to the form factors of the
interaction if the particles are off-shell. The latter provide a next-to-leading interaction between the
massless dark photon and ordinary matter that has yet to be studied (and is not discussed in this
review).
     Higher-order operators give vanishingly small contributions and can be neglected.
     The scale Λ depends on the parameters of the underlaying UV model. Typically, it is the mass of
a heavy state, or the ratio of masses of states of the dark sector, multiplied by the couplings of these
states to the SM particles. In particular, the dipole operators in Eq. (1.15), as they require a chirality
flip, can turn out to be enhanced, or suppressed, according to the underlaying model chirality mixing.
     The fact that the interaction between the massless dark photon and the SM states only takes
place through higher-order operators provide an appealing explanation for its weakness. The structure
of these operators leads directly to the possible underlaying UV models—a minimal example of which
is discussed in section 2.3.


1.3      Dark matter and the dark photon
Dark matter is part of the dark sector. The interplay between the dark photon and dark matter opens
new windows on its physics and gives further constraints. Whereas in most scenarios dark matter is
one of the fermion (or scalar) states in this sector, there also exists the possibility that dark matter
could be a very light vector boson like the massive dark photon itself.

1.3.1     Massless dark photon and galaxy dynamics
Models of self-interacting dark matter charged under Abelian or non-Abelian gauge groups and in-
teracting through the exchange of massless as well as massive particles have a long history.1
    The most obvious obstacle to having dark matter in the dark sector interacting via a long-range
force as the one carried by the massless dark photon comes from the essentially collisionless dynamics
of galaxies and the ellipticity of their dark-matter halo.
    The most severe observational limits come from the present dark matter density distribution in
collapsed dark matter structures, rather than effects in the early Universe or the early stages of
structure formation [48, 49, 59].
    Bounds have been derived from the dynamics in merging clusters, such as the Bullet Cluster [65],
the tidal disruption of dwarf satellites along their orbits in the host halo, and kinetic energy exchanges
among dark matter particles in virialized halos. The latter turns out to be the most constraining
bound, noticing that self-interactions tend to isotropize dark matter velocity distributions, while
there are galaxies whose gravitational potentials show a triaxial structure with significant velocity
anisotropy; limits have been computed, with subsequent refinements, via estimating an isotropization
timescale (through hard scattering and cumulative effects of many interactions, also taking into
account Debye screening) and comparison to the estimated age of the object [49], or following more
closely the evolution of the velocity anisotropy due to the energy transfer [64]. The ellipticity profile
inferred for the galaxy NGC720, according to [64] sets a limit of about
                                                         2/3
                                                   0.01
                                          mχ                     ∼ 300 GeV ,
                                                                 >                                              (1.17)
                                                    αD
     1
     The literature on the subject is already very extensive, see, for example, [42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51,
52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64].
   Interacting dark matter can form bound states. The phenomenology of such atomic dark matter [51] has been
discussed in the literature, see [59] and references therein.
1.3. DARK MATTER AND THE DARK PHOTON                                                                   13

where mχ stands for the dark matter mass and the αD scaling quoted is approximate and comes from
the leading mχ over αD scaling in the expression for the isotropization timescale.
    The limit in Eq. (1.17) is subject to a number of uncertainties and assumptions; it is less stringent
than earlier results, such as the original bound from soft scattering quoted in [48],

                                     GN m4χ N          GN m2χ N
                                         2
                                              >
                                              ∼ 50 log          ,                                  (1.18)
                                      8αD               2αD

where N is the number of dark-matter particles and GN is Newton’s constant, as well about a
factor of 3.5 weaker than [49] (see, also, [66, 67]). On the other hand, results on galaxies from N -
body simulations in self-interacting dark matter cosmologies [68], which take into account predicted
ellipticities and dark matter densities in the central regions, seem to go in the direction of milder
constraints, about at the same level or slightly weaker than the value quoted in Eq. (1.17)—again
subject to uncertainties, such as the role played by the central baryonic component of NGC720.

1.3.2    Massless dark photon and dark-matter relic density
All the stable fields within the dark sector provide a multicomponent candidate for dark matter whose
relic density depends on the value of their couplings to the dark photons and SM fermions (into which
they may annihilate, depending on the UV model) and masses.
     Not all of the dark fermions contribute to the relic density. If these fermions are relatively light,
their dominant annihilation is into dark photons (see Fig. 1.2)

                                               χχ → A0 A0                                          (1.19)

with a rate given by
                                                            2παD2
                                        hσχχ→A0 A0 vi =           .                                (1.20)
                                                             m2χ
For a strength αD ≃ 0.01, all fermions with masses up to around 1 TeV have a large cross section
and their relic density(see Eq. (5.15) in the appendix 5.2)

                                               2.5 × 10−10 GeV−2
                                     Ωχ h2 ≈                                                       (1.21)
                                                  hσχχ→A0 A0 vi

is only a percent of the critical one; it is roughly 10−4 the critical one for dark fermions in the 1
GeV range, even less for lighter states. These dark fermions are not part of dark matter; they have
(mostly) converted into dark photons by the time the universe reaches our age and can only be
produced in high-energy events. This is fortunate because, as we have seen, they are ruled out as
possible dark matter candidates by the limit on galaxy dynamics.
    Heavier dark fermions can be dark matter. The dominant annihilation for these is not into dark
photons but into SM fermions via the exchange of some messenger field S—the details depending
on the underlying UV model—and is proportional to the corresponding coupling which we denote
αL anticipating the discussion in section 2.3—with a thermally averaged cross section approximately
given by
                                                       2παL2
                                         hσχχ→f f¯vi ≃                                         (1.22)
                                                        m2S
instead of Eq. (1.20). The critical relic density can be reproduced if, assuming thermal production,
                                                           2
                                                  10 TeV
                                              
                                          2
                                       2παL                     ≃ 0.1 .                            (1.23)
                                                   mS

    These dark matter fermions belonging to the dark sector are in principle detectable through the
long range exchange of the massless dark photon and its coupling to the magnetic (o electric) dipole
14                                                                      CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION




Figure 1.2: Feynman diagrams for the three processes that are relevant for the discussion of the massive dark
photon and dark matter.



moment of SM matter which is induced at the one loop level in the UV model of the dark sector.
The somewhat complementary problem of dark matter having dipole moment and interacting with
nuclei through the exchange of a photon has been discussed in [69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75] This
dipole interaction is now included within the basis of the operators in the effective field theory of dark
matter detection [76, 77, 78].


1.3.3    Massive dark photon and light dark matter
When dark matter is lighter than the dark photon, and mA0 > 2mχ , the annihilation channel (see
Fig.1.2)
                                        χχ̄ → A0 → f¯f                                  (1.24)

is open and we are in a scenario with light dark matter (LDM) [79, 80, 81]. The cross section is
                                                                                 !
                                                              2
                                                                 
                                                                           2 m 2
                                        4π 2              2  m e               χ
                        σχχ→f f    =       ε ααD m2χ 1 +            1+
                                         3                   s               s
                                                               r
                                                                          2
                                                                 1 − 4mm2 e
                                                  s                     A0
                                   ×          2   2   2    2
                                                               r                                      (1.25)
                                        (s − mA0 ) + mA0 ΓA0         4 m2
                                                                 1 − m2 χ
                                                                           A0



The thermal average of σχχ→f f v is defined in Eq. (5.6) of appendix 5.2. In the non-relativistic limit
where s ≃ 4m2χ we have that

                                                            16πm2χ
                                  hσχχ→f f vi ≃ ε2 ααD                                                (1.26)
                                                         (4m2χ − m2A0 )2

if we neglect me with respect to mχ and ΓA0 with respect to mA0 . The thermal average in Eq. (1.26)
is related to the relic density ρχ (as reviewed in appendix 5.2), or, in terms of the normalized quantity
Ωχ = ρχ /ρc as
                                                2.5 × 10−10 GeV−2
                                       Ω χ h2 ≈                      .                             (1.27)
                                                    hσχχ→f f vi
    The general interplay between the massive dark photon and dark matter was originally discussed
in [82] and, more recently, in [83].
1.3. DARK MATTER AND THE DARK PHOTON                                                                                15

    It has been suggested [84] that the best variable to plot most effectively the constraints in the
case of LDM is by means of the yield variable
                                                                      4
                                                                 mχ
                                                       2
                                                y ≡ ε αD                                                       (1.28)
                                                                 mA0

because, from Eq. (1.26)
                                                                  16παy
                                               hσχχ→f f vi ≃                                                   (1.29)
                                                                   m2χ
and therefore the relic density is brought into the plot. Moreover, the scaling of these limits is made
less dependent on the nature of the LDM. We add the limits in the plane {y-mχ } to those in the
plane {ε-mA0 } in section 3.
    The cross section in Eq. (1.25), written in the t-channel (see Fig. 1.2), controls the size of direct
detection of dark matter in its scattering off the electrons of the detector thus producing ionization,
in particular
                                          16πµ2χe ααD ε2           2
                                    σe =                   F (q 2 ) ,                             (1.30)
                                         (m2A0 + α2 m2e )2
where µχe is the reduced mass of the electron and χ, and F (q 2 ) a form factor given by

                                                           m2A0 + α2 m2e
                                              F (q 2 ) =                 ,                                     (1.31)
                                                            m2A0 + q 2

with q 2 the square of the exchanged momentum. This relationship translates into a differential event
rate in a dark-matter detector with NT the number of target nuclei per unit mass

                                              dR         ρχ dhσe vi
                                                    = NT            ,                                          (1.32)
                                             d ln E      mχ d ln E

where E is the electron energy, hσe vi is the thermally averaged cross section with v the χ velocity,
and ρχ the local density of χ. This makes possible to utilize limits on LDM direct detection to
constraint the dark photon parameter ε [81].

1.3.4       Massive dark photon as dark matter
A very light massive dark photon could be a dark matter candidate2 if produced non-thermally in
the early Universe as a condensate, the same way as the axion is produced by the misalignement
mechanism [86, 87, 88]. In this mechanism, the value of the field is frozen by the fast expanding
Universe to whatever value it has at the initial moment. The rate of expansion is much larger than
the mass and the field has no time to relax to the minimum of the potential. The unavoidable (and
troublesome) Lorentz-invariance violation is estimated to be small and undetectable.
    In this scenario for the dark photon, as discussed in [89, 90], the mass arises via the Stueckelberg
mechanism and there must be a non-minimal coupling to gravity. Once the Hubble constant value
drops below the mass of the dark photon, its field starts to oscillate and these oscillations behave like
non-relativistic matter, that is, like cold dark matter.
    There exist two constraints on the parameters of this dark photon scenario. First of all, the initial
value must be fine-tuned to reproduce the critical density. Second, the decay into photons and SM
leptons must not affect the cosmic microwave background. This latter requirement means that the
mixing parameter ε must not be too large (roughly, less than 10−9 ) and the mass mA0 must be less
than 1 MeV.
    Production by fluctuations during inflation provides another possibility of having a massive dark
photon as dark matter [91, 92].
  2
      In addition, the dark Higgs field breaking the U (1) symmetry can provide yet another dark matter candidate [85].
16                                                                 CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

    The dark-photon dark matter is non-relativistic and interacts with ordinary matter mostly through
the photo-electric process in which a photon (with energy mA0 ) is captured by an atom, with atomic
number Z, with a cross section given, for ordinary photons, by
                                            √     8πre2  me 7/2
                                 σp.e. = 4α4 2Z 5                 ,                           (1.33)
                                                   3      ω
where ω is the photon energy and re the classical radius of the electron re = α/me . The cross
section for the dark photons is that of ordinary photons rescaled by the mixing parameter ε:

                                           σA0 = ε2 σp.e. .                                   (1.34)

This scenario is made accessible to the experiments by considering the rate of absorption of the dark
photon by the detector [93, 94]:
                                                ρA0
                                         ΓA0 =      σ A0 vA0 ,                                 (1.35)
                                               m A0
where the density ρA0 is estimated from the relic density (or the flux from the Sun).
                               Phenomenology of the massless dark photon
                                                                                                  2
     he phenomenology of the massless dark photon depends on the effect of the higher-
T    order operator in Eq. (1.15) which mediates its interaction with the SM particles. This operator
enters the measured observables with an effective scale Λ and the absolute value
                                              ij
                                             dM  ≡ |Dij
                                                     M|                                           (2.1)

of the magnetic dipole coefficient (neglecting the CP-odd DE ) which can eventually be related to
the parameters of the underlying UV model like masses and coupling constants. The experimental
                                                                                  ij
searches can thus be framed in terms of the scale Λ, the dipole coefficient dM       and and the dark
charge coupling eD , which we rewrite as αD = eD /4π. We do not assume this scale and coefficient
                                                  2

to be universal. Depending on the particular experimental set-up, the constraints are further sensitive
to which particular lepton or quark is actually taking part in the interaction. The index, or indices, i
and j keep track on the flavor dependence.
    We discuss in section 2.2 the other side of the massless dark photon, namely the search for dark
particles coupled to the ordinary photon by a milli-charge.


2.1     Limits on the dark dipole scale dM /Λ2
We collect in this section the known constraints on the size of the operator in Eq. (1.15).
   We show in Fig. 2.2 and 2.3 the more stringent limits. Though these limits are on the combinations
dM /Λ2 , with a factor depending on αD , we find it convenient to plot them as dM as a function of
Λ so as to easily see what values of the dipole coefficient are allowed given a value for the scale Λ
(and two representative value of αD ).

2.1.1    Astrophysics and cosmology
Astrophysics and cosmology provide very stringent limits on the interaction of the dark photon with
SM matter as given by the operator in Eq. (1.15). It is understood that all the limits are mostly
on the order of magnitude because of intrinsic uncertainties in the astrophysics of stellar medium,
supernova dynamics and cosmological processes.
    Astrophysical constraints for models with a massless dark photon can be derived from those ob-
tained for axion-like particles because the dipole operator in Eq. (1.15) gives, in the non-relativistic
limit, a derivative (and spin-dependent) coupling of the dark photon with momentum k and polar-
ization  to ordinary fermions ψ given by

                                       MA0µ ≈ ψ̄ (k × ) · σ ψ ,                                  (2.2)

                                                  17
18                     CHAPTER 2. PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE MASSLESS DARK PHOTON




 Figure 2.1: Bremsstrahlung of dark photons from electrons in a star and from nucleons in a supernova.


which, after averaging over the polarizations, gives the same contribution as that for a pseudo-scalar
particle [95, 96] like the axion, namely
                                          Ma ≈ ψ̄ k · σ ψ .                                        (2.3)
Only a factor of two must be included for the independent polarizations of the dark photon.
    Because the massless dark photon does not mix with the ordinary photon, we can compute the
limits in a kinetic theory in which the amplitude for the relevant process is computed in the vacuum
and the effect of the medium—be it the stellar interior or the supernova nucleon gas—is included in
the abundances of the SM states at the given temperature.

    • Stars. The luminosity of stars is related to their energy balance. This balance is a sensitive
probe of the stellar dynamics and the particle-physics processes on which is based. Three processes
are important for energy loss in stars: Compton scattering, pair creation and Bremsstrahlung. Of
these three, it is the latter that provides the most stringent limit. The non-observation of anomalous
energy transport, in various different types of stars, places strong constraints on the dipole coupling
between SM states and the dark photon [97, 15].
    The quantity we need is the energy loss due to the emission of the extra particle. The energy
loss per unit volume Q is given in the appendix 5.3 in terms of the squared amplitude of the process
of emitting, in our case, an axion.
    For the Bremsstrahlung emission of axions, by electrons in the field of nj nuclei with charge Zj ,
the squared amplitude is [98, 99]
                                             0 |p ||p |ω 2
                                        4α2 αae                               2
                                                           
                                                    1 2        2 p1 · p2 − me + (p2 − p1 ) · k
           X                 X
                     2             2
                |M| =            Zj nj                      2ω
                                          π (q2 + κ2F )2                 (p1 · k)(p2 · k)
           spin                j
                                                    
                                  p1 · k     p2 · k
                        + 2−              −                                                       (2.4)
                                  p2 · k     p1 · k
where p1 and p2 and k are the momenta of the initial electrons and q = p2 − p1 . ω and k the energy
and momentum of the axion and κF = (4αpF EF /π)1/2 where pF and EF are the Fermi momentum
and energy of the electrons in the plasma. The coefficient αae  0 is the coupling constant of the axion

to the electrons.
    In a degenerate medium (like the one for red giants and white dwarves) we have that the energy-
loss rate per unit mass Q/ρ is given by [96]
                                             0 T4 X
                                     π 2 α2 αae
                         Q/ρ =                           Zj2 nj F (κF )
                                         15     m2e
                                                      j
                                                              4 2
                                      0                    T       Z
                                ≃ αae 1.08 × 10     27
                                                                        F (κF ) ,                 (2.5)
                                                         10 K
                                                            8      A
the latter equation is written in units of erg g−1 s−1 , and the factor F is approximately given in the
relativistic limit as
                                              2 + κ2F     2 + κ2F
                                   F (κF ) ≃          ln          − 1.                            (2.6)
                                                 2          κ2F
2.1. LIMITS ON THE DARK DIPOLE SCALE DM /Λ2                                                          19

    The most stringent limit for electrons comes from cooling in white dwarves [100] and giant red
stars [101] by axion Bremsstrahlung in a degenerate medium. A combined fit of the data [102] finds
(at 2σ) that the coupling must be
                                          0
                                         αae ≤ 3.0 × 10−27 .                                 (2.7)
    The bound in Eq. (2.7) is translated into a bound for the dark photon by identifying the combina-
tion of parameters in the operator in Eq. (1.15) that controls the same process. This correspondence
yields the equation
                                     0       1        e vh me
                                                               2
                                   αae  =2       2 eD dM           ,                            (2.8)
                                            4π            Λ2
where the factor of 2 in front takes into account the two polarizations of the dark photon (with
respect to the axion), vh = 174 GeV and me is the electron’s mass.
    To satisfy the limit in Eq. (2.7), the dark photon parameters in Eq. (2.8) must satisfy

                                          Λ2
                                             e ∼ 4.5 × 10 TeV ,                                   (2.9)
                                               >         6   2
                                     √
                                         αD dM

after having included the numerical values of me and vh . The limit in Eq. (2.9) updates the one
found in [15].

    • Supernovae. An additional limit is found from the neutrino signal of supernova 1987A, for
which the length of the burst constrains anomalous energy losses in the explosion.
    As before, a bound can be derived from that for the coupling between axions and nucleons. The
corresponding averaged square amplitude is given in [103, 104] as
                                                   "          2            2
                                         3 α2 α0
                  X
                          2      16(4π)     π aN          k2             l2
                       |M| =                                      + 2
                                       3 m2N          k2 + m2π        l + m2π
                  spin
                                    k2 l2 − 3(k · l)2
                                                        
                             +                                                             (2.10)
                                 (k2 + m2π )(l2 + m2π )

where απ = (2mN f /mπ )2 /4π ≃ 15 is the pion-nucleon coupling and k = p2 − p4 and l = p2 − p3
and pi the momenta of the nucleons (see Fig 2.1). The coefficient αaN
                                                                   0  is the coupling constant of
the axion to the nucleons.
    In the thermal medium k2 ≃ 3mN T and we can neglect the pion mass to obtain
                                     X                            0
                                                     32(4π)3 απ2 αaN
                                            |M|2 =          2                                    (2.11)
                                                          mN
                                     spin


and the energy-loss rate per unit mass in the degenerate case is [103, 105]
                                                                          6
                                     0                     ρ          T
                              Q/ρ ≃ αaN 1.74 × 1033                             ,                (2.12)
                                                          1015       MeV

in units of erg g−1 s−1 , which should not exceed the neutrino luminosity. This limit yields, taking the
most conservative estimate in [106, 107],
                                             0
                                            αaN ≤ 1.3 × 10−18 .                                  (2.13)

   The combination that controls energy transfer to dark photons in this process from ordinary
matter (the quarks in the nucleons) is

                                   0           1        q vh mN
                                                                 2
                                  αaN =2           2 eD dM          ,                            (2.14)
                                              4π             Λ2
20                      CHAPTER 2. PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE MASSLESS DARK PHOTON

where mN is the nucleon mass. By taking the limit in Eq. (2.13), we have
                                          Λ2
                                             q ∼ 4.3 × 10 TeV ,                                   (2.15)
                                               >         5   2
                                     √
                                         αD dM
which applies to the light u and d quarks—if we neglect small corrections due to the form factors in
going from the nucleons to the quarks. The limit in Eq. (2.15) updates the one found in [15].
    A caveat in the limit in Eq. (2.13) is due to the fact that if the coupling is too strong the emitted
axions are re-absorbed by the expanding supernova and there is no energy loss; this happens for
                                           0
                                          αaN ≥ 0.7 × 10−14 ,                                     (2.16)

which yields
                                       Λ2
                                          q ∼ 5.9 × 10 TeV ,                                      (2.17)
                                            <         3   2
                                     √
                                      αD dM
There are however limits from laboratory physics, discussed in the next section, that almost close this
window.

    • Big bang nucleosynthesis. A cosmological bound for the dark photon operator in Eq. (1.15)
comes from the determination of the effective number of relativistic species in addition to those of
the SM partaking in the thermal bath—the same way the number of neutrinos is constrained. This
number is constrained by data on big bang nucleosynthesis (BBN) to be [108]:

                                         Neff = 2.878 ± 0.278 .                                   (2.18)

    We follow [15] in deriving the corresponding limits.
    The two degrees of freedom of the dark photon exceeds this limit at the big bang temperature
TBBN and must have decoupled before at temperature Td which is taken to be just above the QCD
phase transition: Td = 150 MeV. The request of decoupling before the BBN epoch can be translated
in having the Hubble constant (see appendix 5.2)
                                                                1/2
                                             Td2
                                                   2
                                                    π
                                   H(Td ) =            g∗ (Td )                           (2.19)
                                             MP l 90
be larger than the rate of interactions between SM states and the dark photon

                                            ΓA0 = nA0 hσvi ,                                      (2.20)

where hσvi is the thermally averaged cross section for the interaction of the dark photon with the
SM particles present at the temperature Td , v = 1, and the number density of dark photon is given
(see appendix 5.2) by (kB = 1)
                                                2ζ(3) 3
                                         nA0 =         T .                                  (2.21)
                                                  π2
    The cross section for SM fermions to Compton and annihilate into dark photon is approximately
given by
                                                 αD d2M vh2
                                        hσvi ≃               .                              (2.22)
                                                    Λ4
    We thus find the condition
                                                                     1/2
                                               Td2
                                                    2
                              2ζ(3) 3                 2π
                                   T hσvi <                 g∗ (Td )      ,                 (2.23)
                               π2 d           MP l 45
where the effective number of degrees of freedom g∗ (Td ) is bound from the limit on Neff . This
relationship is obtained from

                               TBBN 4      g∗ (TBBN ) 4/3 7
                                                   
                                      =                    < ∆Neff ,                       (2.24)
                                Td           g∗ (Td )        4
2.1. LIMITS ON THE DARK DIPOLE SCALE DM /Λ2                                                                                 21


                              106

                  dlM × 103
                              105
                              104                     LEP (e)
                              103                                                                          10 TeV
                              102    1 TeV
                               10
                                                                , µ)
                                1                     BBN (e

                              10−1
                              10−2
                                                      stars (e)
                              10−3                                                       α D = 0.01
                              10−4                                                       α D = 0.1

                              10−5
                                             2              4           6            8                10            12
                                                                                                       Λ [TeV]

Figure 2.2: Model-independent limits for the interaction with leptons. The limits on the dark dipole operator
  `
dM  /Λ2 are shown by taking the coefficient dM `
                                                 as a function of the scale Λ (for two representative values of
                                                       `
αD ). Given an energy scale, the allowed values for dM    can be read from the plot. The strongest bound on
electrons comes from stellar cooling (stars). Big bang nucleosynthesis (BBN) and collider physics (LEP) set
the other depicted bounds. Solid lines are for the representative value αD = 0.01, dashed lines for αD = 0.1.



which, knowing that g∗ (TBBN ) = 43/4, gives
                                                                                 −3/4
                                                   g∗ (Td ) > (43/7)4/3 ∆Neff            ,                               (2.25)

where ∆Neff ≡ Neff − 3 ≃ 0.34 by taking 2σ of the result in Eq. (2.18).
   The limit applies to the interaction of leptons (electron and muon):
                                                     Λ2
                                                   √    `
                                                          ≥ 6.6 × 103 TeV2 ,                                             (2.26)
                                                    αD dM
and quarks (s, u, d):
                                                     Λ2
                                                        q ≥ 4.3 × 10 TeV ,                                               (2.27)
                                                                    3   2
                                                   √
                                                    αD dM
which partake into the Compton and annihilation processes. The difference between Eq. (2.26) and
Eq. (2.27) is due to the number of colors.

2.1.2     Precision, laboratory and collider physics
Laboratory physics can set new constrains on the dipole operator in Eq. (1.15). They are less stringent
than those from astrophysics and cosmology because the higher-order dipole operator always yields
a small number of events; these small numbers are amplified in the stars by the enormous density of
particles in the medium but not in the laboratory experiments where the density is smaller.

    • Precision physics. The operator in Eq. (1.15) gives rise to a macroscopic spin-dependent (non-
relativistic) potential [109]:

                                                 αD v 2 daM dbM h                                    i
                                V (r) = −                         σ a · σ b − 3 (σ a · r̂)(σ b · r̂)   ,                 (2.28)
                                                    4Λ4 r3
where r = ra − rb is the vector distance and r = |r| and r̂ the corresponding unit vector. The
potential in Eq. (2.28) is between two fermions fa and fb , with spin σ a and σ b , and magnetic dipole
22                             CHAPTER 2. PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE MASSLESS DARK PHOTON


                             106

                  dM × 103
                             105
                             104
                                                                                                 10 TeV
                  q
                                                       ,d)
                                                 LHC (u
                             103
                             102    1 TeV
                              10
                                                           ,d,s)
                               1                 BBN (u
                             10−1
                                                        )
                             10−2                SN (u,d

                             10−3                                              α D = 0.01
                             10−4                                              α D = 0.1

                             10−5
                                            2          4           6       8                10            12
                                                                                             Λ [TeV]

Figure 2.3: Model-independent limits for for the interaction with quarks. Same as in Fig. 2.2. The strongest
bounds on light quarks comes from supernovae (SN). Primordial nucleosynthesis (BBN) and collider physics
(LHC) set the other depicted bounds. Solid lines are for the representative value αD = 0.01, dashed lines for
αD = 0.1.



moments da,bM , as defined in Eq. (1.15)—whose interaction can affect atomic energy levels as well as
macroscopic forces.
     The potential in Eq. (2.28) can be used to explore atomic physics as well as macroscopic fifth-force
like interactions.
     Many atomic energy levels are known with high precision. Unfortunately, the theoretical com-
putation is lagging behind many of the experiments, mainly because of uncertainties in higher-order
corrections like those due to the size of the nuclei. For this reason many results are given as energy
differences where corrections proportional to 1/r3 are factorized out. This procedure makes often
impossible to use these results to test the potential in Eq. (2.28).
     The best limit is obtained in the fine-structure spectroscopy of Helium. The extra interaction
between the two electrons has been discussed in [110] whose limits, obtained by the constraints from
the 23 P2 -23 P1 transitions in He, can be expressed as
                                                       Λ2
                                                          e ∼ 872 GeV .                                        (2.29)
                                                            >        2
                                                  √
                                                      αD dM
   Bounds on long-range forces depending on spin set limits on the scale of the operator in Eq. (1.14)
based on the potential in Eq. (2.28) as discussed in [109]. The strongest bounds come from limits
on macroscopic forces between electrons [111]
                                                       Λ2
                                                          e ∼ 1.61 TeV ,                                       (2.30)
                                                            >         2
                                                  √
                                                      αD dM
and electrons and nucleons [112]
                                                    Λ2
                                                           ∼ 1.94 TeV .                                        (2.31)
                                                           >         2
                                                √
                                                    q
                                                       e q
                                                  αD dM dM

The limits among nucleons and electrons and protons are weaker.
    Whereas the strong limits on the anomalous magnetic moments of the electron and the muon
are traditionally used to set limits on new physics, they cannot be used directly in our case because
2.1. LIMITS ON THE DARK DIPOLE SCALE DM /Λ2                                                        23

they only apply to operators coupling to the visible photon. The operator in Eq. (1.14) enters in
the computation of the magnet moments but only at higher order with two insertions in the loop
computation. The limits are accordingly weak. The contribution of the dark photon to the anomalous
magnetic moment is given by
                                                             2 
                                                 m` vh d`M                 µ2
                                                                               
                                0  3 αD                             5
                             aA
                              ` =−                                    + log 2                  (2.32)
                                      2 π           Λ2              4      m

in the M S scheme; contrary to the SM case, the result depends on the subtraction of a divergence.
    We discuss below in section 2.3 how in the UV model, where there are states coupled to both
the dark and the visible photon, the anomalous magnetic moment can be brought to bear directly on
the limits.
    The quantity ∆ae , the difference between the experimental value of the electron anomalous
magnetic moment [113] and its SM prediction is very small. The uncertainty on this difference (at
1σ) is given by [114]
                                        δ∆ae < 8.1 × 10−13 .                                (2.33)
By requiring that the contribution of the dark photon does not exceed this value, and therefore does
not contribute to the electron magnetic moment, we obtain

                                        Λ2
                                           e ∼ 0.075 TeV ,                                     (2.34)
                                             >          2
                                      √
                                       αD dM

by taking the renormalization scale µ = me .
    The analogous quantity ∆aµ , the difference between the experimental value of the muon anoma-
lous magnetic moment [115] and its SM prediction [116], is less than

                                        ∆aµ < 2.74 × 10−9 ,                                    (2.35)

at 2σ level, from which we derive

                                             Λ2
                                                µ ∼ 0.5 TeV ,                                  (2.36)
                                                  >        2
                                        √
                                            αD dM

for µ = mµ . Notice that the current 3.2σ discrepancy in ∆aµ could be explained by requiring

                                            Λ2
                                               µ ≃ 0.27 TeV .                                  (2.37)
                                                           2
                                       √
                                           αD dM

    Flavor changing processes can provide constraints on possible dipole operator contributions to
off-diagonal interactions.
    In the lepton sector the process µ → eX 0 , with X 0 a massless neutral boson, is bounded to [117]

                                    BR (µ → eX 0 ) < 5.8 × 10−5 ,                              (2.38)
which gives
                                      Λ2
                                         µe ∼ 5.1 × 10 TeV .                                   (2.39)
                                            >         5   2
                                    √
                                     αD dM
   Similar limits in the hadron sector on, for example, the decays K → πX 0 or B → KX 0 , cannot
be used because they are forbidden when X 0 is a spin one boson like the dark photon. The decay
B → K ∗ X 0 is not forbidden but gives a very weak bound. Instead, the current limit on the rare
decay K + → π + ν ν̄ given by (at the 90% CL, see, for example, [118])

                                 BR (K + → π + ν ν̄) < 1.85 × 10−10                            (2.40)
24                      CHAPTER 2. PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE MASSLESS DARK PHOTON

can be used, if we assume the dark photon to decay into light dark-sector fermions, and yields

                                           Λ2    > 9.5 × 106 TeV2 ,
                                      √       sd ∼
                                                                                                   (2.41)
                                          αD dM

which is the strongest among all the limits on the dipole interaction we have discussed.

     • Laboratory physics. An interesting limit is derived by means, again, of the data from SN 1987A,
this time indirectly from the counting of events in the Kamiokande detector. Axions from the star can,
via inverse Bremsstrahlung, excite the oxygen nuclei in the water tank as, in the process a16 O →16O∗ ,
which subsequently decay producing γ rays triggering the detector. The failure of observing these
extra events excludes the values for the coupling αaN 0   [119]

                                  6.5 × 10−14 ≤ αaN
                                                 0
                                                    ≤ 8.0 × 10−8 ,                                 (2.42)

which can be turned, taking the lower limit in Eq. (2.42), in

                                        Λ2
                                           q ∼ 1.9 × 10 TeV ,                                      (2.43)
                                             >         3   2
                                      √
                                       αD dM

for the massless dark photons. The limit in Eq. (2.43) nicely closes the range left open by Eq. (2.15).
A thin windows between Eq. (2.16) and Eq. (2.42) is apparently left open for αaN   0  ≃ 10−14 .

    • Collider physics. Limits from colliders are weaker but are worthwhile to be reported since they
come from laboratory physics which is independent of all astrophysical assumptions. The process of
pair annihilation into a dark and an ordinary photon provides a striking benchmark (mono-photon
plus missing energy) for this search. It applies to electrons in searches at the LEP [120, 121, 122]:

                                                Λ2
                                                   e ∼ 1.2 TeV ,                                   (2.44)
                                                     >        2
                                           √
                                               αD dM

and the first generation of quarks at the LHC from CMS [123] with luminosity of 35.9 fb−1 (the
ATLAS result [124] is with smaller luminosity and less stringent):

                                                Λ2
                                                   q ∼ 4.3 TeV .                                   (2.45)
                                                     >        2
                                           √
                                               αD dM

We computed the limits in Eq. (2.44) and Eq. (2.45) for this review by requiring that the number of
dark photon events be, bin by bin, less than the difference between the observed and the expected
number of events.

2.1.3    Can the massless dark photon be seen at all?
The limits for the dark dipole of the massless dark photon, as summarized in Fig. 2.2 and Fig. 2.3,
are indeed very stringent. For an effective scale Λ around 1 TeV, for example, only values of dipole
moments of O(10−6 ) for electrons and O(10−5 ) for quarks are still allowed. These are numbers
making detection in an experiment very challenging.
    This does not mean that the massless dark photon cannot be searched for in the laboratory. We
must look either to processes where SM particles heavier than the electron or the muon and the u or
d quarks are involved—and the most severe astrophysical bounds do not apply—or physics where the
dipole operator in Eq. (1.15) is between fermions of different flavors or very high-energy processes
where the large scale Λ is partially compensated by the scaling of the dipole and radius operators in
Eq. (1.14) and Eq. (1.16) and the overall contribution is less suppressed.
    For example, for a first generation quark taken to be a parton in a hadron collider, the limit at
                                   u,d
an energy scale of 10 TeV, is of dM    ≃ 10−3 (see Fig. 2.3) which would give a deviation in the cross
section within the reach of future machines. Similarly, for the electron, the limits in Fig. 2.2 show that
2.2. LIMITS ON MILLI-CHARGED PARTICLES                                                                      25


                             1
                                                      miniBooNE
                 ε = Qχ/e
                                                                  LEP LHC
                         10−1
                                               LSND                                 ΩDM h2 > 0.1
                         10−2
                         10−3     oPS
                                                     iQ                   WMAP
                           −4              SLAC mill
                         10
                         10−5                           CMB Neff
                         10−6
                         10−7
                                              SN1987A
                                                            N eff
                                                        BBN
                            −8
                         10
                         10−9
                        10−10 RGWD
                        10−11
                        10−12
                        10−13
                        10−14
                            10−3 10−2 10−1 1 10 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109
                                                                              mχ [MeV]

Figure 2.4:     Existing limits for experiments on milli-charged dark-sector matter. Limits from stellar evo-
lution (RGWD [125] and SN1987A [126]); Nef f during nucleosynthesis and in the cosmic microwave back-
ground [125]; invisible decays of ortho-positronium (oPS) [127]; SLAC milliQ experiment [128]; reinterpretation
of data from LSND and miniBooNE [129]; searches at LEP [18] and LHC [130]; WMAP results and dark
matter relic density abundance [130].



a dMe ≃ 10−6 is still allowed at the scale of 1 TeV and therefore accessible at future lepton colliders

for the projected sensitivity. As much suppressed as these cross sections are, they are comparable with
those of the case of the massive dark photon after the corresponding limits are taken into account
(see section 3.1.1).
     These, and others possibilities, are discussed in section 2.4 where some of the proposed experi-
ments to search for the massless dark photon are reviewed.


2.2      Limits on milli-charged particles
Milli-charged particles arise, as discussed in the section 1.1 of the Introduction, in the case of a
massless dark photon because the rotation of the mixing term in Eq. (1.1) leaves the photon coupled
to the dark sector particles χ with strength εe0 . Searches are accordingly parameterized in terms
of the mass mχ and the electromagnetic coupling (modulated by ε) of the supposedly milli-charged
dark-sector particle.
    The physics of stellar evolution for horizontal branches, red giants, and white dwarves (RGWD [125]),
together with supernovae (SN1987 [126]) provide bounds in the region of small masses (mχ <         ∼ 1
MeV). In this region constraints on Nef f during nucleosynthesis and in the cosmic microwave back-
ground (Nef f BBN and CMB [125]) limits the possibility of having milli-charged particles. These
limits are derived along the same lines discussed in the case of the massless dark photon.
    Further limits can be derived from precision measurements in QED, notably from the Lamb shift
in the transition 2S1/2 -2P3/2 in the Hydrogen atom [136] and the non-observation of the invisible
decay of ortho-positronium (oPS [127]). Limits in the intermediate mass range 1 − 100 MeV come
from a SLAC dedicated experiment (SLAC milliQ [128]) and from the reinterpretation of data from
the neutrino experiments LSND and miniBooNE [129].
    Searches at LEP [18] and LHC [130] cover larger values of the mass (100 MeV <       ∼ mχ <∼ 1 TeV).
    Finally, for very large masses (mχ ∼ 10 TeV) the impact on the cosmological parameters severely
                                         >
restricts the possible values of milli-charges (WMAP and dark matter relic density constraint, [130]
26                          CHAPTER 2. PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE MASSLESS DARK PHOTON


                            1

                 ε = Qχ/e
                                                                    ( µ ) ++
                         10−1                                      64
                         10−2
                                                       ++
                                                       )          NA
                                                   64(e
                                                NA                             milliQan:
                         10−3                                                  solid: 300 fb -1 -1
                                                                               dashed: 3000 fb
                         10−4                               Fermini @ FNAL

                         10−5
                                                  LDMX @ CERN


                         10−6
                         10−7
                         10−8
                         10−9
                        10−10
                        10−11
                        10−12
                        10−13
                        10−14
                           10−3 10−2 10−1   1   10 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109
                                                                                                     mχ [MeV]

Figure 2.5:       Future sensitivities for proposed experiments on milli-charged dark-sector matter. Future
sensitivities of NA64(e)++ [131]; NA64(µ) [132]; FerMINI [133]; milliQAN [134];LDMX [135]. The sensitivity
shown for LDMX @ CERN corresponds to 1016 electrons-on-target and a beam energy of 16 GeV. The existing
limits are shown as gray areas. The plot is revised from [14].



and references therein).
    All these limits are shown as filled area in the plot of Fig. 2.4.
    Milli-charged particles as dark matter have been proposed (see for example [137] and [138]) to
explain the anomalous 21 cm hydrogen absorption signal reported by the EDGES experiment [139].
Given the preliminary nature of the results, we have not included them in Fig. 2.4.
    The projected limits of future experiments are depicted in Fig. 2.5 together with the current
limits in gray background to show the expected advances. Of these, the most significative for masses
around 1 GeV comes from the proposed milliQAN experiment [134] proposed to be installed on the
surface above one of the LHC interaction points. MilliQAN could improve the collider limits by
two orders of magnitude. The range in mass between 10-100 MeV can be optimally covered by the
FerMINI experiment [133] proposed in the DUNE near detector hall at Fermilab. Finally the search
for milli-charged particles below 10 MeV mass may be improved by almost two orders of magnitude
by the LDMX experiment [135] proposed both at CERN [140] and at SLAC [141].


2.3       A minimal model of the dark sector
As discussed in section 1, it is useful to underpin the phenomenology of the massless dark photon to a
UV model. We consider a minimal model consisting of dark fermions that are, by definition, singlets
under the SM gauge interactions. These dark fermions interact with the visible sector through a
portal provided by scalar messengers which carry both SM and dark-sector charges. These scalars are
phenomenologically akin to the sfermions of supersymmetric models.
    In general, we can have as many dark fermions as there are in the SM; they can be classified
conveniently according to whether they couple (via the corresponding messengers) to quarks (qL , uR ,
dR ) or leptons (lL , eR ): We denote the first (hadron-like) Q and the latter (lepton-like) χ.
    The Yukawa-like interaction Lagrangian for flavor-diagonal interactions can be written as [57, 142]:
                                                                           
                        L ⊃ −gL φ†L χ̄R lL + SLU † Q̄UR qL + SLD† Q̄D R q L
                                                                         
                                        †
                                                        L uR + SR Q̄L dR + H.c.                  (2.46)
                                                   U†           U†
                            − gR φR χ̄L eR + SR       Q̄D           D
2.3.     A MINIMAL MODEL OF THE DARK SECTOR                                                          27

where qL (qR ) and eL (eR ) are SU (2)L doublets (singlets) for quarks and leptons respectively. Sum
over flavor and color indices, that we omitted for simplicity, is understood. The L-type scalars are
doublets under SU(2)L , while the R-type scalars are singlets under SU(2)L . The SL,R messengers
carry color indices (unmarked in (2.46)), while the messengers φL,R are color singlets. The Yukawa
coupling strengths are parameterized by αL,R ≡ gL,R
                                                  2 /(4π); they can be different for different fermions

and as many as the SM fermions. For simplicity, we take them to be equal and, in addition, αL = αR .
    In order to generate chirality-changing processes, we must have the mixing terms
                                                                      
                      L ⊃ −λs S0 H † φ†R φL + H̃ † SR  SL + H † SR
                                                    U† U
                                                                    SL + h.c. ,
                                                                  D† D
                                                                                                  (2.47)

where H is the SM Higgs boson, H̃ = iσ2 H ? , and S0 a scalar singlet of the dark sector. After both
S0 and H take a vacuum expectation value (µS and vh —the electroweak vacuum expectation value—
respectively), the Lagrangian in Eq. (2.47) gives rise to the mixing between right- and left-handed
states.
     Dark sector and messenger states are both charged under an unbroken U (1)D gauge symmetry
which is the same of the corresponding massless dark photon, with coupling strength αD . We assign
different dark U (1)D charges to the various dark sector fermions to ensures, by charge conservation,
their stability. Since SM fields are neutral under U (1)D interactions, messengers and associated
dark-fermions field in Eq.(2.46) must carry the same U (1)D quantum charge.
     When the dark sector scalar S0 and the Higgs boson acquire their vacuum expectation values, the
scalar messengers must be rotated to identify the physical states. Before this rotation, φLν , SLd
                                                                                                U ,and
  D are degenerate mass eigenstates with mass m . After the rotation, the mass eigenstates (labeled
SLu                                               S                   
                                                 U,D
by ±) are given by φ± ≡ √12 (φL ± φR ) ,        S±   ≡ √12 SLU,D ± SR
                                                                    U,D
                                                                              , corresponding to masses

                                                                                                  (2.48)
                                                         p
                                           m± = mφ,S      1 ± ηs

where we defined the mixing parameters for the S and φ messengers
                                                      λs µφ,S vh
                                             ηφ,S ≡              .                                (2.49)
                                                         m2S

       In the new basis, the interaction terms in Eq. (2.46) in the lepton sector is given by
                                                          gL            
                          L(lep) ⊃ −gL φ†Lν (χ̄R νL ) − √ φ†+ + φ†− (χ̄R eL )
                                                            2
                                       gR  †      †
                                                     
                                  − √ φ+ − φ− (χ̄L eR ) + h.c. .                                  (2.50)
                                         2
The corresponding interaction terms in the hadronic sector have the same form.
    Looking at (2.50), we can see that if χ is a stable dark-sector species, then its mass must be at
most m− + me . Similarly, for a dark-sector species Q, the mass must be no heavier than m− + mq ,
where mq is the mass of the SM species corresponding to Q. This sets an upper bound for the mixing
ηφ,S :
                                                      M 2
                                                         
                                      ηφ,S < 1 −              .                                (2.51)
                                                     mφ,S
In Eq. (2.51), M is the mass of the heaviest stable dark-sector species. We assume that M is heavier
than any SM species. The upper bound in Eq. (2.51) also guarantees that the scalar messengers are
heavier than the dark fermion into which they can thus decay.
    This model can be considered as a template for many models of the dark sector with the scalar
messenger as stand-in for more complicated portals. It is a simplified version of the model in [57],
which might provide a natural solution to the SM flavor-hierarchy problem.
    The discussion above is restricted to the flavor-diagonal interactions. A more general flavor
structure in the portal interaction, including the off-diagonal terms, arising as a consequence of the
28                      CHAPTER 2. PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE MASSLESS DARK PHOTON




 Figure 2.6: Vertex diagrams for the generation of the dipole operators in the model of the dark sector.


simultaneous diagonalization of the dark-fermion mass and quark interaction basis, can be simply
obtained by generalizing the above terms as follows [143]
                                  SLi Q̄Ri qLi → SLi Q̄Ri (ρUL )ij qLj
                                    U †   U            U †   U


                                                                   j
                                                                                                    (2.52)
                                    U †   U i          U †   U
                                  SRi Q̄Li qR → SRi Q̄Li (ρUL )ij qR ,
and analogously for the down and lepton sectors, where i, j are explicit flavor indices and sum over
i, j is understood.
     To keep the contribution to the dipole coefficient simple, lest the generality obfuscates the esti-
mate, we follow the guidelines of the model in [57]. We assume that the masses of the messengers
φi , SL,R
       U,i
             and SL,R
                  D,i
                      are the same and the mixing matrices ρij have a hierarchical structure (like in the
SM) with the off-diagonal smaller than the diagonal terms. The former hypothesis is a consequence
of the SU (NF ) flavor symmetry in the free lagrangian of messenger sector (with NF = 6)) [57],
while the latter follows from the requirement of minimal flavor violation hypothesis [142].
     We also take ρij ≡ ρD    ij = ρij . This way, the loop of dark sector particles is dominated by
                                    U

the contribution with the heaviest dark fermion coupled to the SM fermions of flavor i and j with
one coefficient off-diagonal ρij and one diagonal ρii . In the following, in order to distinguish the
contribution from the up and down sector couplings we will use the notation ρuu ≡ ρU11 , ρdd ≡ ρD      11 ,
ρsd ≡ ρ21 , and similarly for the other coefficients.
           D

     Matching the model to the effective Lagrangian given in Eq. (1.14) after integrating the loop,
and identifying the scale Λ as
                                               vh     mQi
                                                 2
                                                   ≃ 2 ,                                          (2.53)
                                               Λ      mS
with mQi the heaviest dark-fermion running in the loop, we can re-express the magnetic dipole
explicitly in terms of the parameters of the model. For example, in the case of the generic (quark)
flavor transition from i → j, with i- and j mixing, neglecting the SM masses, according to the
Lagrangian in (2.46) and substitutions (2.52), we have [143]
                                                       
                                 ij        ∗      gL gR
                                DM = ρjj ρij Re           FM (x, ηs ) .                      (2.54)
                                                  (4π)2
where x = (mQi )2 /m2S and ηs the mixing parameter defined in (2.49). In the following, we will
introduce the notation of mS U and mS D to distinguish the common messenger mass in the up and
down SU (2)L sectors respectively, and ηsU,D for the corresponding mixing parameters. The function
FM (x, y) is given by [143]
                                             1h                   i
                                FM (x, y) = f (x, y) − f (x, −y) ,                           (2.55)
                                             2
where                                                              
                                                                  x
                                        1 − x + y + (1 + y) log 1+y
                            f (x, y) =                                 .                     (2.56)
                                                 (1 − x + y)2
CP-violating phases, relevant for flavor changing processes, can arise from the mixing parameters.
For instance, in the n → m flavor transition, we can have CP-violating phase δCP from the relation
                                   ρnm ρ∗mm − ρ∗nm ρmm = 2 i sin δCP .                              (2.57)
2.3.     A MINIMAL MODEL OF THE DARK SECTOR                                                         29

2.3.1       Constraints on the UV model parameters
The introduction of the UV model makes possible to re-discuss the bounds of section 2.1 on the
massless dark photon in terms of the parameters of the model.
     There are no laboratory limits for the masses of the dark fermions from events in which they
are produced because they are SM singlets and do not interact directly with the detector. Cosmo-
logical bounds have been considered in [144] where, in particular, avoiding distortions of the cosmic
microwave background is shown to require the masses of the dark fermions to be larger than 1 GeV
or, if lighter, that the coupling αL and αR be less than 10−3 .
     The messenger states have the same quantum numbers and spin as the supersymmetric squarks.
At the LHC they are copiously produced in pairs through QCD interactions and decay at tree level
into a quark and a dark fermion. The final state arising from their decay is thus the same as the one
obtained from the q̃ → qχ01 process. Therefore limits on the messenger masses can be obtained by
reinterpreting supersymmetric searches on first and second generation squarks decaying into a light
jet and a massless neutralino [145], assuming that the gluino is decoupled. A lower bound on their
masses is thus obtained [146] to give

                                                     ∼ 940 GeV ,
                                                 miS >                                          (2.58)

for the messenger mass related to the dark fermions QU and QD . This limit increases up to 1.5 TeV
by assuming that messengers of both chiralities associated to the first and second generation of SM
quarks are degenerate in mass.
    For the masses of the lepton-like scalar messengers, constraints on the mass of sleptons [147]
give the following lower bound on the messenger mass in the lepton sector:

                                                 ∼ 290 GeV.
                                              mφ >                                              (2.59)

       All the limits discussed in section 2.1 can be re-expressed in terms of the UV model parameters.
       For example, the limit from stellar cooling in Eq. (2.9) becomes

                                          m2φ /mχe
                                                                    ∼ 2.1 × 10 TeV ,            (2.60)
                                                                    >         6
                             √
                                 αD αL αR |ρee |2 | FM (xe , ηφ )

where xe = m2φ /m2χe , with mχe the dark fermion mass associated to the electron, and ηφ the
corresponding mixing parameter in the colorless messengers sector, and the loop function FM (x, y)
is given in Eq. (2.55). This limit, which is obtained by rescaling the right-hand side of Eq. (2.9) for
1/(4πvh ), applies specifically to the Yukawa coupling of electrons and the corresponding messenger
state.
    For a quick estimate of the bound above and those that follow, the loop function FM (x, y) can
be considered a coefficient of order O(10−1 ) as long as ηφ is not too small. For instance, for x ≃ 1
and y ≃ 0.5, the loop function FM ≃ 0.09.
    Similarly, by using the same rescaling factor, the neutrino signal of supernova 1987A and the limit
in Eq. (2.15) yields now

                                        m2S /mQu
                                                                ∼ 2.0 × 10 TeV ,                (2.61)
                                                                >         5
                             √
                                 αD αL αR |ρuu |2 FM (xu , ηS )

where now xu = m2S /m2Qu , with mQu the dark-fermion associated to the light u quark. A similar
limit holds for the case of the d quark sector.
    The others bounds in section 2.1 can be written in terms of the parameters of the model in the
same way.
    Instead, new bounds can be set now that we have un underlying UV model because the scalar
messengers carry also the electromagnetic charge. Processes with the visible photon can thus be
used; these processes were not available for the model-independent case in section 2.1 for which only
the coupling to the dark photon was taken into account.
30                     CHAPTER 2. PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE MASSLESS DARK PHOTON

   The magnetic moment of the SM fermions arises from the one-loop diagram of the states of the
UV model.
   From Eq. (2.33) in section 2.1, we find

                                       m2φ /mχe
                                                              ∼ 9.8 × 10 TeV ,                 (2.62)
                                                              >         4
                            √
                                αL αR |ρee |2 GM (xe , ηφ )

where xe = m2χe /m2φ , with mχe the dark-fermion mass associated to the muon. The loop function
is in this case given by [143]
                                            1h                 i
                               GM (x, y) = g(x, y) − g(x, −y) ,                          (2.63)
                                            2
where                                                                             
                                                                              x
                                      (1 + y)2 − x2 + 2x (1 + y) log         1+y
                         g(x, y) =                                                     .       (2.64)
                                                   2 (x − 1 − y)3
    Also interesting is the anomalous magnetic moment of the muon because of the lingering dis-
crepancy between theory and experiments. From Eq. (2.35) in section 2.1, we find

                                       m2φ /mχµ
                                                              ∼ 6.3 × 10 TeV ,                 (2.65)
                                                              >         3
                           √
                               αL αR |ρµµ |2 GM (xµ , ηφ )

where xµ = m2χµ /m2φ , with mχµ the dark-fermion mass associated to the muon. Again, for a quick
estimate of the bounds above and those that follow, the loop function GM (x, y) can be considered
a coefficient of order O(10−1 ) as long as ηφ is not too small. For instance, for x ≃ 1 and y ≃ 0.5,
the loop function GM ≃ 0.05.
    The various Yukawa couplings and messenger and fermion masses are probed in a selective man-
ner in flavor physics where we must distinguish among the various couplings and states. Mixing
(proportional to a coefficient ρij in the equations below) between different flavor states must be
included.
    The strongest bound comes from the limit on the BR (µ → eγ) < 4.2 × 10−13 (CL 90%) [148]
of the MEG experiment. From this result, we find that

                                       m2φ /mχµ
                                                                ∼ 4.9 × 10 TeV .               (2.66)
                                                                >         8
                          √
                              αL αR |ρµµ ρ?µe | GM (xµ , ηφ )

    A weaker bound can be extracted, in the hadronic sector, from the difference between the exper-
imental limit on the BR (B → Xs γ) < (3.21 ± 0.33) × 10−4 [149] of the BaBar collaboration and
its SM estimate [150]. It yields

                                      m2S /mQb
                                                               ∼ 1.3 × 10 TeV ,                (2.67)
                                                               >         4
                           √
                               αL αR |ρbb ρ?bs | GM (xb , ηS )

where xb = m2Qb /m2S , with mQb the mass of dark fermion associated to the b-quark,
    The limits in Eq. (2.66) and Eq. (2.67) apply specifically to the off-diagonal terms in the Yukawa
couplings ρij of the muon-electron and b-s quark mixing respectively, and to the corresponding mass
of messenger states.
    The mass mixing in the Kaon system [143, 151] gives a further limit

                                        m2S
                                                  2 ∼ 3 × 10 TeV ,                             (2.68)
                                                    >       5   2
                                   2    2      ∗
                                          
                                  αL + αR ρss ρsd

which is not related to the dark photon and its coupling αD because it comes from the box-diagram
insertion of the dark scalars and fermions.
2.4. FUTURE EXPERIMENTS                                                                             31

    The limit in Eq. (2.68) is obtained by requiring that the messenger contribution to the box
diagram for the K 0 -K̄ 0 mixing does not exceed the experimental value of the mixing parameter
∆mK = 3.48 × 10−12 MeV [152]. Due to chirality arguments, the leading contribution to the box
diagram in Eq. (2.68) does not depend on the dark fermion mass, which is assumed to be much
smaller than the corresponding messenger mass in the down sector and therefore very weakly on the
loop function.
    The limit in Eq. (2.68) applies specifically to the off-diagonal term in the Yukawa coupling of d-s
quark mixing and the corresponding messenger state. A similar but weaker bound can be found from
B-meson mixing.
    As displayed in the equations above, all these limit can be made weaker by taking mχ (or mQ )
sufficiently light or by varying the corresponding mixing parameters ηs , ηφ . In the UV model is thus
possible to play with the parameters to make room for larger values of the dipole coefficient by
absorbing part of the suppression in the connection between the scale Λ and the mass ratios mχ /m2φ
and mQ /mS . For instance a scale Λ = 1 TeV for the new physics of the dark sector is still allowed by
the stringent bound in Eq. (2.35) if we take mχ sufficiently small. This way, there is some additional
freedom in comparing limits from different processes as compared to the model-independent case
where the scale Λ is taken to be the same for all bounds.


2.4     Future experiments
The massless dark photon has been neglected so far from the experimental point of view as compared
to the massive one. It is one of the aims of the present review to boost the community scrutiny in
this direction. In the past few year several proposals have been put forward and new experiments are
in the planning:
   • Flavor physics: This is one of the most promising areas for searching for the dark photon and
     the dark sector in general because none of the stringent astrophysical constrains discussed in
     section 2.1 applies given the flavor off-diagonal nature of the dipole operator in these cases.
      Proposals exist for processes in Kaon physics at NA62 [153]. The Kaon decay K → πA0 is
      forbidden by the conservation of angular momentum but the decay K + → π 0 π + A0 is allowed
      and the estimated branching ratio [151] is within reach of the current sensitivity. The rare
      decays K + → π + ν ν̄ [154] and KL → π 0 ν ν̄ [155] are other two processes where the physics of
      the dark photon can play a crucial role [156]. Also Hyperion decays can be used for detecting
      the production of A0 [157] and in the decay of charmed hadrons [158] and BESIII.
      In addition, decays into invisible states of B-mesons at BaBar [159] and Belle [160] and KL,S
      and other neutral mesons at NA64 [161, 162] can be used to study the dark sector (assuming the
      invisible states belong to it). These decays are greatly enhanced by the Fermi-Sommerfeld [163,
      164] effect due to their interaction with the dark photon—the same way as ordinary decays, like
      the β-decay, are enhanced by the same effect—making this another exciting area for searching
      the dark sector [146].
   • Higgs and Z physics: The striking signature of a mono-photon plus missing energy can be used
     to search Higgs [165, 166, 167] and Z-boson [168, 169] decay into a visible and a dark photon.
     Again, the stringent astrophysical constrains discussed in section 2.1 do not apply because the
     size of the dipole operator is dominated (in the loop diagram) by the heavy-quark contribution’s
     giving raise to the coupling to the dark photon, as discussed in section 2.3.
   • Pair annihilation: Collider experiment at higher energies and luminosities can use the same
     striking signature of a mono-photon plus missing energy to search for the dark photon. Even
     though the dipole interaction is suppressed and severely constrained in this case by the astro-
     physical and cosmological bounds discussed in section 2.1, it is no more suppressed than the
     equivalent cross sections for the massive case. Moreover, the dipole operator scales as the
     center-of-mass energy in the process and higher energies make it more and more relevant;
32                      CHAPTER 2. PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE MASSLESS DARK PHOTON

     • Magnons: An interesting possibility is the use of magnons in ferromagnetic materials and their
       interaction with dark photons (QUAX proposal) [170, 171]. The estimated sensitivity is again
       done for axions but can be translated for massless dark photons as in the discussion about stars
       above.

     • Astrophysics: Gravitation waves emitted during the inspiral phase of neutron star collapse can
       test the presence of other forces beside gravitation. Dipole radiation by even small amount of
       charges on the stars modifies the energy emitted; the dark photon is a prime candidate for this
       kind of correction [172, 173, 174, 175].
                              Phenomenology of the massive dark photon
                                                                                              3
     he phenomenology of the massive dark photon is discussed in terms of its interaction
T    with the SM particles, as given by Eq. (1.5):

                                         L = −εeJ µ A0µ ,                                      (3.1)

where J µ is the electromagnetic current. The strength of this interaction is modulated by the
parameter ε. The parameter space for the experimental searches is given by the mass of the dark
photon mA0 and the mixing parameter ε.

3.0.1   Production, decays and detection
Because the current in Eq. (3.1) is the same as the usual electromagnetic current, dark photons A0
can be produced like ordinary photons. The main production mechanisms are:

   - Bremsstrahlung . The incoming electron scatters off the target nuclei (Z), goes off-shell and
     can thus emit the dark photon: e− Z → e− ZA0 ;

   - Annihilation: An electron-positron pair annihilates into an ordinary and a dark photon: e− e+ →
     γA0

   - Meson decays: A meson M (it being a π 0 η, or a K or a D) decays as M → γA0 ;

   - Drell-Yan: A quark-antiquark pair annihilates into the dark photon, which then decays into a
     lepton pair (or hadrons): q q̄ → A0 (→ `+ `− or h+ h− ).

Different experiments use different production mechanisms and, sometime, more than one simulta-
neously.
    Detection of A0 is based on its decays modes. The decay width of the massive dark photon A0
into SM leptons ` is
                                                  s
                                                        4m2`      2m2`
                                                                      
                           0     + −     1    2
                       Γ(A → ` ` ) = α ε mA0 1 − 2            1+ 2       ,                 (3.2)
                                         3              mA0       mA0

which is only open for mA0 > 2me . Similarly, the width into hadrons is
                                                   s                      !
                                                          4m 2       2m 2
                                        1                    µ          µ
                    Γ(A0 → hadrons) = αε2 mA0 1 − 2             1+ 2        R,                 (3.3)
                                        3                 mA0        m A0

                                                33
34                         CHAPTER 3. PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE MASSIVE DARK PHOTON




     Figure 3.1: Production of dark photons: Bremsstrahlung, Annihilation, Meson decay and Drell-Yan.



where R ≡ σe+ e− →had /σe+ e− →µ+ µ− .
    Since all visible widths are proportional to ε, the branching ratios are independent of it.
    At accelerator-based experiments, several approaches can be pursued to search for dark photons
depending on the characteristics of the available beam line and the detector. These can be summarized
as follows:

     - Detection of visible final states: dark photons with masses above ∼ 1 MeV can decay to visible
       final states. The detection of visible final state is a technique mostly used in beam-dump and
       collider experiments, where typical signatures are expected to show up as narrow resonances
       over an irreducible background. Collider experiments are typically sensitive to larger values of
       ε (ε > 10−3 ) than beam dump experiments which typically cover couplings below 10−3 . The
       use of this technique requires high luminosity colliders or large fluxes of protons/electrons on
       a dump because the dark photon detectable rate is proportional to the fourth power of the
       coupling involved, ε4 , and so very suppressed for very feeble couplings.
       The smallness of the couplings implies that the dark photons are also very long-lived (up to
       0.1 sec) compared to the bulk of the SM particles. Hence: The decays to SM particles can be
       optimally detected using experiments with long decay volumes followed by spectrometers with
       excellent tracking systems and particle identification capabilities.

       Missing momentum/energy techniques: invisible decay of dark photons can be detected in fixed-
       target reactions as, for example, e− Z → e− ZA0 (Z being the nuclei atomic number) with
       A0 → χχ and χ being a putative dark matter particle, by measuring the missing momentum or
       missing energy carried away from the escaping invisible particle or particles. The main challenge
       for this approach is the very high background rejection that must be achieved, which relies
       heavily on the detector being hermetically closed and, in some cases, on the exact knowledge
       of the initial and final state kinematics.
       These techniques guarantee an intrinsic better sensitivity for the same luminosity than the
       technique based on the detection of dark photons decaying to visible final states, as it is
       independent of the probability of decays and therefore scales only as the SM-dark photon
       coupling squared, ε2 .

     - Missing mass technique:
       This technique is mostly used to detect invisible particles (as DM candidates or particles with
       very long lifetimes) in reactions with a well-known initial state, as for example, at e+ e− collider
                                                                                                       35




Figure 3.2:     Decay of the massive dark photon into visible (SM leptons or hadrons) and invisible (DM)
modes



        experiments using the process e+ e− → A0 γ, where A0 is on shell, using the single photon
        trigger.
        Characteristic signature is the presence of a narrow resonances emerging over a smooth back-
        ground in the distribution of the missing mass.
        It requires detectors with very good hermeticity that allow to detect all the other particles in
        the final state. Characteristic signature of this reaction is the presence of a narrow resonance
        emerging over a smooth background in the distribution of the missing mass. The main limitation
        of this technique is the required knowledge of the background arising from processes in which
        particles in the final state escape the apparatus without being detected.

3.0.2      Visible and invisible massive dark photon
In collecting the limits on the parameters of massive dark photon is important to distinguish two
cases accordingly on whether its mass is smaller or larger than twice the mass of the electron, the
lightest charged SM fermion.
    The dark photon is visible if its mass is MA0 > 2me ≃ 1 MeV because it can decay into SM
charged states which leave a signature in the detectors. We discuss the limits on the visible dark
photon in section 3.1.1.
    In the same regime for which MA0 > 1 MeV, however, the massive dark photon could also decay
into dark sector states if their masses are light enough. In this case we have a non-vanishing branching
ratio into invisible final states. The invisible decay into these states of the dark sector χ in given by
                                                     s                         !
                                                             4m 2        2m  2
                                            1                   χ            χ
                           Γ(A0 → χχ̄) = αD mA0 1 − 2               1+ 2         .                   (3.4)
                                            3                m A0        mA0

Dark photons decays into this invisible channel if mA0 > 2mχ ; this channel dominates if αD  αε2 .
    Most of the experimental searches with dark photon in visible decays assume that the dark-sector
states are not kinematically accessible and the dark photon is visible only through its decay into SM
states. The limits need to be re-modulated if the branching ratio into invisible states is numerically
significant or even dominant. We discuss this case in section 3.1.2 below.
    If the mass of the dark photon is less than 1 MeV, it cannot decay in any known SM charged
fermion and its decay is therefore completely invisible. The experimental searches for dark photon into
invisible final states are based on the energy losses that the production of dark photons, independently
of his being stable or decaying into dark fermions, implies on astrophysical objects like stars or in
36                             CHAPTER 3. PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE MASSIVE DARK PHOTON


                ε    10−2                         2) e
                                               (g-
                                                          A1    KLOE
                                                                                CMS
                     10−3        E774

                                                NA48/2                 BaBar
                     10−4           NA64(e)                     LHCb

                                  E141
                     10−5
                                                          nu
                                                     -C
                                                        al
                          −6
                     10                          CHARM


                     10−7                        E137


                     10−8
                                         SN1987A
                          −9
                     10
                          10−3          10−2             10−1     1      10    102     103
                                                                               mA' [GeV]

Figure 3.3: Existing limits on the massive dark photon for mA0 > 1 MeV from di-lepton searches at
experiments at collider/fixed target (A1 [176], LHCb [177], CMS [178], BaBar [179], KLOE [180, 181, 182,
183], and NA48/2 [184]) and old beam dump: E774 [185], E141 [186], E137 [187, 188, 189]), ν-Cal [190, 191],
and CHARM (from [192]. Bounds from supernovae [193] and (g − 2)e [194] are also included.



signals released in direct detection dark matter experiments. The experimental limits in the case of
the invisible dark photon are discussed in section 3.1.3 below.


3.1      Limits on the parameters ε and mA0
As discussed, the space of the parameters (the mixing ε and the mass mA0 of the dark photon) is
best spanned in two regions according on whether the mass mA0 is larger or smaller than twice the
mass of the electron: Roughly 1 MeV.

3.1.1     Constraints for mA0 > 1 MeV with A0 decays to visible final states
Two kinds of experiments provide the existing limits on the visible massive dark photon in the region
of mA0 > 1 MeV: experiments at colliders and at fixed-target or beam dumps. In both cases
the experiments search for resonances over a smooth background, with a vertex prompt or slightly
displaced with respect to the beam interaction point in case of collider, or highly displaced in case
of beam dump based experiments. The two categories are highly complementary, being the first
category mostly sensitive to relatively large values of the mixing parameter ε, (ε > 10−3 ) and the
dark photon mass (up to several tens of GeV for pp collider experiments), while the second is sensitive
to relatively small values (10−7 <
                                 ∼ε< ∼ 10 ) in the low mass range, mA0 less than few GeV.
                                           −3


     • Experiments at colliders. These experiments search for resonances in the invariant mass dis-
       tribution of e+ e− , µ+ µ− pairs. Different dark-photon production mechanisms are used in the
       different experiments: meson decays (π 0 → γA0 , NA48/2 [184]), Bremsstrahlung (e− Z →
       e− ZA0 , A1 [176]), annihilation (e+ e− → γA0 , BaBar [179]), and all these processes in differ-
       ent searches at KLOE [180, 181, 182, 183]. In a proton-proton (pp) collider the dark photon
       is produced via the γ − A0 mixing in all the processes where an off-shell photon γ ∗ with mass
       m(γ ∗ ) is produced: meson decays, Bremsstrahlung, and Drell-Yan production. LHCb [210, 177]
       has performed a search for dark photon decaying in µ+ µ− final states using 1.6 fb−1 of data
3.1. LIMITS ON THE PARAMETERS ε AND MA0                                                                                       37


               ε    10−2                                                                                            -LH
                                                                                                                        C
                                                  MESA                                                            HL h
                                                                                                                     -h
                                                                                                                 FCC
                     10−3               8     *            APEX
                                         Be
                                                                                            FCC-ee, 250 GeV
                    10−4                                   HPS
                                                                               Belle II
                                                                                            FCC-ee, 90 GeV
                                                                          LHeC (dashed)
                                        ++                                FCC-eh (solid)
                              NA64(e)
                     10−5                                               LHCb: 15 fb (solid), 300 fb-1 (dotted)
                                                                                      -1

                                         AWAKE
                                           FAS
                                               ER                 NA
                                                                   62         SeaQuest
                    10−6                          FAS
                                                     ER2               -d
                                                                         um
                                                                          p

                     10−7
                                                                               SHiP

                     10−8

                     10−9
                       10−3        10−2                 10−1              1                10          102              103
                                                                                                       mA' [GeV]

Figure 3.4:      Colored curves are projections for existing and proposed experiments on the massive dark
photon for mA0 > 1 MeV: Belle-II [195] at SuperKEKb; LHCb upgrade [196, 197] at the LHC; NA62 in dump
mode [198] and NA64(e)++ [131] at the SPS; FASER and FASER2 [199] at the LHC; SeaQuest [200] at
Fermilab; HPS [201] at JLAB; an NA64-like experiment at AWAKE [202], and an experiment dedicated to
dark photon searches at MESA [203, 204]. For masses above 10 GeV projections obtained for ATLAS/CMS
during the high luminosity phase of the LHC (HL-LHC [205]) and for experiments running at a future FCC-
ee [206], LHeC/FCC-eh [207], and FCC-hh [205] are also shown. The vertical red line shows the allowed
range of couplings of a new gauge boson X to electrons that could explain the 8 Be anomaly [208, 209]. The
existing limits are shown as gray areas. The bottom plot is revised from [14].



      collected at the LHC pp collisions at 13 TeV centre-of-mass energy. CMS [178] has performed
      the same search using 137 fb−1 of fully reconstructed data and 96.6 fb−1 of data collected
      with a reduced trigger information.
      Fig. 3.3 shows the existing limits for NA48/2, A1, LHCb, and BaBar; only one set of limits
      from KLOE is shown since the others have been superseded by the limits from BaBar.

   • Beam-dump experiments. These experiments use the collisions of an electron or proton beam
     with a fixed-target or a dump to generate the dark photon via Bremsstrahlung (electron and
     proton beams), meson production and QCD processes (proton beams only). The products
     of the collisions are mostly absorbed in the dump and the dark photon is searched for as a
     displaced vertex with two opposite charged tracks in the decay volume of the experiment.
      Fig. 3.3 shows the limits from experiments at extracted electron beams (E141 [186] and
      E137 [187, 188, 189] at SLAC, E774 [185] at Fermilab) and at extracted proton beams from
      CHARM at CERN ([192] based on CHARM data [211]).

     In addition, bounds on energy losses in supernovae provide further limits in the region of small
masses. These limits where discussed in [212, 213] and updated in [193, 214] by including the effect
of finite temperature and plasma density.
     Also the electron magnetic moment, with its very precise experimental determination, can be
used to set an indirect limit [194]. These limits are included in Fig. 3.3.
     Recent constraints from ATLAS [215, 216] and CMS [217] would nominally cover the interesting
region around 1 GeV for ε between 10−6 and 10−2 but unfortunately they have been framed within
a restrictive model and are not on the same footing that the limits included in Fig. 3.3.
38                        CHAPTER 3. PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE MASSIVE DARK PHOTON

    Additional limits (not included in Fig. 3.3) from cosmology (in the cosmic microwave background
and nucleosynthesis) exist in the very dark region of very small ε < 10−10 [218].
    Looking at Fig. 3.3, it is clear that it would be desirable to first close the gap between the beam-
dump and the collider based experiments in the region between tens of MeV up to 1 GeV in the dark
photon mass, and then extend the limits for larger masses. Both of these goals could be achieved
through a series of experiments summarized here below whose sensitivity is shown in Figure 3.4 as
colored curves.

     - Belle-II at SuperKEKB will search for visible dark photon decays A0 → e+ e− , µ+ µ− where A0
       is produced in the process e+ e− → A0 γ. The projections shown in Fig. ?? is based on 50 ab−1
       of integrated luminosity [195].

     - LHCb upgrade (phase I and phase II) at the LHC: LHCb phase I will search for dark photon in
       visible final states both using the inclusive di-muon production [196] and the D∗0 → D0 e+ e−
       decays [197]. The projections are based on 15 fb−1 , 3 years data taking with 5 fb−1 /year with
       an upgraded detector after the LHC Long Shutdown 2. This can be further improved with a
       possible Phase II upgraded detector [219] collecting up to 300 fb−1 of integrated luminosity
       after Long Shutdown 4.

     - NA62++ or NA62 in dump mode at the SPS, CERN, will search for a multitude of feebly-
       interacting particles, including dark photon, decaying into visible final states and possibly
       emerging from the interactions of 400 GeV proton beam with a dump. NA62 aims to col-
       lect approximately 1018 protons-on-target in 2021-2024 [198].

     - NA64(e)++ at the SPS, CERN, is the upgrade of the existing NA64(e) experiment. It aims to
       collect about 5 × 1012 electrons-on-target after the CERN Long Shutdown 2 [131].

     - NA64-like experiment at AWAKE, CERN: progress in the coming years in proton-driven plasma
       wake-field acceleration of electrons at the AWAKE facility at CERN could allow an NA64-like
       experiment be served by a high-intensity high energy primary electron beam for search for dark
       photons in visible final states [202]. The sensitivity plot has been obtained assuming ∼ 1016
       electrons-on-target with an energy of 50 GeV.

     - FASER and FASER2 at the LHC, CERN: FASER [199] is being installed in a service tunnel of
       the LHC located along the beam collision axis, 480 m downstream from the ATLAS interaction
       point. At this location, FASER (and possibly its larger successor FASER2) will enhance the LHC
       discovery potential by providing sensitivity to dark photons, dark Higgs bosons, heavy neutral
       leptons, axion-like particles, and many other proposed feebly-interacting particles [220]. FASER
       and FASER2 aim to collect 150 fb−1 and 3000 fb−1 of integrated luminosity, respectively.

     - HPS at Jefferson Laboratory (JLab) The HPS experiment [201], proposed at an electron beam-
       dump at CEBAF electron beam (2.2-6.6 GeV, up to 500 nA), search for visible (A0 → e+ e− )
       dark photon (prompt and displaced) decays produced via Bremsstrahlung production in a thin
       W target. The experiment makes use of the 200 nA electron beam available in Hall-B at
       Jefferson Lab.

     - SeaQuest at Fermilab (FNAL) will search for visible dark photon decays A0 → e+ e− at the
       120 GeV main injector proton beamline at FNAL [200]. It plans to accumulate approximately
       1018 protons-on-target by 2024.

     - MAGIX or Beam Dump Experiment at MESA, Mainz: The MESA accelerator is a continuous
       wave linac that will be able to provide an electron beam of Emax = 155 MeV energy and up
       to 1 mA current [203]. The MAGIX detector is a twin arm dipole spectrometer placed around
       a gas target and will search for search for visible (A0 → e+ e− ) dark photon (prompt and
       displaced) decays produced via Bremsstrahlung production [204]. The possibility of a beam
3.1. LIMITS ON THE PARAMETERS ε AND MA0                                                                              39


                ε    10−2
                                          tra
                                       pec                                    E949
                                  mic s             (g-2) µ ± 5 σ (favored)
                              ato

                     10−3
                                                                                                   BaBar (2017)
                                                                                     NA62 (2019)

                                )
                            (g-2 e
                     10−4

                                              19)
                                      4 (20
                     10−5     NA6




                     10−6


                     10−7
                       10−3                             10−2                    10−1                 1
                                                                                                         mA' [GeV]

Figure 3.5: Existing limits for a massive dark photon going to invisible final states (αD >> αε2 ). Existing
limits from Kaon decay experiments (E787 [222], E949 [223], NA62 [224]), BaBar [225], and NA64(e) [226].
The constraints from (g − 2)µ [115] and (g − 2)e are also shown.



      dump setup experiment is also under study. Timeline: targeted operations in 2021-2022 and 2
      years of data taking.

    - Experiments at a future e+ e− circular collider, FCC-ee: a powerful technique to be exploited
      at experiments running at a future e+ e− circular collider is the radiative return, e+ e− →
      A0 γ, A0 → µ+ µ− . The results obtained in [206] have been rescaled to the integrated luminosi-
                         √                              √
      ties of 150 fb−1 at s = 90 GeV and 5 ab−1 at s = 250 GeV, as in [221].

    - ATLAS/CMS at the high-luminosity phase at the LHC and at a future pp circular collider: at pp
      colliders the dark photon can be produced via a Drell-Yan process, pp → A0 → e+ e− , µ+ µ− .
                                                                               √
      The physics reach of ATLAS/CMS like experiments have been computed for s = 14 TeV and
                   √
      3 ab−1 and s = 100 TeV, 3 ab−1 [205].

    - ATLAS/CMS at a possible LHeC collider in the LHC tunnel and a future FCC-eh circular
      collider: At the LHeC (FCC-eh) a 7 TeV (50 TeV) a proton beam collides with a 60 GeV
      electron beam achieving a center-of-mass energy of 1.3 TeV (3.5 TeV) and a total integrate
      luminosity of 1 ab−1 (3 ab−1 ). At eh colliders the main production process for the dark photon
      is the deep inelastic scattering e− + parton → e− parton A0 , with A0 → charged fermions
      [207].

3.1.2    Constraints for mA0 > 1 MeV with A0 decays to invisible final states
Different constraints apply in the case of massive dark photon going into invisible final states in the
mass region mA0 > 1 MeV. In this case techniques like missing momentum, missing energy, and
missing mass are used in order to identify a possible massive dark photon decaying into invisible final
states.
    The most stringent bounds come from BaBar [225] and the electron beam dump NA64(e) ex-
periment at CERN [226] which recently superseded the results from Kaon experiments (E787 [222]
and E949 [223] at BNL, NA62 [224] at CERN). The existing bounds are depicted in the top plot of
Fig. 3.5 as colored areas. These limits overlap with the exclusion regions defined by the dark photon
40                          CHAPTER 3. PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE MASSIVE DARK PHOTON


                ε    10−2


                     10−3
                                PADME @ BTF                           BelleII 20 fb -1
                                                           KLE
                     10−4
                                                              VER




                                                              A C
                     10−5
                                                           SL
                                                      @
                                                   MX
                                 ++ (e)          LD
                                 4
                              NA6


                     10−6                                  CE
                                                             RN

                                                   M  X@
                                                 LD

                     10−7
                       10−3               10−2               10−1              1
                                                                                   mA' [GeV]

Figure 3.6: Future sensitivities for proposed experiments for a massive dark photon going to invisible final
states (αD >> αε2 ). Future sensitivities for NA64(e)++ [131], Belle II [195], KLEVER [227], PADME [228],
LDMX@SLAC [135, 140], and LDMX@CERN [135, 141]. The sensitivity curves for LDMX@SLAC and
LDMX@CERN assume 1014 electrons-on-target and Ebeam = 4 GeV and 1016 electrons-on-target and
Ebeam = 16 GeV, respectively. The bottom plot is revised from [14]. See text for details.



decays into visible final states for masses mA0 > 1 GeV and complement them in the range of masses
10 MeV <          ∼ 1 GeV and kinetic mixing strength 10 <      ∼ 10 , where the searches of dark
                                                         −5          −3
         ∼ mA0 <                                             ∼ε<
photon into visible decays are typically weaker.
    Sensitivities of existing or proposed experiments are shown in Fig. 3.6 as colored lines. These
include:

     - NA64(e)++ with 5 × 1012 electrons-on-target will search A0 → invisible final states with a miss-
       ing energy technique using a secondary electron beam at ∼ 100 GeV at the CERN SPS [131].

     - Belle II will search for dark photons in the process e+ e− → A0 and A0 → invisible [195].
       Projections are based on 20 fb−1 of integrated luminosity.

     - KLEVER, proposed at the SPS, could search for dark photons in invisible final states as a
       by-product of the analysis of the KL → π 0 νν rare decay, pushing further the investigation
       performed by traditional Kaon experiments in the mass region between 100-200 MeV [227].

     - PADME [228] will search for A0 → invisible final states using the missing momentum technique
       at the Beam Test Facility (BTF) at Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati (INFN). It will use a
       550 MeV positron beam on a diamond target. A first commissioning run was performed in late
       2018 and early 2019 to assess the detector performance and beam line quality. A physics data
       taking to collect 5 × 1012 positrons on target is expected in the second part of 2020.

3.1.3     Constraints for mA0 < 1 MeV
Strong constraints exist for the invisible massive dark photon in the region mA0 < 1 MeV. They come
from different sources:

     • Atomic and nuclear experiments: These experiments aim to detect modifications of the Coulomb
       force (as discussed in [254]) due to the dark photon. Corrections in Rydberg atoms, Lamb shift
3.1. LIMITS ON THE PARAMETERS ε AND MA0                                                                          41


               ε    10−2
                    10−3              Co                                                    atomic spectra
                    10−4                 ul
                                            om
                    10−5                                           LSW
                             COBE/FIRAS                                             TEXONO
                                               b           CROWS
                                                                                                        10
                                                                                            NA64, 4.3 10 eot
                                                                                    Rydberg
                       −6                                                                               12
                    10                                                  C
                                                                                            NA64, 4.0 10 eot

                       −7                                        SH AS
                    10                                              IP
                                                                       S
                                                                            T
                    10−8
                    10−9                                       r
                                                          atte           XE
                   10−10                         D a r kM        SU
                                                                    N-
                                                                       L
                                                                            NO
                                                                               N1
                      −11                                                         0
                   10                                                                SUN-T HB RG
                      −12
                   10
                   10−13
                   10−14
                   10−15
                   10−16
                   10−17
                       10−20 10−18 10−16 10−14 10−12 10−10 10−8 10−6 10−4 10−2                               1
                                                                                               mA' [MeV]

Figure 3.7: Current limits on massive dark photon for mA0 < 1 MeV. Bounds from cosmology (COBE/-
FIRES [229, 230, 231, 232]), light through a wall (LSW) [233], CROWS [234], CAST [235], XENON10 [236],
SHIPS [237], TEXONO [238], atomic experiments (Coulomb, Rydberg and atomic spectra [239]) and as-
trophysics: Solar lifetime (SUN-T and SUN-L), red giants (RG), horizontal branches (HB) [240, 241, 214].
Additional limits under the assumption that the dark photon is the dark matter: The curve “Dark Matter"
includes the combination of the constraints from the references discussed in the main text.



               ε    10−9
                                                                        Dark M
                                                                                atter
                   10−10

                   10−11                               FUNK
                                                                                   SuperCDMS
                        −12
                   10                                      SENSEI
                                                                                                   XMASS
                                                DAMIC
                        −13
                   10
                                                                                           EDELWEISS-III
                        −14                   XENON10                                    XENON100
                   10

                   10−15                                             CDEX-10
                                                                                   XENON-1T (2020)
                        −16
                   10                                   XENON-1T (2019)


                   10−17
                      10−8        10−7      10−6      10−5       10−4      10−3         10−2     10−1        1
                                                                                               mA' [MeV]

Figure 3.8: Zoom in the range 10−8 MeV <
                                       ∼ MA0 <
                                             ∼ 1 MeV and 10
                                                            −17 <
                                                                ∼ε<
                                                                      −9
                                                                  ∼ 10 for the current limits
on massive dark photon for mA0 < 1 MeV. Results from dark matter direct detection experiments (XENON10
and XENON100 ([242] based on XENON10 [243] and XENON100 [244] data), XENON1T (2019) [245];
XENON1T (2020) [246]; DAMIC [247]; SuperCDMS [248]; CDEX-10 [249]; EDELWEISS-III [250]; SEN-
SEI [251]; XMASS [252]; FUNK [253]).




      and hyperfine splitting in atomic hydrogen have been translated into bounds on the massive
      dark photon mixing parameter [239]. The results of the TEXONO neutrino experiment [255]
42                        CHAPTER 3. PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE MASSIVE DARK PHOTON

       have been interpreted in terms of dark photon parameters in [238];

     • Axion-like particles and helioscopes: Experiments of light shining through a wall (LSW) for
       axions and axion-like particles can be adapted to the dark photon and limits can accordingly
       be estimated [233]. The same phenomenon has been used in the experiment CROWS [234] at
       CERN. The CAST result, on the flux of axion-like particles from the Sun (Helioscope), can be
       translated [235] into a bound on the massive dark photon parameters. The same is true for
       XENON10, whose data set provides further limits [236] and the results from the experiment
       SHIPS [237];

     • Astrophysics: The non-observation of anomalous energy transport (by the mechanism discussed
       in section 2.1) in stars on the horizontal branch (HB), red giants (RG) and the Sun (SUN-T
       and SUN-L) imposes severe constraints on the mixing parameter of the massive dark photon.
       Mixing effects are important in these processes for both the longitudinal (L) and transverse (T)
       modes and one must use thermal field theory [240, 241, 214]. The dark photon partakes of the
       plasmon modes (see appendix 5.3) in an effective mixing with the ordinary photon proportional
       to its mass (and vanishing as it goes to zero).

     • Cosmology: The oscillation between the ordinary and the massive dark photon γ → A0 induces
       deviations on the black body spectrum (as measured by COBE/FIRAS [256]) in the cosmic
       microwave background. This effect depends on the effective plasma mass of the dark photon
       and it is enhanced when this mass is equal to mA0 . The bound depicted in Fig. ?? follows
       the most recent evaluation [229, 230, 231]—which includes inhomogeneities in the plasma
       mass—for values mA0 < 10−15 MeV, and [257, 232] for larger values.

    Even stronger constraints can be derived under the assumption that the dark photon is itself the
dark matter. The combination (in order of increasing values of mA0 ) of

     - astrophysical bounds on dwarf galaxies [258]. These limits apply for values of mA0 < 10−19
       MeV and are not shown in Fig. ??, measurements of the temperature of the intergalactic
       medium at the epoch of He++ re-ionization in the presence of inhomogeneities [229, 230, 231],

     - cold Galactic Center gas clouds heating rates [259];

     - cosmic microwave background spectral distortions (µ and y-type) [231];

     - energy deposition during the dark ages [232],

     - the number of relativistic species ∆N ef f during big-bang nucleosynthesis and recombina-
       tion [90] and

     - the diffuse X-ray background [260]

yield a series of limits on the upper value of ε for different values of MA0 . These limits are depicted
together by the curve labelled “Dark Matter” in Fig. 3.7.
    In addition, there are limits from:

     • Dark matter direct detection experiments: These experiments are part of the on-going search
       for dark matter through its direct detection. Data from XENON10/XENON100 ([242] based on
       XENON10 [243] and XENON100 [244]), XENON1T [245], DAMIC [247], SuperCDMS [248],
       CDEX-10 [249], EDELWEISS-III [250], SENSEI [251], XMASS [252] and FUNK [253] can be
       used to constrain the massive dark photon parameters;

     • Haloscopes: Searches with microwave cavities for relic axion converting to photons [261] can
       be translated into limits (not shown in Fig. ??) on the dark photon parameter ε to be less than
       10−13 -10−15 in the range around 10−11 -10−12 MeV [90].
3.2. LIMITS ON THE PARAMETERS Y AND Mχ                                                                                                         43

                                                                Elastic Scalar Dark Matter
                                      10−7




                y= ε2 αD (mχ/m A')4
                                                                                                                                      -




                                                                          XENON 10/10
                                                                                                                         MiniBooNE (e , N)
                                                                                                               g
                                      10−8
                                                                                                           -2
                                                                                                          EI
                                                      BaBar                                           NS
                                           −9                                                        SE
                                      10                                      0


                                10−10                                                                                             CRESST-II

                                                      E137
                                 10−11                                   en
                                                                                        sit
                                                                                            y
                                                                       cd
                                                                  rel
                                                                      i                                                          α D = 0.1
                                10−12                  NA
                                                           64                                                                    mA'/m χ = 3
                                                      S N D
                                                    L

                                 10−13

                                10−14

                                10−15
                                                1                                               10                 102               103
                                                                                                                                mχ [MeV]

Figure 3.9: Existing limits for existing experiments for massive dark photon for mA0 > 1 MeV in the plane
of the yield variable y as a function of dark matter mass mχ for an elastic scalar dark matter particle. Limits
from BaBar [225], NA64(e) [226], reinterpretation of the data from E137 [188] and LSND [262]; result from
MiniBooNE [263]; interpretation in the dark photon framework of data from CRESST-II [264].



    The limits from dark-matter direct detection are shown in Fig. 3.8.
    Some of the limits on the right side of Fig. 3.7 are the continuation of the corresponding left side
of the limits in Fig. 3.5. The two figures are back-to-back at mA0 = 1 MeV thus covering the full
range of the dark-photon masses.


3.2      Limits on the parameters y and mχ
If the dark sector states into which the invisible dark photon decays are taken to be dark matter,
there are new limits involving also the coupling strength αD and the connection to the direct-detection
searches for dark matter. As discussed in section 1.3, the best way to plot the experimental limits in
this case is in terms of the yield variable y, defined in Eq. (1.28), and the dark matter mass mχ .
    The corresponding limits strongly depend on the nature of the dark-matter state χ because the
velocity dependence of the averaged cross sections. In the case of Dirac fermions, Planck data [270]
rule out sub-GeV dark matter because of their too large annihilation rate at the cosmic microwave
background epoch. For this reason, pseudo-Dirac fermions and scalars, which have velocity suppressed
annihilation cross sections, are usually studied.
    The current bounds and future perspectives in the plane y versus dark matter mass are shown in
Fig. 3.9 and 3.10 under the hypothesis that the dark matter is a scalar particle and for a specific choice
of αD (αD = 0.1) and the ratio between the mediator and the dark matter masses (mA0 /mχ = 3).
In these plots, the lower limit for the thermal relic density is also shown, under that hypothesis
that a single dark-matter candidate is responsible for the whole dark-matter abundance. It is worth
noting that results from accelerator-based experiments are largely independent of the assumptions on
a specific dark matter nature as dark matter at accelerators is produced in relativistic regime and the
strength of the interactions with light mediators and SM particles is only fixed by thermal freeze-out.
    Current bounds come from the same experiments using missing energy/missing momentum tech-
niques contributing to the {ε, mA0 } sensitivity plot (BaBar and NA64(e)) with the addition of the
re-interpretation of data from old neutrino experiments (E137 [188] and LSND [262]) and results
from current neutrino experiments (MiniBooNE [263]) exploiting dark matter scattering on nucleons
44                                           CHAPTER 3. PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE MASSIVE DARK PHOTON

                                                          Elastic Scalar Dark Matter
                                      10−7                                                     RENT




                y= ε2 αD (mχ/m A')4
                                                                                                                         SBND, π0, e-
                                      10−8                                                    COHE
                                                                                                                    X
                                                                                                                   BD
                                      10−9
                                                 Belle II - 20 fb-1
                                10−10                                                                                         CRESST-II


                                 10−11                                en
                                                                         sit
                                                                            y
                                                                                                          ,   8G
                                                                                                                   eV
                                                                     d
                                                                 lic                                   RN                    α D = 0.1
                                                               re                                    CE
                                10−12                               SHiP               M
                                                                                          X
                                                                                               @
                                                                                                                    eV
                                                                                                                             mA'/m χ = 3
                                                                                     LD                        16G
                                 10−13                                                               CE
                                                                                                        R   N,
                                                                                                @
                                                           ++                              X
                                                           )                              M
                                10−14              NA
                                                      64(e                           LD                                      SuperCDMS


                                10−15
                                             1                                  10                            102                103
                                                                                                                            mχ [MeV]

Figure 3.10: Future sensitivities for proposed experiments for massive dark photon for mA0 > 1 MeV in the
plane of the yield variable y as a function of dark matter mass mχ for an elastic scalar dark matter particle.
Projections for SHiP [265], BDX [266], SBND [267], LDMX@CERN [135, 141], SENSEI with a proposed 100 g
detector operating at SNOLAB [268], and SuperCDMS at SNOLAB [269]. The plot is revised from [14].



and/or electrons. Bounds can also be derived by using a superfluid He-4 detector, as shown in [271],
but they lie at the margin of the range included in Fig. 3.9.
    In all the bounds shown for electron beam-dump or missing energy experiments, we are neglecting
the contribution of secondary positrons in dark photon production through annihilation on atomic
electrons, as for example studied in [189].
    Future initiatives that could explore a still uncovered parameter space in the plane {y, mχ } for dark
matter masses below 1 GeV are all those that have sensitivity in the plane {ε, mA0 } and, in addition,
accelerator-based and dark matter direct detection experiments exploiting dark matter scattering
against the nucleons and/or electrons. Accelerator-based experiments are SHiP at CERN [265], and
BDX at JLab [266] and SBND [267] at FNAL as explained below.

     - BDX at JLAB: The Beam Dump eXperiment (BDX) [266] is aiming to detect light dark matter
       χ produced in the interaction of an intense (100 µA) 10 GeV electron beam with a dump.
       The experiment is sensitive to elastic dark matter scattering e− χ → e− χ in the detector after
       production in e− Z → e− ZA0 (A0 → χχ).

     - SBND is planned to be installed at the 8 GeV proton Booster Neutrino Beamline at FNAL about
       470 m downstream of the beam dump [267]. The dark matter beam is primarily produced via
       pion decays out of collisions from the primary proton beam, and identified via dark-matter-
       nucleon or dark-matter-electron elastic scattering in a LAr-based detector. SBND is expected
       to improve upon MiniBooNE by more than an order of magnitude with 6 × 1020 protons-on-
       target.

    Also dark matter direct-detection experiments with sensitivity below 1 GeV mass contribute to
this plot. These are:

     - SENSEI is a direct detection experiment [272] that will be able to explore dark matter candidates
       with masses in the 1 eV and few GeV range, by detecting the signal released in dark-matter-
       electron scattering interactions in a fully depleted silicon CCD. A 2-gram detector is already
3.2. LIMITS ON THE PARAMETERS Y AND Mχ                                                          45

    operating in the NUMI access tunnel [273]. A larger project (100 grams) can be deployed at
    SNOLAB if funding is obtained [268].

  - CRESST-II [264] uses cryogenic detectors to search for nuclear recoil events induced by elastic
    scattering of dark-matter particles in CaWO4 crystals. Because of its low-energy threshold,
    the sensitivity to dark matter was extended in the sub-GeV region. Current bounds are derived
    from a dataset corresponding to 52 kg live days.

  - super-CDMS [269] at SNOLAB (Canada)Start mid-2021, and uses 30 kg of Germanium and
    Silicium detectors.
46   CHAPTER 3. PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE MASSIVE DARK PHOTON
                                                                                           Outlook
                                                                                                     4
    n the past 50 years it has been assumed that physics beyond the SM interacted through
I   (at least) some of the same gauge interactions of the SM. The minimal supersymmetric SM and
weakly interacting massive dark matter are the two preeminent and most influential models based on
this paradigm.
     This program is now running out of some of the initial momentum because of the lack of the
discovery of new particles. In the absence of new states, the many parameters, for instance, of
the minimal supersymmetric SM are working against its usefulness as a foil for the SM in mapping
possible experimental discrepancies.
     In more recent times—mostly under the influence of this lack of any real signal of the breaking up
of the SM—a more general scenario has been attracting increasing interest. Matter beyond the SM
is part of a new sector which is dark because it does not interact through the SM gauge interactions.
The dark sector may contain a wealth of physics with many particles (some of which are dark matter)
and interactions.
     From our side, in the visible world, we may glimpse this dark sector through a portal. If it exists,
this portal can take various forms depending on the spin of the mediator. We have reviewed in this
primer the vector case in which the portal arises from the kinetic mixing between the SM electric (or
hyper) charge gauge group and an U (1) gauge symmetry of the dark sector.
     The discovery of the dark photon associated to this new Abelian gauge symmetry is by far more
interesting than finding just a new particle because, if found, this new gauge boson would be the
harbinger of a new interaction and of the existence of a whole new sector of elementary particles.
     Past and current experiments have already restricted an important part of the space of the
parameters of the vector portal, both for the massless and the massive dark photon. Compared to
other searches for models beyond the SM, the parameters are fewer and the signatures more easily
interpreted.
     We are now on the verge of a new wave of experiments aiming at further closing the windows
left still open in the interaction between ordinary matter and the dark photon. The long years of
searching in vane for physics beyond the SM has thought us to be very patient and persevering.
     The constraints in the massless case seem to relegate the possible detection of the dark photon
to very large values of the effective scale Λ in the dark dipole interaction, as we discuss in section 2.1.
Exploring physics at such a large energy scale requires the high sensitivity that can only be achieved
either in future lepton colliders (where the scaling with the energy of the dark dipole operator will
also enhance its contribution) or in searches for rare flavor-changing decays like those of the Kaon
and B-meson systems.
     The constraints in the case of the massive dark photon have left open two important regions in
the parameter space. The first one is for the visible dark photon with masses around 100 MeV or
larger and mixing parameter between 10−6 and 10−4 . Many future experiments aim at looking into
this range, as we review in section 3.1.1. If also this window will be closed, it means that the already
feeble interaction of the vector portal is very weak indeed. Which leaves us with the second window

                                                    47
48                                                                         CHAPTER 4. OUTLOOK

still left unexplored: an invisible dark photon with a very light mass and a mixing parameter of order
O(10−8 ) or even lighter and with smaller mixing parameter, as discussed in section 3.1.2 and 3.1.3.
These two latter regions are of great interest for astrophysics and cosmology and a very active area
of speculations.
     No single experiment or experimental approach is sufficient alone to cover the large parameter
space in terms of masses and couplings that dark photon models suggest: Synergy and complemen-
tarity among a great variety of experimental facilities are paramount, calling for a broad collaboration
across different communities.
                                                                                               49

Acknowledgements

    The digital inclusion of some of the experimental limits in the figures was done by means of
WebPlotDigitizer.1 Numerical results for some of the dark-photon limits were provided by the
Darkcast package.2
    We would like to thank Tram Acuña, Andrea Celentano, Monica D’Onofrio, Angelo Esposito,
Oliver Fischer, Phil Ilten, Sam McDermott, Maxim Pospelov, Diego Redigolo, Josh Ruderman, Piero
Ullio, Alfredo Urbano and Mike Williams for useful discussions and suggestions.
    MF is affiliated to the Physics Department of the University of Trieste and the Scuola Inter-
nazionale Superiore di Studi Avanzati (SISSA), Trieste, Italy. MF and EG are affiliated to the
Institute for Fundamental Physics of the Universe (IFPU), Trieste, Italy. The support of all these
institutions is gratefully acknowledged. EG thanks the Department of Theoretical Physics of CERN
for its kind hospitality during the preparation of this work.




  1
      Website: https://automeris.io/WebPlotDigitizer
  2
      Website: https://gitlab.com/philten/darkcast
50   CHAPTER 4. OUTLOOK
                                                                                    Appendix
                                                                                               5
5.1     Dark sector portals


In this appendix we give the Lagrangian for the four portals mentioned in the introduction as well as
a minimal bibliography to provide their context within the search of phenomenological models beyond
the Standard Model.
    The dark sector is assumed to interact with the visible, SM sector through relevant operators of
dimension four and five (and possibly sub-leading higher-order operators).
    These portals are classified according to the spin of the mediator field. We can have

   • dark photon (spin 1): The portal operator arises from the kinetic is mixing between the SM
     photon field strength Fµν and a dark photon F µν0 :
                                                ε
                                                  Fµν F µν0 ,
                                                2
      it is an operator of dimension four. It is assumed that the dark photon is the main carrier of
      the interaction among the dark sector states.
      The existence of an independent U (1) group symmetry was originally proposed, in the context
      of supersymmetric theories, in [3, 4] and, more in general, in [5, 6];

   • axion (spin 0): The operator comes from the interaction between a pseudo-scalar, the axion a,
     and the SM photon and fermions ψ:
                                      a             1
                                         Fµν F̃ µν + ∂µ a ψ γ µ γ5 ψ ,
                                      fa            fa
      with operators of dimension five; the physics of this portal is based on that of the axion and
      related to the strong CP problem as well as axion dark matter. In many cases, the portal is
      generalized to an axion-like particle (ALP) with similar couplings but without the constraints
      of the QCD axion. The parameters of the portal are two: the mass ma of the axion, or the
      ALP and the scale fa . Often the ALP is the only member of the dark sector of these models.
      The original axion emerged from addressing [274] the strong CP problem induced by instantons
      in QCD. Light pseudo-scalar bosons are found in many models of physics beyond the Standard
      Model;

   • scalar (spin 0): Interaction between a scalar S and the SM Higgs boson H:

                                            (µS + λS 2 )H † H ,

                                                 51
52                                                                              CHAPTER 5. APPENDIX

       in this case the operators are of dimension three and four. The experimental limits are often
       expressed in terms of the two parameters ν and the mass mS of the scalar singlet, and neglecting
       the quartic coupling λ. In most models, the dark sector states have Yukawa-like interactions
       with the scalar S.
       The idea of a scalar singlet interacting with the Higgs boson originated within the frame-
       work of the next-to-minimal supersymmetric Standard Model [275, 276, 277] and developed
       independently in [278, 279, 280];

     • sterile neutrino (spin 1/2): Interaction between a heavy fermion N , which is a SM singlet, the
       SM Higgs boson and the SM fermions L:

                                                              yN LHN ,

       with, again, an operator of dimension four. The existence of heavy lepton-like fermions is
       suggested by neutrino see-saw models and the possible origin of baryon-number asymmetry in
       the leptonic sector. The experimental searches are framed in terms of the parameter yN and
       the mass of the heavy fermion N . The sterile neutrino can be the only member of the dark
       sector or be one among many other dark fermions.
       The structure of the neutrino portal closely follows that of the see-saw mechanism [281, 282,
       283, 284]—which was introduced to generate small masses for the neutrinos—and, more in
       general, left-right symmetric models [285, 286, 287, 288].

    More details on the various portals can be found in the same references cited in the introduction:
[7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14].


5.2      Boltzmann equation and relic density
This appendix includes a short summary of some results necessary to follow the discussion in the main
text about the relic density of dark matter and limits based on cosmology. We follow the excellent
review [289].
    The rate Γ for a the interaction between two particles is given as

                                                     Γ = nσv,                                    (5.1)

the product of the corresponding cross section σ times the number density of the particles partaking
n, times the their relative velocity v.
    This process proceeds as long as the rate is larger than the Hubble constant
                                                              p
                                                          π     g∗ (T ) T 2
                                          H(T ) =              √            ,                    (5.2)
                                                                 90 mP l

where mP l the Planck mass and g∗ (T ) is the number of effective degrees of freedom at the given
temperature is given by
                                                             4             4
                                        X                Tb          7 X     Tf
                           g∗ (T ) =            gb                 +     gf      ,               (5.3)
                                                         T           8       T
                                       bosons                        fermions

where gb,f is the number of degrees of freedom of the corresponding particle. The value of the
function g∗ (T ) goes from 106.5 above the EW phase transition to 3.38 at temperature around 0.1
MeV.
    After Γ < H, the particles are decoupled and their number density frozen.
5.2. BOLTZMANN EQUATION AND RELIC DENSITY                                                          53

   The number density at the equilibrium at a given temperature T (for kB = 1) is given by
                                d3 p
                           Z
                                          1
           neq (T ) = g∗            3   E/T
                               (2π) e       ±1
                                     3/2
                                 mT
                            g∗              e−m/T non-relativistic (T  m)
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                                 2π
                    =       ζ(3)                                                           (5.4)
                                 g T3
                               2 ∗
                                                   relativistic bosons (T  m)
                        
                        
                            π
                         3 ζ(3) g T 3
                        
                        
                                                   relativistic fermions (T  m) ,
                        
                                     ∗
                            4 π2
where ζ(3) ≃ 1.2
    The number density n(t) of a weakly interacting, massive particle χ at a certain time t in the
evolution of the Universe is computed by means of the Boltzmann equation

                        ṅ(t) + 3H(t)n(t) = −hσχχ→f f vi n2 (t) − n2eq (t) ,                 (5.5)
                                                                          

where H(t) is the Hubble constant and hσχχ→f f vi is the thermal average of the cross section for
a pair of the particles χ, with relative velocity v = (s − 4m2χ )/m2χ , to annihilate into SM fermions
f ; this term depletes the density as the particles χ turns into SM fermions. The thermal average is
defined as                             R 4m2χ √                   √ 
                                                           2 )K      s
                                        ∞    ds   s(s − 4m χ    1   T  σχχ→f f
                        hσχχ→f f vi =                         m  2           ,                (5.6)
                                                  8m4χ T K2 Tχ
where K1 and K2 are the Bessel function of second kind. It is usually computed after expanding

                                 hσχχ→f f vi = hs0 + s1 v 2 + O(v 4 )i                          (5.7)

with s0 the cross section in the s-wave and s1 the first correction in the p-wave. The leading term
is s0 for the dark sector Dirac fermions interacting through the dark photon, in both the s- and
t-channel.
    Eq. (5.5)
          p is usually re-written in terms of the function Y (t) = n(t)/T and the variable x =
                                                                             3

mχ /T = 2tH(T = mχ ) as
                                    dY      λ(x) 
                                        = − 2 Y 2 (x) − Yeq2                                   (5.8)
                                                                
                                    dx       x
with
                                              m3χ hσχχ→f f vi
                                      λ(x) =                  ,                                (5.9)
                                               H(T = mχ )
and in this form numerically solved.
   Eq. (5.8) can be solved analytically by dropping the second term Yeq2 (x)—which is small because
decreasing like e−x —approximating

                                 hσχχ→f f vi = σχχ→f f v + O(v 2 ) ,                           (5.10)

where v = 2/x and writing
         p

                                          √
                                           180 mP l mχ
                                   λ(x) =    √         σχχ→f f                                 (5.11)
                                            π g∗ x
by means of
                                             g∗ (T = mχ ) m2χ
                                            p
                                                π
                               H(T = mχ ) =                    .                               (5.12)
                                                 90       mP l
   The solution for x0 larger than decoupling temperature xd is
                                                        xd
                                            Y (x0 ) =      .                                   (5.13)
                                                        λ
54                                                                                 CHAPTER 5. APPENDIX

This quantity is related to the relic density

                                                                    Y (x0 )
                                             ρχ = mχ n(x0 ) = m4χ                                         (5.14)
                                                                    28xd

or, in terms of the normalized quantity Ωχ = ρχ /ρc as
                                                         √
                                                       xd g∗ 1.7 × 10−9 GeV−2
                                  Ωχ h2 ≃ 0.12
                                                       23 10    hσχχ→f f vi
                                                  2.5 × 10−10 GeV−2
                                              ≃                     ,                                     (5.15)
                                                      hσχχ→f f vi

which provides the relationship between relic density and the annihilation cross section.


5.3     Thermal field theory
The energy loss rate Q (energy per volume and unit time) for the emission of a pseudoscalar particle
(the axion) in a process with matrix element ,which is computed in the vacuum, is given by

                                d3 pi                         d3 pf                          d3 pa
                    YZ                           Y      Z                              Z
            Q =                         fi (Ei )                      [1 ± ff (Ef )]                 ωa
                              2Ei (2π)3                     2Ef (2π)3                      2ωa (2π)3
                    i=1                            f =1
                        1       X                          X       X           
                    ×                       |M|2 (2π)4 δ 4     pi −      pf − pa ,                        (5.16)
                        S
                            spin and pol.

where S is a symmetrization factor for identical particles. In Eq. (5.16), the medium is composed of
the initial particles i and final particles f with the corresponding energy ω and momentum p and with
occupation number following the distribution function (Fermi or Bose depending on the particles)
(kB = 1):
                                                       Z 2
                                                          d pj
                                         nj (Ej ) = gj         f (Ej ) ,                       (5.17)
                                                         (2π)3
where gj is the degeneracy number. TheP emitted  axion carries energy ωa and momentum pa .
   Given the squared matrix element      |M|2 for the process of interest, the electron and nucleon
Bremsstrahlung in section 2.1, the corresponding luminosity can be computed as
                                             Z
                                         L = dV Q e−τ ,                                      (5.18)

where τ is an attenuation factor taking into account the optical depth of the emission, and compared
to the observational data.
    When the emitted particle mixes with the ordinary photon, the approach above of computing the
matrix element in the vacuum is no longer a reliable approximation and the full thermal field theory
must be used. We follow [290] in giving the essential formulas.
    The electromagnetic polarization tensor is given by
                                          Z 3
                       µν                     d pi 1
                     Π (k) = 16πα                          [ne (E) + nē (E)]
                                             (2π)3 2 E
                                   p · k (pµ k ν + k µ pν ) − k 2 pµ pν − (p · k)2 g µν
                              ×                                                         ,      (5.19)
                                                  (p · k)2 − (k 2 )2 /4

where k µ = (ω, k) and pµ = (E, p). The transverse and longitudinal polarizations are defined as

                                                      1 ij
                                                        δ − k i k j Πij (ω, k)                            (5.20)
                                                                   
                                     ΠT (ω, k) =
                                                      2
5.3. THERMAL FIELD THEORY                                                                         55

and
                                      ΠL (ω, k) = Π00 (ω, k) .                                (5.21)
      The effective propagator of the photon (in the Coulomb gauge) has components
                                                              1
                                    D00 (ω, k) =                                              (5.22)
                                                     k 2 − ΠL (ω, k)

and
                                                   1
                             Dij (ω, k) =                     ij     i j
                                                                                              (5.23)
                                                                         
                                                            δ    − k  k    .
                                            k 2 − ΠT (ω, k)
The dispersion relationships are defined by the solutions of the equations

                                                                  ωL2
                        ωT2 = k 2 + ΠT (ωT , k) and ωL2 =             + ΠT (ωL , k)           (5.24)
                                                                  k2
   In the degenerate limit,
                        √ the distribution functions in Eq. (5.17) reduce to step functions at the
Fermi momentum pF = 3π 2 ne and we have
                                         2        ω 2 − vF2 k 2
                                                                            
                                   2 3ω                             ω + vF k
                     ΠT (ω, k) = ωP 2 2 1 −                     log                         (5.25)
                                     2vF k          2vF ωk          ω − vF k

and                                                                          
                                             3ω            ω       ω + vF k
                          ΠL (ω, k) = ωP2                      log          −1                (5.26)
                                            2vF3 k       2vF k     ω − vF k
where ωP = 4αp2F vF /3π is the plasma frequency.
    The energy loss rate Q (energy per volume and unit time) is written in terms of the imaginary
part of the polarization of the photon in the medium of charged particles. The contribution of the
longitudinal and transverse modes is obtained (by the optical theorem) as

                                      d3 k Im ΠL (ω, k) + Im ΠT (ω, k)
                                   Z
                            Q=−                                         ,                   (5.27)
                                     (2π)3         ω(eω/T − 1)

from which the luminosity in Eq. (5.18) can be computed and compared with the astrophysical limit
of interest. The expression for Im ΠL,T (ω, k) for the massive dark photon can be found in [241, 240]
and [214] where plasma effects are also included.
56   CHAPTER 5. APPENDIX
                                                                                    Bibliography




 [1] B. Holdom, “Two U(1)’s and Epsilon Charge Shifts,” Phys. Lett. 166B (1986) 196–198.
 [2] P. Fayet, “Extra U(1)’s and New Forces,” Nucl. Phys. B347 (1990) 743–768.
 [3] P. Fayet, “Effects of the Spin 1 Partner of the Goldstino (Gravitino) on Neutral Current
     Phenomenology,” Phys. Lett. B 95 (1980) 285–289.
 [4] P. Fayet, “On the Search for a New Spin 1 Boson,” Nucl. Phys. B 187 (1981) 184–204.
 [5] L. B. Okun, “LIMITS OF ELECTRODYNAMICS: PARAPHOTONS?,” Sov. Phys. JETP 56 (1982)
     502. [Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz.83,892(1982)].
 [6] H. Georgi, P. H. Ginsparg, and S. L. Glashow, “Photon Oscillations and the Cosmic Background
     Radiation,” Nature 306 (1983) 765–766.
 [7] J. L. Hewett et al., “Fundamental Physics at the Intensity Frontier,” 2012. arXiv:1205.2671
     [hep-ex]. http://lss.fnal.gov/archive/preprint/fermilab-conf-12-879-ppd.shtml.
 [8] R. Essig et al., “Working Group Report: New Light Weakly Coupled Particles,” in Proceedings, 2013
     Community Summer Study on the Future of U.S. Particle Physics: Snowmass on the Mississippi
     (CSS2013): Minneapolis, MN, USA, July 29-August 6, 2013. 2013. arXiv:1311.0029 [hep-ph].
     http:
     //www.slac.stanford.edu/econf/C1307292/docs/IntensityFrontier/NewLight-17.pdf.
 [9] M. Raggi and V. Kozhuharov, “Results and perspectives in dark photon physics,” Riv. Nuovo Cim. 38
     no. 10, (2015) 449–505.
[10] M. A. Deliyergiyev, “Recent Progress in Search for Dark Sector Signatures,” Open Phys. 14 no. 1,
     (2016) 281–303, arXiv:1510.06927 [hep-ph].
[11] S. Alekhin et al., “A facility to Search for Hidden Particles at the CERN SPS: the SHiP physics case,”
     Rept. Prog. Phys. 79 no. 12, (2016) 124201, arXiv:1504.04855 [hep-ph].
[12] F. Curciarello, “Review on Dark Photon,” EPJ Web Conf. 118 (2016) 01008.
[13] J. Alexander et al., “Dark Sectors 2016 Workshop: Community Report,” 2016. arXiv:1608.08632
     [hep-ph]. http://lss.fnal.gov/archive/2016/conf/fermilab-conf-16-421.pdf.
[14] J. Beacham et al., “Physics Beyond Colliders at CERN: Beyond the Standard Model Working Group
     Report,” J. Phys. G 47 no. 1, (2020) 010501, arXiv:1901.09966 [hep-ex].
[15] B. A. Dobrescu, “Massless gauge bosons other than the photon,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005) 151802,
     arXiv:hep-ph/0411004 [hep-ph].
[16] F. del Aguila, M. Masip, and M. Perez-Victoria, “Physical parameters and renormalization of U(1)-a x
     U(1)-b models,” Nucl. Phys. B456 (1995) 531–549, arXiv:hep-ph/9507455 [hep-ph].
[17] D. Feldman, Z. Liu, and P. Nath, “The Stueckelberg Z-prime Extension with Kinetic Mixing and
     Milli-Charged Dark Matter From the Hidden Sector,” Phys. Rev. D75 (2007) 115001,
     arXiv:hep-ph/0702123 [HEP-PH].

                                                   57
58                                                                                      BIBLIOGRAPHY

[18] S. Davidson, S. Hannestad, and G. Raffelt, “Updated bounds on millicharged particles,” JHEP 05
     (2000) 003, arXiv:hep-ph/0001179 [hep-ph].
[19] H. Ruegg and M. Ruiz-Altaba, “The Stueckelberg field,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. A19 (2004) 3265–3348,
     arXiv:hep-th/0304245 [hep-th].
[20] T. Appelquist, B. A. Dobrescu, and A. R. Hopper, “Nonexotic Neutral Gauge Bosons,” Phys. Rev.
     D68 (2003) 035012, arXiv:hep-ph/0212073 [hep-ph].
[21] P. Galison and A. Manohar, “TWO Z’s OR NOT TWO Z’s?,” Phys. Lett. 136B (1984) 279–283.
[22] X.-G. He, G. C. Joshi, H. Lew, and R. R. Volkas, “Simplest Z-prime model,” Phys. Rev. D44 (1991)
     2118–2132.
[23] K. S. Babu, C. F. Kolda, and J. March-Russell, “Implications of generalized Z - Z-prime mixing,”
     Phys. Rev. D57 (1998) 6788–6792, arXiv:hep-ph/9710441 [hep-ph].
[24] H. Davoudiasl, H.-S. Lee, and W. J. Marciano, “’Dark’ Z implications for Parity Violation, Rare
     Meson Decays, and Higgs Physics,” Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 115019, arXiv:1203.2947 [hep-ph].
[25] J. Heeck, “Unbroken B ? L symmetry,” Phys. Lett. B739 (2014) 256–262, arXiv:1408.6845
     [hep-ph].
[26] M. Bauer, P. Foldenauer, and J. Jaeckel, “Hunting All the Hidden Photons,” JHEP 07 (2018) 094,
     arXiv:1803.05466 [hep-ph]. [JHEP18,094(2020)].
[27] P. Fayet, “The light U boson as the mediator of a new force, coupled to a combination of Q, B, L and
     dark matter,” Eur. Phys. J. C77 no. 1, (2017) 53, arXiv:1611.05357 [hep-ph].
[28] T. G. Rizzo, “Kinetic mixing, dark photons and an extra dimension. Part I,” JHEP 07 (2018) 118,
     arXiv:1801.08525 [hep-ph].
[29] E. Bertuzzo, S. Jana, P. A. Machado, and R. Zukanovich Funchal, “Neutrino Masses and Mixings
     Dynamically Generated by a Light Dark Sector,” Phys. Lett. B 791 (2019) 210–214,
     arXiv:1808.02500 [hep-ph].
[30] R. Essig, P. Schuster, and N. Toro, “Probing Dark Forces and Light Hidden Sectors at Low-Energy
     e+e- Colliders,” Phys. Rev. D80 (2009) 015003, arXiv:0903.3941 [hep-ph].
[31] S. Koren and R. McGehee, “Freezing-in twin dark matter,” Phys. Rev. D 101 no. 5, (2020) 055024,
     arXiv:1908.03559 [hep-ph].
[32] T. Gherghetta, J. Kersten, K. Olive, and M. Pospelov, “Evaluating the price of tiny kinetic mixing,”
     Phys. Rev. D 100 no. 9, (2019) 095001, arXiv:1909.00696 [hep-ph].
[33] K. R. Dienes, C. F. Kolda, and J. March-Russell, “Kinetic mixing and the supersymmetric gauge
     hierarchy,” Nucl. Phys. B492 (1997) 104–118, arXiv:hep-ph/9610479 [hep-ph].
[34] S. A. Abel and B. W. Schofield, “Brane anti-brane kinetic mixing, millicharged particles and SUSY
     breaking,” Nucl. Phys. B685 (2004) 150–170, arXiv:hep-th/0311051 [hep-th].
[35] S. A. Abel, J. Jaeckel, V. V. Khoze, and A. Ringwald, “Illuminating the Hidden Sector of String
     Theory by Shining Light through a Magnetic Field,” Phys. Lett. B666 (2008) 66–70,
     arXiv:hep-ph/0608248 [hep-ph].
[36] M. Goodsell, “Light Hidden U(1)s from String Theory,” in Proceedings, 5th Patras Workshop on
     Axions, WIMPs and WISPs (AXION-WIMP 2009): Durham, UK, July 13-17, 2009, pp. 165–168.
     2009. arXiv:0912.4206 [hep-th].
[37] M. Goodsell, J. Jaeckel, J. Redondo, and A. Ringwald, “Naturally Light Hidden Photons in LARGE
     Volume String Compactifications,” JHEP 11 (2009) 027, arXiv:0909.0515 [hep-ph].
[38] J. J. Heckman and C. Vafa, “An Exceptional Sector for F-theory GUTs,” Phys. Rev. D83 (2011)
     026006, arXiv:1006.5459 [hep-th].
[39] N. Arkani-Hamed and N. Weiner, “LHC Signals for a SuperUnified Theory of Dark Matter,” JHEP 12
     (2008) 104, arXiv:0810.0714 [hep-ph].
[40] Y. F. Chan, M. Low, D. E. Morrissey, and A. P. Spray, “LHC Signatures of a Minimal Supersymmetric
     Hidden Valley,” JHEP 05 (2012) 155, arXiv:1112.2705 [hep-ph].
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                                             59

[41] B. Grzadkowski, M. Iskrzynski, M. Misiak, and J. Rosiek, “Dimension-Six Terms in the Standard
     Model Lagrangian,” JHEP 10 (2010) 085, arXiv:1008.4884 [hep-ph].
[42] H. Goldberg and L. J. Hall, “A New Candidate for Dark Matter,” Phys. Lett. B174 (1986) 151.
     [,467(1986)].
[43] B. Holdom, “Searching for  Charges and a New U(1),” Phys. Lett. B178 (1986) 65–70.
[44] B.-A. Gradwohl and J. A. Frieman, “Dark matter, long range forces, and large scale structure,”
     Astrophys. J. 398 (1992) 407–424.
[45] E. D. Carlson, M. E. Machacek, and L. J. Hall, “Self-interacting dark matter,” Astrophys. J. 398
     (1992) 43–52.
[46] R. Foot, “Mirror matter-type dark matter,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. D13 (2004) 2161–2192,
     arXiv:astro-ph/0407623 [astro-ph].
[47] J. L. Feng, H. Tu, and H.-B. Yu, “Thermal Relics in Hidden Sectors,” JCAP 0810 (2008) 043,
     arXiv:0808.2318 [hep-ph].
[48] L. Ackerman, M. R. Buckley, S. M. Carroll, and M. Kamionkowski, “Dark Matter and Dark
     Radiation,” Phys. Rev. D79 (2009) 023519, arXiv:0810.5126 [hep-ph]. [,277(2008)].
[49] J. L. Feng, M. Kaplinghat, H. Tu, and H.-B. Yu, “Hidden Charged Dark Matter,” JCAP 0907 (2009)
     004, arXiv:0905.3039 [hep-ph].
[50] N. Arkani-Hamed, D. P. Finkbeiner, T. R. Slatyer, and N. Weiner, “A Theory of Dark Matter,” Phys.
     Rev. D79 (2009) 015014, arXiv:0810.0713 [hep-ph].
[51] D. E. Kaplan, G. Z. Krnjaic, K. R. Rehermann, and C. M. Wells, “Atomic Dark Matter,” JCAP 1005
     (2010) 021, arXiv:0909.0753 [hep-ph].
[52] M. R. Buckley and P. J. Fox, “Dark Matter Self-Interactions and Light Force Carriers,” Phys. Rev.
     D81 (2010) 083522, arXiv:0911.3898 [hep-ph].
[53] D. Hooper, N. Weiner, and W. Xue, “Dark Forces and Light Dark Matter,” Phys. Rev. D86 (2012)
     056009, arXiv:1206.2929 [hep-ph].
[54] L. G. van den Aarssen, T. Bringmann, and C. Pfrommer, “Is dark matter with long-range interactions
     a solution to all small-scale problems of Λ CDM cosmology?,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (2012) 231301,
     arXiv:1205.5809 [astro-ph.CO].
[55] J. M. Cline, Z. Liu, and W. Xue, “Millicharged Atomic Dark Matter,” Phys. Rev. D85 (2012) 101302,
     arXiv:1201.4858 [hep-ph].
[56] S. Tulin, H.-B. Yu, and K. M. Zurek, “Beyond Collisionless Dark Matter: Particle Physics Dynamics for
     Dark Matter Halo Structure,” Phys. Rev. D87 no. 11, (2013) 115007, arXiv:1302.3898 [hep-ph].
[57] E. Gabrielli and M. Raidal, “Exponentially spread dynamical Yukawa couplings from nonperturbative
     chiral symmetry breaking in the dark sector,” Phys. Rev. D89 no. 1, (2014) 015008,
     arXiv:1310.1090 [hep-ph].
[58] M. Baldi, “Structure formation in Multiple Dark Matter cosmologies with long-range scalar
     interactions,” Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 428 (2013) 2074, arXiv:1206.2348 [astro-ph.CO].
[59] F.-Y. Cyr-Racine and K. Sigurdson, “Cosmology of atomic dark matter,” Phys. Rev. D87 no. 10,
     (2013) 103515, arXiv:1209.5752 [astro-ph.CO].
[60] J. M. Cline, Z. Liu, G. Moore, and W. Xue, “Composite strongly interacting dark matter,” Phys. Rev.
     D90 no. 1, (2014) 015023, arXiv:1312.3325 [hep-ph].
[61] X. Chu and B. Dasgupta, “Dark Radiation Alleviates Problems with Dark Matter Halos,” Phys. Rev.
     Lett. 113 no. 16, (2014) 161301, arXiv:1404.6127 [hep-ph].
[62] K. K. Boddy, J. L. Feng, M. Kaplinghat, and T. M. P. Tait, “Self-Interacting Dark Matter from a
     Non-Abelian Hidden Sector,” Phys. Rev. D89 no. 11, (2014) 115017, arXiv:1402.3629 [hep-ph].
[63] M. A. Buen-Abad, G. Marques-Tavares, and M. Schmaltz, “Non-Abelian dark matter and dark
     radiation,” Phys. Rev. D92 no. 2, (2015) 023531, arXiv:1505.03542 [hep-ph].
60                                                                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY

[64] P. Agrawal, F.-Y. Cyr-Racine, L. Randall, and J. Scholtz, “Make Dark Matter Charged Again,” JCAP
     1705 no. 05, (2017) 022, arXiv:1610.04611 [hep-ph].
[65] D. Clowe, M. Bradac, A. H. Gonzalez, M. Markevitch, S. W. Randall, C. Jones, and D. Zaritsky, “A
     direct empirical proof of the existence of dark matter,” Astrophys. J. 648 (2006) L109–L113,
     arXiv:astro-ph/0608407 [astro-ph].
[66] J. L. Feng, M. Kaplinghat, and H.-B. Yu, “Halo Shape and Relic Density Exclusions of
     Sommerfeld-Enhanced Dark Matter Explanations of Cosmic Ray Excesses,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 104
     (2010) 151301, arXiv:0911.0422 [hep-ph].
[67] T. Lin, H.-B. Yu, and K. M. Zurek, “On Symmetric and Asymmetric Light Dark Matter,” Phys. Rev.
     D85 (2012) 063503, arXiv:1111.0293 [hep-ph].
[68] A. H. G. Peter, M. Rocha, J. S. Bullock, and M. Kaplinghat, “Cosmological Simulations with
     Self-Interacting Dark Matter II: Halo Shapes vs. Observations,” Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 430
     (2013) 105, arXiv:1208.3026 [astro-ph.CO].
[69] M. Pospelov and T. ter Veldhuis, “Direct and indirect limits on the electromagnetic form-factors of
     WIMPs,” Phys. Lett. B 480 (2000) 181–186, arXiv:hep-ph/0003010.
[70] K. Sigurdson, M. Doran, A. Kurylov, R. R. Caldwell, and M. Kamionkowski, “Dark-matter electric and
     magnetic dipole moments,” Phys. Rev. D70 (2004) 083501, arXiv:astro-ph/0406355
     [astro-ph]. [Erratum: Phys. Rev.D73,089903(2006)].
[71] T. Banks, J.-F. Fortin, and S. Thomas, “Direct Detection of Dark Matter Electromagnetic Dipole
     Moments,” arXiv:1007.5515 [hep-ph].
[72] V. Barger, W.-Y. Keung, and D. Marfatia, “Electromagnetic properties of dark matter: Dipole
     moments and charge form factor,” Phys. Lett. B 696 (2011) 74–78, arXiv:1007.4345 [hep-ph].
[73] N. Fornengo, P. Panci, and M. Regis, “Long-Range Forces in Direct Dark Matter Searches,” Phys.
     Rev. D 84 (2011) 115002, arXiv:1108.4661 [hep-ph].
[74] E. Del Nobile, C. Kouvaris, P. Panci, F. Sannino, and J. Virkajarvi, “Light Magnetic Dark Matter in
     Direct Detection Searches,” JCAP 08 (2012) 010, arXiv:1203.6652 [hep-ph].
[75] X. Chu, J.-L. Kuo, and J. Pradler, “Dark sector-photon interactions in proton-beam experiments,”
     Phys. Rev. D 101 (2020) 075035, arXiv:2001.06042 [hep-ph].
[76] A. L. Fitzpatrick, W. Haxton, E. Katz, N. Lubbers, and Y. Xu, “The Effective Field Theory of Dark
     Matter Direct Detection,” JCAP 1302 (2013) 004, arXiv:1203.3542 [hep-ph].
[77] S. Liem, G. Bertone, F. Calore, R. Ruiz de Austri, T. M. P. Tait, R. Trotta, and C. Weniger, “Effective
     field theory of dark matter: a global analysis,” JHEP 09 (2016) 077, arXiv:1603.05994 [hep-ph].
[78] J. Brod, A. Gootjes-Dreesbach, M. Tammaro, and J. Zupan, “Effective Field Theory for Dark Matter
     Direct Detection up to Dimension Seven,” JHEP 10 (2018) 065, arXiv:1710.10218 [hep-ph].
[79] C. Boehm, T. Ensslin, and J. Silk, “Can Annihilating dark matter be lighter than a few GeVs?,” J.
     Phys. G 30 (2004) 279–286, arXiv:astro-ph/0208458.
[80] S. Knapen, T. Lin, and K. M. Zurek, “Light Dark Matter: Models and Constraints,” Phys. Rev. D96
     no. 11, (2017) 115021, arXiv:1709.07882 [hep-ph].
[81] R. Essig, J. Mardon, and T. Volansky, “Direct Detection of Sub-GeV Dark Matter,” Phys. Rev. D85
     (2012) 076007, arXiv:1108.5383 [hep-ph].
[82] C. Boehm and P. Fayet, “Scalar dark matter candidates,” Nucl. Phys. B 683 (2004) 219–263,
     arXiv:hep-ph/0305261.
[83] T. Hambye, M. H. Tytgat, J. Vandecasteele, and L. Vanderheyden, “Dark matter from dark photons:
     a taxonomy of dark matter production,” Phys. Rev. D 100 no. 9, (2019) 095018, arXiv:1908.09864
     [hep-ph].
[84] E. Izaguirre, G. Krnjaic, P. Schuster, and N. Toro, “Analyzing the Discovery Potential for Light Dark
     Matter,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 no. 25, (2015) 251301, arXiv:1505.00011 [hep-ph].
[85] C. Mondino, M. Pospelov, J. T. Ruderman, and O. Slone, “Dark Higgs Dark Matter,”
     arXiv:2005.02397 [hep-ph].
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                                                61

 [86] J. Preskill, M. B. Wise, and F. Wilczek, “Cosmology of the Invisible Axion,” Phys. Lett. 120B (1983)
      127–132.
 [87] L. F. Abbott and P. Sikivie, “A Cosmological Bound on the Invisible Axion,” Phys. Lett. 120B (1983)
      133–136.
 [88] M. Dine and W. Fischler, “The Not So Harmless Axion,” Phys. Lett. 120B (1983) 137–141.
 [89] A. E. Nelson and J. Scholtz, “Dark Light, Dark Matter and the Misalignment Mechanism,” Phys. Rev.
      D84 (2011) 103501, arXiv:1105.2812 [hep-ph].
 [90] P. Arias, D. Cadamuro, M. Goodsell, J. Jaeckel, J. Redondo, and A. Ringwald, “WISPy Cold Dark
      Matter,” JCAP 1206 (2012) 013, arXiv:1201.5902 [hep-ph].
 [91] P. W. Graham, J. Mardon, and S. Rajendran, “Vector Dark Matter from Inflationary Fluctuations,”
      Phys. Rev. D 93 no. 10, (2016) 103520, arXiv:1504.02102 [hep-ph].
 [92] Y. Nakai, R. Namba, and Z. Wang, “Light Dark Photon Dark Matter from Inflation,”
      arXiv:2004.10743 [hep-ph].
 [93] M. Pospelov, A. Ritz, and M. B. Voloshin, “Bosonic super-WIMPs as keV-scale dark matter,” Phys.
      Rev. D78 (2008) 115012, arXiv:0807.3279 [hep-ph].
 [94] I. M. Bloch, R. Essig, K. Tobioka, T. Volansky, and T.-T. Yu, “Searching for Dark Absorption with
      Direct Detection Experiments,” JHEP 06 (2017) 087, arXiv:1608.02123 [hep-ph].
 [95] S. Hoffmann, “Paraphotons and Axions: Similarities in Stellar Emission and Detection,” Phys. Lett.
      B193 (1987) 117–122.
 [96] G. G. Raffelt, Stars as laboratories for fundamental physics. Chicago, USA: Univ. Pr. (1996) 664 p,
      1996. http://wwwth.mpp.mpg.de/members/raffelt/mypapers/199613.pdf.
 [97] E. D. Carlson, “LIMITS ON A NEW U(1) COUPLING,” Nucl. Phys. B 286 (1987) 378–398.
 [98] M. Nakagawa, Y. Kohyama, and N. Itoh, “Axion Bremsstrahlung in Dense Stars,” Astrophys. J. 322
      (1987) 291.
 [99] G. G. Raffelt, “Axion bremsstrahlung in red giants,” Phys. Rev. D 41 (1990) 1324–1326.
[100] M. M. Miller Bertolami, B. E. Melendez, L. G. Althaus, and J. Isern, “Revisiting the axion bounds
      from the Galactic white dwarf luminosity function,” JCAP 1410 no. 10, (2014) 069,
      arXiv:1406.7712 [hep-ph].
[101] N. Viaux, M. Catelan, P. B. Stetson, G. Raffelt, J. Redondo, A. A. R. Valcarce, and A. Weiss,
      “Neutrino and axion bounds from the globular cluster M5 (NGC 5904),” Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 (2013)
      231301, arXiv:1311.1669 [astro-ph.SR].
[102] M. Giannotti, I. Irastorza, J. Redondo, and A. Ringwald, “Cool WISPs for stellar cooling excesses,”
      JCAP 1605 no. 05, (2016) 057, arXiv:1512.08108 [astro-ph.HE].
[103] R. P. Brinkmann and M. S. Turner, “Numerical Rates for Nucleon-Nucleon Axion Bremsstrahlung,”
      Phys. Rev. D 38 (1988) 2338.
[104] G. Raffelt and D. Seckel, “A selfconsistent approach to neutral current processes in supernova cores,”
      Phys. Rev. D 52 (1995) 1780–1799, arXiv:astro-ph/9312019.
[105] N. Iwamoto, “Axion Emission from Neutron Stars,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 53 (1984) 1198–1201.
[106] W. Keil, H.-T. Janka, D. N. Schramm, G. Sigl, M. S. Turner, and J. R. Ellis, “A Fresh look at axions
      and SN-1987A,” Phys. Rev. D56 (1997) 2419–2432, arXiv:astro-ph/9612222 [astro-ph].
[107] P. Carenza, T. Fischer, M. Giannotti, G. Guo, G. Martínez-Pinedo, and A. Mirizzi, “Improved axion
      emissivity from a supernova via nucleon-nucleon bremsstrahlung,” JCAP 1910 no. 10, (2019) 016,
      arXiv:1906.11844 [hep-ph].
[108] B. D. Fields, K. A. Olive, T.-H. Yeh, and C. Young, “Big-Bang Nucleosynthesis After Planck,” JCAP
      2003 no. 03, (2020) 010, arXiv:1912.01132 [astro-ph.CO].
[109] B. A. Dobrescu and I. Mocioiu, “Spin-dependent macroscopic forces from new particle exchange,”
      JHEP 11 (2006) 005, arXiv:hep-ph/0605342 [hep-ph].
62                                                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY

[110] F. Ficek, D. F. J. Kimball, M. Kozlov, N. Leefer, S. Pustelny, and D. Budker, “Constraints on exotic
      spin-dependent interactions between electrons from helium fine-structure spectroscopy,” Phys. Rev.
      A95 no. 3, (2017) 032505, arXiv:1608.05779 [physics.atom-ph].
[111] W.-T. Ni, S.-S. Pan, H.-C. Yeh, L.-S. Hou, and J.-L. Wan, “Search for an axionlike spin coupling
      using a paramagnetic salt with a dc SQUID,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (1999) 2439–2442.
[112] D. J. Wineland, J. J. Bollinger, D. J. Heinzen, W. M. Itano, and M. G. Raizen, “Search for anomalous
      spin-dependent forces using stored-ion spectroscopy,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 (1991) 1735–1738.
[113] D. Hanneke, S. Fogwell, and G. Gabrielse, “New Measurement of the Electron Magnetic Moment and
      the Fine Structure Constant,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 (2008) 120801, arXiv:0801.1134
      [physics.atom-ph].
[114] G. Giudice, P. Paradisi, and M. Passera, “Testing new physics with the electron g-2,” JHEP 11 (2012)
      113, arXiv:1208.6583 [hep-ph].
[115] Muon g-2 Collaboration, G. W. Bennett et al., “Final Report of the Muon E821 Anomalous Magnetic
      Moment Measurement at BNL,” Phys. Rev. D73 (2006) 072003, arXiv:hep-ex/0602035
      [hep-ex].
[116] RBC, UKQCD Collaboration, T. Blum, P. Boyle, V. Gülpers, T. Izubuchi, L. Jin, C. Jung,
      A. Jüttner, C. Lehner, A. Portelli, and J. Tsang, “Calculation of the hadronic vacuum polarization
      contribution to the muon anomalous magnetic moment,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 no. 2, (2018) 022003,
      arXiv:1801.07224 [hep-lat].
[117] TWIST Collaboration, R. Bayes et al., “Search for two body muon decay signals,” Phys. Rev. D 91
      no. 5, (2015) 052020, arXiv:1409.0638 [hep-ex].
[118] NA62 Collaboration, J. Engelfried, “Search for K + → π + νν: First NA62 Results,” Springer Proc.
      Phys. 234 (2019) 135–141.
[119] J. Engel, D. Seckel, and A. C. Hayes, “Emission and detectability of hadronic axions from SN1987A,”
      Phys. Rev. Lett. 65 (1990) 960–963.
[120] OPAL Collaboration,√   G. Abbiendi et al., “Search for anomalous photonic events with missing energy
      in e+ e− collisions at s = 130-GeV, 136-GeV and 183-GeV,” Eur. Phys. J. C8 (1999) 23–40,
      arXiv:hep-ex/9810021 [hep-ex].
[121] L3 Collaboration,
                   √    M. Acciarri et al., “Single and multiphoton events with missing energy in e+ e−
      collisions at S - 189-GeV,” Phys. Lett. B470 (1999) 268–280, arXiv:hep-ex/9910009 [hep-ex].
[122] ALEPH Collaboration,
                   √         A. Heister et al., “Single photon and multiphoton production in e+ e−
      collisions at s up to 209-GeV,” Eur. Phys. J. C28 (2003) 1–13.
[123] ATLAS Collaboration, M. Aaboud et al., “Search√for new phenomena in events with a photon and
      missing transverse momentum in pp collisions at s = 13 TeV with the ATLAS detector,” JHEP 06
      (2016) 059, arXiv:1604.01306 [hep-ex].
[124] CMS Collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., “Search for new physics
                                                                    √ in final states with a single photon
      and missing transverse momentum in proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV,” JHEP 02 (2019) 074,
      arXiv:1810.00196 [hep-ex].
[125] H. Vogel and J. Redondo, “Dark Radiation constraints on minicharged particles in models with a
      hidden photon,” JCAP 1402 (2014) 029, arXiv:1311.2600 [hep-ph].
[126] J. H. Chang, R. Essig, and S. D. McDermott, “Supernova 1987A Constraints on Sub-GeV Dark
      Sectors, Millicharged Particles, the QCD Axion, and an Axion-like Particle,” JHEP 09 (2018) 051,
      arXiv:1803.00993 [hep-ph].
[127] A. Badertscher, P. Crivelli, W. Fetscher, U. Gendotti, S. Gninenko, V. Postoev, A. Rubbia,
      V. Samoylenko, and D. Sillou, “An Improved Limit on Invisible Decays of Positronium,” Phys. Rev.
      D75 (2007) 032004, arXiv:hep-ex/0609059 [hep-ex].
[128] A. A. Prinz et al., “Search for millicharged particles at SLAC,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998) 1175–1178,
      arXiv:hep-ex/9804008 [hep-ex].
[129] G. Magill, R. Plestid, M. Pospelov, and Y.-D. Tsai, “Millicharged particles in neutrino experiments,”
      Phys. Rev. Lett. 122 no. 7, (2019) 071801, arXiv:1806.03310 [hep-ph].
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                                                63

[130] J. Jaeckel, M. Jankowiak, and M. Spannowsky, “LHC probes the hidden sector,” Phys. Dark Univ. 2
      (2013) 111–117, arXiv:1212.3620 [hep-ph].
[131] D. Banerjee et al., “Addendum to the NA64 Proposal: search for A0 → invisible and X → e+ e−
      decays in 2021,”. http://cds.cern.ch/record/2300189?ln=en.
[132] D. Banerjee et al., “Addendum to the Proposal P348: Search for dark sector particles weakly coupled
      to muon with NA64 µ,”. http://cds.cern.ch/record/2640930?ln=en.
[133] K. J. Kelly and Y.-D. Tsai, “Proton fixed-target scintillation experiment to search for millicharged dark
      matter,” Phys. Rev. D100 no. 1, (2019) 015043, arXiv:1812.03998 [hep-ph].
[134] A. Ball et al., “A Letter of Intent to Install a milli-charged Particle Detector at LHC P5,”
      arXiv:1607.04669 [physics.ins-det].
[135] LDMX Collaboration, T. Akesson et al., “Light Dark Matter eXperiment (LDMX),”
      arXiv:1808.05219 [hep-ex].
[136] E. W. Hagley and F. M. Pipkin, “Separated oscillatory field measurement of hydrogen S-21/2- P-23/2
      fine structure interval,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 72 (1994) 1172–1175.
[137] E. D. Kovetz, V. Poulin, V. Gluscevic, K. K. Boddy, R. Barkana, and M. Kamionkowski, “Tighter
      limits on dark matter explanations of the anomalous EDGES 21 cm signal,” Phys. Rev. D98 no. 10,
      (2018) 103529, arXiv:1807.11482 [astro-ph.CO].
[138] H. Liu, N. J. Outmezguine, D. Redigolo, and T. Volansky, “Reviving Millicharged Dark Matter for
      21-cm Cosmology,” Phys. Rev. D 100 no. 12, (2019) 123011, arXiv:1908.06986 [hep-ph].
[139] R. A. Monsalve, B. Greig, J. D. Bowman, A. Mesinger, A. E. E. Rogers, T. J. Mozdzen, N. S. Kern,
      and N. Mahesh, “Results from EDGES High-Band: II. Constraints on Parameters of Early Galaxies,”
      Astrophys. J. 863 no. 1, (2018) 11, arXiv:1806.07774 [astro-ph.CO].
[140] T. Akesson et al., “Dark Sector Physics with a Primary Electron Beam Facility at CERN,”.
      http://cds.cern.ch/record/2640784?ln=en.
[141] T. Raubenheimer, A. Beukers, A. Fry, C. Hast, T. Markiewicz, Y. Nosochkov, N. Phinney,
      P. Schuster, and N. Toro, “DASEL: Dark Sector Experiments at LCLS-II,” arXiv:1801.07867
      [physics.acc-ph].
[142] E. Gabrielli, L. Marzola, and M. Raidal, “Radiative Yukawa Couplings in the Simplest Left-Right
      Symmetric Model,” Phys. Rev. D95 no. 3, (2017) 035005, arXiv:1611.00009 [hep-ph].
[143] E. Gabrielli, B. Mele, M. Raidal, and E. Venturini, “FCNC decays of standard model fermions into a
      dark photon,” Phys. Rev. D94 no. 11, (2016) 115013, arXiv:1607.05928 [hep-ph].
[144] J. T. Acuña, M. Fabbrichesi, and P. Ullio, “Phenomenological consequences of an interacting
      multicomponent dark sector,” arXiv:2005.04146 [hep-ph].
[145] ATLAS Collaboration, M. Aaboud et al., “Search√ for squarks and gluinos in final states with jets and
      missing transverse momentum using 36 fb−1 of s = 13 TeV pp collision data with the ATLAS
      detector,” Phys. Rev. D97 no. 11, (2018) 112001, arXiv:1712.02332 [hep-ex].
[146] D. Barducci, M. Fabbrichesi, and E. Gabrielli, “Neutral Hadrons Disappearing into the Darkness,”
      Phys. Rev. D98 no. 3, (2018) 035049, arXiv:1806.05678 [hep-ph].
[147] CMS Collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan √ et al., “Search for supersymmetric partners of electrons and
      muons in proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV,” Phys. Lett. B790 (2019) 140–166,
      arXiv:1806.05264 [hep-ex].
[148] MEG Collaboration, A. Baldini et al., “Search for the lepton flavour violating decay µ+ → e+ γ with
      the full dataset of the MEG experiment,” Eur. Phys. J. C 76 no. 8, (2016) 434, arXiv:1605.05081
      [hep-ex].
[149] BaBar Collaboration, J. Lees et al., “Precision Measurement of the B → Xs γ Photon Energy
      Spectrum, Branching Fraction, and Direct CP Asymmetry ACP (B → Xs+d γ),” Phys. Rev. Lett. 109
      (2012) 191801, arXiv:1207.2690 [hep-ex].
[150] M. Misiak et al., “Estimate of B(B̄ → Xs γ) at O(αs2 ),” Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 (2007) 022002,
      arXiv:hep-ph/0609232.
64                                                                                          BIBLIOGRAPHY

[151] M. Fabbrichesi, E. Gabrielli, and B. Mele, “Hunting down massless dark photons in kaon physics,”
      Phys. Rev. Lett. 119 no. 3, (2017) 031801, arXiv:1705.03470 [hep-ph].
[152] Particle Data Group Collaboration, M. Tanabashi et al., “Review of Particle Physics,” Phys. Rev. D
      98 no. 3, (2018) 030001.
[153] NA62 Collaboration, E. Cortina Gil et al., “The Beam and detector of the NA62 experiment at
      CERN,” JINST 12 no. 05, (2017) P05025, arXiv:1703.08501 [physics.ins-det].
[154] NA62 Collaboration, E. Cortina Gil et al., “First search for K + → π + ν ν̄ using the decay-in-flight
      technique,” Phys. Lett. B 791 (2019) 156–166, arXiv:1811.08508 [hep-ex].
[155] KOTO Collaboration, J. Ahn et al., “Search for the KL → π 0 νν and KL → π 0 X 0 decays at the
      J-PARC KOTO experiment,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 122 no. 2, (2019) 021802, arXiv:1810.09655
      [hep-ex].
[156] M. Fabbrichesi and E. Gabrielli, “Dark-sector physics in the search for the rare decays K + → π + ν ν̄
      and KL → π 0 ν ν̄,” Eur. Phys. J. C 80 no. 6, (2020) 532, arXiv:1911.03755 [hep-ph].
[157] J.-Y. Su and J. Tandean, “Searching for dark photons in hyperon decays,” arXiv:1911.13301
      [hep-ph].
[158] J.-Y. Su and J. Tandean, “Seeking massless dark photons in the decays of charmed hadrons,”
      arXiv:2005.05297 [hep-ph].
[159] BaBar Collaboration, J. P. Lees et al., “Improved Limits on B 0 Decays to Invisible Final States and to
      ν ν̄γ,” Phys. Rev. D86 (2012) 051105, arXiv:1206.2543 [hep-ex].
[160] Belle Collaboration, C. L. Hsu et al., “Search for B 0 decays to invisible final states,” Phys. Rev. D86
      (2012) 032002, arXiv:1206.5948 [hep-ex].
[161] S. N. Gninenko and N. V. Krasnikov, “Invisible KL decays as a probe of new physics,” Phys. Rev.
      D92 no. 3, (2015) 034009, arXiv:1503.01595 [hep-ph].
[162] S. N. Gninenko, “Search for invisible decays of π 0 , η, η 0 , KS and KL : A probe of new physics and
      tests using the Bell-Steinberger relation,” Phys. Rev. D91 no. 1, (2015) 015004, arXiv:1409.2288
      [hep-ph].
[163] A. Sommerfeld, “Über die beugung und bremsung der elektronen,” Annalen der Physik 403 (1931)
      257.
[164] E. Fermi, “An attempt of a theory of beta radiation. 1.” Zeitschrift für Physik 88 (1934) 161.
[165] E. Gabrielli, M. Heikinheimo, B. Mele, and M. Raidal, “Dark photons and resonant monophoton
      signatures in Higgs boson decays at the LHC,” Phys. Rev. D90 no. 5, (2014) 055032,
      arXiv:1405.5196 [hep-ph].
[166] S. Biswas, E. Gabrielli, M. Heikinheimo, and B. Mele, “Higgs-boson production in association with a
      dark photon in e+ e? collisions,” JHEP 06 (2015) 102, arXiv:1503.05836 [hep-ph].
[167] S. Biswas, E. Gabrielli, M. Heikinheimo, and B. Mele, “Dark-photon searches via ZH production at
      e+ e− colliders,” Phys. Rev. D96 no. 5, (2017) 055012, arXiv:1703.00402 [hep-ph].
[168] M. Fabbrichesi, E. Gabrielli, and B. Mele, “Z Boson Decay into Light and Darkness,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
      120 no. 17, (2018) 171803, arXiv:1712.05412 [hep-ph].
[169] M. Cobal, C. De Dominicis, M. Fabbrichesi, E. Gabrielli, J. Magro, B. Mele, and G. Panizzo,
      “Z-boson decays into an invisible dark photon at the LHC, HL-LHC and future lepton colliders,” Phys.
      Rev. D 102 no. 3, (2020) 035027, arXiv:2006.15945 [hep-ph].
[170] R. Barbieri, C. Braggio, G. Carugno, C. S. Gallo, A. Lombardi, A. Ortolan, R. Pengo, G. Ruoso, and
      C. C. Speake, “Searching for galactic axions through magnetized media: the QUAX proposal,” Phys.
      Dark Univ. 15 (2017) 135–141, arXiv:1606.02201 [hep-ph].
[171] S. Chigusa, T. Moroi, and K. Nakayama, “Detecting Light Boson Dark Matter through Conversion
      into Magnon,” arXiv:2001.10666 [hep-ph].
[172] D. Croon, A. E. Nelson, C. Sun, D. G. E. Walker, and Z.-Z. Xianyu, “Hidden-Sector Spectroscopy
      with Gravitational Waves from Binary Neutron Stars,” Astrophys. J. 858 no. 1, (2018) L2,
      arXiv:1711.02096 [hep-ph].
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                                               65

[173] S. Alexander, E. McDonough, R. Sims, and N. Yunes, “Hidden-Sector Modifications to Gravitational
      Waves From Binary Inspirals,” Class. Quant. Grav. 35 no. 23, (2018) 235012, arXiv:1808.05286
      [gr-qc].
[174] J. Kopp, R. Laha, T. Opferkuch, and W. Shepherd, “Cuckoo’s eggs in neutron stars: can LIGO hear
      chirps from the dark sector?,” JHEP 11 (2018) 096, arXiv:1807.02527 [hep-ph].
[175] M. Fabbrichesi and A. Urbano, “Charged neutron stars and observational tests of a dark force weaker
      than gravity,” arXiv:1902.07914 [hep-ph].
[176] H. Merkel et al., “Search at the Mainz Microtron for Light Massive Gauge Bosons Relevant for the
      Muon g-2 Anomaly,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 no. 22, (2014) 221802, arXiv:1404.5502 [hep-ex].
[177] LHCb Collaboration, R. Aaij et al., “Search for A0 → µ+ µ− Decays,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 124 no. 4,
      (2020) 041801, arXiv:1910.06926 [hep-ex].
[178] CMS Collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., “Search for a narrow resonance decaying to a pair of
      muons in proton-proton collisions at 13 TeV,”.
[179] BaBar Collaboration, J. P. Lees et al., “Search for a Dark Photon in e+ e− Collisions at BaBar,” Phys.
      Rev. Lett. 113 no. 20, (2014) 201801, arXiv:1406.2980 [hep-ex].
[180] KLOE-2 Collaboration, F. Archilli et al., “Search for a vector gauge boson in φ meson decays with
      the KLOE detector,” Phys. Lett. B706 (2012) 251–255, arXiv:1110.0411 [hep-ex].
[181] KLOE-2 Collaboration, D. Babusci et al., “Limit on the production of a light vector gauge boson in
      phi meson decays with the KLOE detector,” Phys. Lett. B720 (2013) 111–115, arXiv:1210.3927
      [hep-ex].
[182] KLOE-2 Collaboration, D. Babusci et al., “Search for light vector boson production in
      e+ e− → µ+ µ− γ interactions with the KLOE experiment,” Phys. Lett. B736 (2014) 459–464,
      arXiv:1404.7772 [hep-ex].
[183] KLOE-2 Collaboration, A. Anastasi et al., “Limit on the production of a new vector boson in
      e+ e− → Uγ, U→ π + π − with the KLOE experiment,” Phys. Lett. B757 (2016) 356–361,
      arXiv:1603.06086 [hep-ex].
[184] NA48/2 Collaboration, J. R. Batley et al., “Search for the dark photon in π 0 decays,” Phys. Lett.
      B746 (2015) 178–185, arXiv:1504.00607 [hep-ex].
[185] A. Bross, M. Crisler, S. H. Pordes, J. Volk, S. Errede, and J. Wrbanek, “A Search for Shortlived
      Particles Produced in an Electron Beam Dump,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 (1991) 2942–2945.
[186] E. M. Riordan et al., “A Search for Short Lived Axions in an Electron Beam Dump Experiment,” Phys.
      Rev. Lett. 59 (1987) 755.
[187] J. D. Bjorken, S. Ecklund, W. R. Nelson, A. Abashian, C. Church, B. Lu, L. W. Mo, T. A.
      Nunamaker, and P. Rassmann, “Search for Neutral Metastable Penetrating Particles Produced in the
      SLAC Beam Dump,” Phys. Rev. D38 (1988) 3375.
[188] B. Batell, R. Essig, and Z. Surujon, “Strong Constraints on Sub-GeV Dark Sectors from SLAC Beam
      Dump E137,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 no. 17, (2014) 171802, arXiv:1406.2698 [hep-ph].
[189] L. Marsicano, M. Battaglieri, M. Bondi’, C. R. Carvajal, A. Celentano, M. De Napoli, R. De Vita,
      E. Nardi, M. Raggi, and P. Valente, “Dark photon production through positron annihilation in
      beam-dump experiments,” Phys. Rev. D 98 no. 1, (2018) 015031, arXiv:1802.03794 [hep-ex].
[190] J. Blumlein and J. Brunner, “New Exclusion Limits for Dark Gauge Forces from Beam-Dump Data,”
      Phys. Lett. B 701 (2011) 155–159, arXiv:1104.2747 [hep-ex].
[191] J. Blumlein and J. Brunner, “New Exclusion Limits on Dark Gauge Forces from Proton Bremsstrahlung
      in Beam-Dump Data,” Phys. Lett. B731 (2014) 320–326, arXiv:1311.3870 [hep-ph].
[192] S. Gninenko, “Constraints on sub-GeV hidden sector gauge bosons from a search for heavy neutrino
      decays,” Phys. Lett. B 713 (2012) 244–248, arXiv:1204.3583 [hep-ph].
[193] J. H. Chang, R. Essig, and S. D. McDermott, “Revisiting Supernova 1987A Constraints on Dark
      Photons,” JHEP 01 (2017) 107, arXiv:1611.03864 [hep-ph].
66                                                                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY

[194] M. Pospelov, “Secluded U(1) below the weak scale,” Phys. Rev. D80 (2009) 095002,
      arXiv:0811.1030 [hep-ph].
[195] Belle-II Collaboration, W. Altmannshofer et al., “The Belle II Physics Book,” PTEP 2019 no. 12,
      (2019) 123C01, arXiv:1808.10567 [hep-ex]. [Erratum: PTEP2020,no.2,029201(2020)].
[196] P. Ilten, Y. Soreq, J. Thaler, M. Williams, and W. Xue, “Proposed Inclusive Dark Photon Search at
      LHCb,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 116 no. 25, (2016) 251803, arXiv:1603.08926 [hep-ph].
[197] P. Ilten, J. Thaler, M. Williams, and W. Xue, “Dark photons from charm mesons at LHCb,” Phys.
      Rev. D92 no. 11, (2015) 115017, arXiv:1509.06765 [hep-ph].
[198] E. Cortina Gil et al., “ADDENDUM I TO P326 Continuation of the physics programme of the NA62
      experiment,”. https://cds.cern.ch/record/2691873?ln=en.
[199] J. L. Feng, I. Galon, F. Kling, and S. Trojanowski, “ForwArd Search ExpeRiment at the LHC,” Phys.
      Rev. D97 no. 3, (2018) 035001, arXiv:1708.09389 [hep-ph].
[200] A. Berlin, S. Gori, P. Schuster, and N. Toro, “Dark Sectors at the Fermilab SeaQuest Experiment,”
      Phys. Rev. D98 no. 3, (2018) 035011, arXiv:1804.00661 [hep-ph].
[201] HPS Collaboration, P. Adrian et al., “Search for a dark photon in electroproduced e+ e− pairs with
      the Heavy Photon Search experiment at JLab,” Phys. Rev. D 98 no. 9, (2018) 091101,
      arXiv:1807.11530 [hep-ex].
[202] A. Caldwell et al., “Particle physics applications of the AWAKE acceleration scheme,”
      arXiv:1812.11164 [physics.acc-ph].
[203] L. Doria, P. Achenbach, M. Christmann, A. Denig, and H. Merkel, “Dark Matter at the Intensity
      Frontier: the new MESA electron accelerator facility,” in An Alpine LHC Physics Summit 2019 (ALPS
      2019) Obergurgl, Austria, April 22-27, 2019. 2019. arXiv:1908.07921 [hep-ex].
[204] L. Doria, P. Achenbach, M. Christmann, A. Denig, P. Gulker, and H. Merkel, “Search for light dark
      matter with the MESA accelerator,” in 13th Conference on the Intersections of Particle and Nuclear
      Physics (CIPANP 2018) Palm Springs, California, USA, May 29-June 3, 2018. 2018.
      arXiv:1809.07168 [hep-ex].
[205] D. Curtin, R. Essig, S. Gori, and J. Shelton, “Illuminating Dark Photons with High-Energy Colliders,”
      JHEP 02 (2015) 157, arXiv:1412.0018 [hep-ph].
[206] M. Karliner, M. Low, J. L. Rosner, and L.-T. Wang, “Radiative return capabilities of a high-energy,
      high-luminosity e+ e− collider,” Phys. Rev. D 92 no. 3, (2015) 035010, arXiv:1503.07209
      [hep-ph].
[207] M. D’Onofrio, O. Fischer, and Z. S. Wang, “Searching for Dark Photons at the LHeC and FCC-he,”
      Phys. Rev. D 101 no. 1, (2020) 015020, arXiv:1909.02312 [hep-ph].
[208] J. L. Feng, B. Fornal, I. Galon, S. Gardner, J. Smolinsky, T. M. P. Tait, and P. Tanedo, “Protophobic
      Fifth-Force Interpretation of the Observed Anomaly in 8 Be Nuclear Transitions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 117
      no. 7, (2016) 071803, arXiv:1604.07411 [hep-ph].
[209] J. L. Feng, B. Fornal, I. Galon, S. Gardner, J. Smolinsky, T. M. P. Tait, and P. Tanedo, “Particle
      physics models for the 17 MeV anomaly in beryllium nuclear decays,” Phys. Rev. D 95 no. 3, (2017)
      035017, arXiv:1608.03591 [hep-ph].
[210] LHCb Collaboration, R. Aaij et al., “Search for Dark Photons Produced in 13 TeV pp Collisions,”
      Phys. Rev. Lett. 120 no. 6, (2018) 061801, arXiv:1710.02867 [hep-ex].
[211] CHARM Collaboration, F. Bergsma et al., “Search for Axion Like Particle Production in 400-GeV
      Proton - Copper Interactions,” Phys. Lett. 157B (1985) 458–462.
[212] J. B. Dent, F. Ferrer, and L. M. Krauss, “Constraints on Light Hidden Sector Gauge Bosons from
      Supernova Cooling,” arXiv:1201.2683 [astro-ph.CO].
[213] H. K. Dreiner, J.-F. Fortin, C. Hanhart, and L. Ubaldi, “Supernova constraints on MeV dark sectors
      from e+ e− annihilations,” Phys. Rev. D89 no. 10, (2014) 105015, arXiv:1310.3826 [hep-ph].
[214] E. Hardy and R. Lasenby, “Stellar cooling bounds on new light particles: plasma mixing effects,”
      JHEP 02 (2017) 033, arXiv:1611.05852 [hep-ph].
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                                                 67

[215] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad√et al., “Search for long-lived neutral particles decaying into lepton jets
      in proton-proton collisions at s = 8 TeV with the ATLAS detector,” JHEP 11 (2014) 088,
      arXiv:1409.0746 [hep-ex].
                                                                                               √
[216] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et al., “A search for prompt lepton-jets in pp collisions at s = 8 TeV
      with the ATLAS detector,” JHEP 02 (2016) 062, arXiv:1511.05542 [hep-ex].
[217] CMS Collaboration, V. Khachatryan et al., “A search for pair production of new light bosons decaying
      into muons,” Phys. Lett. B752 (2016) 146–168, arXiv:1506.00424 [hep-ex].
[218] A. Fradette, M. Pospelov, J. Pradler, and A. Ritz, “Cosmological Constraints on Very Dark Photons,”
      Phys. Rev. D90 no. 3, (2014) 035022, arXiv:1407.0993 [hep-ph].
[219] LHCb Collaboration, R. Aaij et al., “Physics case for an LHCb Upgrade II - Opportunities in flavour
      physics, and beyond, in the HL-LHC era,” arXiv:1808.08865 [hep-ex].
[220] FASER Collaboration, A. Ariga et al., “FASER physics reach for long-lived particles,” Phys. Rev. D99
      no. 9, (2019) 095011, arXiv:1811.12522 [hep-ph].
[221] R. K. Ellis et al., “Physics Briefing Book: Input for the European Strategy for Particle Physics Update
      2020,” arXiv:1910.11775 [hep-ex].
[222] E787 Collaboration, S. Adler et al., “Further evidence for the decay K + → π + ν ν̄,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
      88 (2002) 041803, arXiv:hep-ex/0111091 [hep-ex].
[223] BNL-E949 Collaboration, A. V. Artamonov et al., “Study of the decay K + → π + ν ν̄ in the
      momentum region 140 < Pπ < 199 MeV/c,” Phys. Rev. D79 (2009) 092004, arXiv:0903.0030
      [hep-ex].
[224] NA62 Collaboration, E. Cortina Gil et al., “Search for production of an invisible dark photon in π 0
      decays,” JHEP 05 (2019) 182, arXiv:1903.08767 [hep-ex].
[225] BaBar Collaboration, J. P. Lees et al., “Search for Invisible Decays of a Dark Photon Produced in
      e+ e− Collisions at BaBar,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 119 no. 13, (2017) 131804, arXiv:1702.03327
      [hep-ex].
[226] D. Banerjee et al., “Dark matter search in missing energy events with NA64,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 123
      no. 12, (2019) 121801, arXiv:1906.00176 [hep-ex].
[227] KLEVER Project Collaboration, F. Ambrosino et al., “KLEVER: An experiment to measure
      BR(KL → π 0 ν ν̄) at the CERN SPS,” arXiv:1901.03099 [hep-ex].
[228] M. Raggi, V. Kozhuharov, and P. Valente, “The PADME experiment at LNF,” EPJ Web Conf. 96
      (2015) 01025, arXiv:1501.01867 [hep-ex].
[229] A. Caputo, H. Liu, S. Mishra-Sharma, and J. T. Ruderman, “Dark Photon Oscillations in Our
      Inhomogeneous Universe,” arXiv:2002.05165 [astro-ph.CO].
[230] A. A. Garcia, K. Bondarenko, S. Ploeckinger, J. Pradler, and A. Sokolenko, “Effective photon mass
      and (dark) photon conversion in the inhomogeneous Universe,” arXiv:2003.10465 [astro-ph.CO].
[231] S. J. Witte, S. Rosauro-Alcaraz, S. D. McDermott, and V. Poulin, “Dark Photon Dark Matter in the
      Presence of Inhomogeneous Structure,” arXiv:2003.13698 [astro-ph.CO].
[232] S. D. McDermott and S. J. Witte, “Cosmological evolution of light dark photon dark matter,” Phys.
      Rev. D 101 no. 6, (2020) 063030, arXiv:1911.05086 [hep-ph].
[233] K. Ehret et al., “New ALPS Results on Hidden-Sector Lightweights,” Phys. Lett. B689 (2010)
      149–155, arXiv:1004.1313 [hep-ex].
[234] M. Betz, F. Caspers, M. Gasior, M. Thumm, and S. Rieger, “First results of the CERN Resonant
      Weakly Interacting sub-eV Particle Search (CROWS),” Phys. Rev. D 88 no. 7, (2013) 075014,
      arXiv:1310.8098 [physics.ins-det].
[235] J. Redondo, “Helioscope Bounds on Hidden Sector Photons,” JCAP 07 (2008) 008,
      arXiv:0801.1527 [hep-ph].
[236] H. An, M. Pospelov, and J. Pradler, “Dark Matter Detectors as Dark Photon Helioscopes,” Phys. Rev.
      Lett. 111 (2013) 041302, arXiv:1304.3461 [hep-ph].
68                                                                                      BIBLIOGRAPHY

[237] M. Schwarz, E.-A. Knabbe, A. Lindner, J. Redondo, A. Ringwald, M. Schneide, J. Susol, and
      G. Wiedemann, “Results from the Solar Hidden Photon Search (SHIPS),” JCAP 08 (2015) 011,
      arXiv:1502.04490 [hep-ph].
[238] M. Danilov, S. Demidov, and D. Gorbunov, “Constraints on hidden photons produced in nuclear
      reactors,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 122 no. 4, (2019) 041801, arXiv:1804.10777 [hep-ph].
[239] J. Jaeckel and S. Roy, “Spectroscopy as a test of Coulomb’s law: A Probe of the hidden sector,” Phys.
      Rev. D82 (2010) 125020, arXiv:1008.3536 [hep-ph].
[240] J. Redondo and G. Raffelt, “Solar constraints on hidden photons re-visited,” JCAP 1308 (2013) 034,
      arXiv:1305.2920 [hep-ph].
[241] H. An, M. Pospelov, and J. Pradler, “New stellar constraints on dark photons,” Phys. Lett. B725
      (2013) 190–195, arXiv:1302.3884 [hep-ph].
[242] H. An, M. Pospelov, J. Pradler, and A. Ritz, “Direct Detection Constraints on Dark Photon Dark
      Matter,” Phys. Lett. B 747 (2015) 331–338, arXiv:1412.8378 [hep-ph].
[243] XENON10 Collaboration, J. Angle et al., “A search for light dark matter in XENON10 data,” Phys.
      Rev. Lett. 107 (2011) 051301, arXiv:1104.3088 [astro-ph.CO]. [Erratum: Phys.Rev.Lett. 110,
      249901 (2013)].
[244] XENON100 Collaboration, E. Aprile et al., “First Axion Results from the XENON100 Experiment,”
      Phys. Rev. D90 no. 6, (2014) 062009, arXiv:1404.1455 [astro-ph.CO]. [Erratum: Phys.
      Rev.D95,no.2,029904(2017)].
[245] XENON Collaboration, E. Aprile et al., “Light Dark Matter Search with Ionization Signals in
      XENON1T,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 123 no. 25, (2019) 251801, arXiv:1907.11485 [hep-ex].
[246] XENON Collaboration, E. Aprile et al., “Observation of Excess Electronic Recoil Events in
      XENON1T,” arXiv:2006.09721 [hep-ex].
[247] DAMIC Collaboration, A. Aguilar-Arevalo et al., “First Direct-Detection Constraints on eV-Scale
      Hidden-Photon Dark Matter with DAMIC at SNOLAB,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 no. 14, (2017) 141803,
      arXiv:1611.03066 [astro-ph.CO].
[248] SuperCDMS Collaboration, T. Aralis et al., “Constraints on Dark Photons and Axion-Like Particles
      from SuperCDMS Soudan,” Phys. Rev. D101 no. 5, (2020) 052008, arXiv:1911.11905 [hep-ex].
[249] Z. She et al., “Direct Detection Constraints on Dark Photons with CDEX-10 Experiment at the China
      Jinping Underground Laboratory,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 124 no. 11, (2020) 111301, arXiv:1910.13234
      [hep-ex].
[250] EDELWEISS Collaboration, E. Armengaud et al., “Searches for electron interactions induced by new
      physics in the EDELWEISS-III Germanium bolometers,” Phys. Rev. D98 no. 8, (2018) 082004,
      arXiv:1808.02340 [hep-ex].
[251] SENSEI Collaboration, O. Abramoff et al., “SENSEI: Direct-Detection Constraints on Sub-GeV Dark
      Matter from a Shallow Underground Run Using a Prototype Skipper-CCD,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 122
      no. 16, (2019) 161801, arXiv:1901.10478 [hep-ex].
[252] XMASS Collaboration, K. Abe et al., “Search for dark matter in the form of hidden photons and
      axion-like particles in the XMASS detector,” Phys. Lett. B787 (2018) 153–158, arXiv:1807.08516
      [astro-ph.CO].
[253] FUNK Experiment Collaboration, A. Andrianavalomahefa et al., “Limits from the Funk Experiment
      on the Mixing Strength of Hidden-Photon Dark Matter in the Visible and Near-Ultraviolet Wavelength
      Range,” arXiv:2003.13144 [astro-ph.CO].
[254] D. F. Bartlett, P. E. Goldhagen, and E. A. Phillips, “Experimental Test of Coulomb’s Law,” Phys. Rev.
      D2 (1970) 483–487.
[255] TEXONO Collaboration, M. Deniz et al., “Measurement of Nu(e)-bar -Electron Scattering
      Cross-Section with a CsI(Tl) Scintillating Crystal Array at the Kuo-Sheng Nuclear Power Reactor,”
      Phys. Rev. D 81 (2010) 072001, arXiv:0911.1597 [hep-ex].
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                                                 69

[256] D. Fixsen, E. Cheng, J. Gales, J. C. Mather, R. Shafer, and E. Wright, “The Cosmic Microwave
      Background spectrum from the full COBE FIRAS data set,” Astrophys. J. 473 (1996) 576,
      arXiv:astro-ph/9605054.
[257] A. Mirizzi, J. Redondo, and G. Sigl, “Microwave Background Constraints on Mixing of Photons with
      Hidden Photons,” JCAP 03 (2009) 026, arXiv:0901.0014 [hep-ph].
[258] D. Wadekar and G. R. Farrar, “First direct astrophysical constraints on dark matter interactions with
      ordinary matter at very low velocities,” arXiv:1903.12190 [hep-ph].
[259] A. Bhoonah, J. Bramante, F. Elahi, and S. Schon, “Galactic Center gas clouds and novel bounds on
      ultralight dark photon, vector portal, strongly interacting, composite, and super-heavy dark matter,”
      Phys. Rev. D 100 no. 2, (2019) 023001, arXiv:1812.10919 [hep-ph].
[260] J. Redondo and M. Postma, “Massive hidden photons as lukewarm dark matter,” JCAP 02 (2009)
      005, arXiv:0811.0326 [hep-ph].
[261] P. Sikivie, “Experimental Tests of the Invisible Axion,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 51 (1983) 1415–1417.
      [Erratum: Phys.Rev.Lett. 52, 695 (1984)].
[262] P. deNiverville, M. Pospelov, and A. Ritz, “Observing a light dark matter beam with neutrino
      experiments,” Phys. Rev. D 84 (2011) 075020, arXiv:1107.4580 [hep-ph].
[263] MiniBooNE DM Collaboration, A. Aguilar-Arevalo et al., “Dark Matter Search in Nucleon, Pion, and
      Electron Channels from a Proton Beam Dump with MiniBooNE,” Phys. Rev. D 98 no. 11, (2018)
      112004, arXiv:1807.06137 [hep-ex].
[264] CRESST Collaboration, G. Angloher et al., “Results on light dark matter particles with a
      low-threshold CRESST-II detector,” Eur. Phys. J. C 76 no. 1, (2016) 25, arXiv:1509.01515
      [astro-ph.CO].
[265] SHiP Collaboration, M. Anelli et al., “A facility to Search for Hidden Particles (SHiP) at the CERN
      SPS,” arXiv:1504.04956 [physics.ins-det].
[266] BDX Collaboration, M. Battaglieri et al., “Dark Matter Search in a Beam-Dump eXperiment (BDX)
      at Jefferson Lab,” arXiv:1607.01390 [hep-ex].
[267] MicroBooNE, LAr1-ND, ICARUS-WA104 Collaboration, M. Antonello et al., “A Proposal for a
      Three Detector Short-Baseline Neutrino Oscillation Program in the Fermilab Booster Neutrino Beam,”
      arXiv:1503.01520 [physics.ins-det].
[268] M. Battaglieri et al., “US Cosmic Visions: New Ideas in Dark Matter 2017: Community Report,” in
      U.S. Cosmic Visions: New Ideas in Dark Matter. 7, 2017. arXiv:1707.04591 [hep-ph].
[269] SuperCDMS Collaboration, R. Agnese et al., “Projected Sensitivity of the SuperCDMS SNOLAB
      experiment,” Phys. Rev. D 95 no. 8, (2017) 082002, arXiv:1610.00006 [physics.ins-det].
[270] Planck Collaboration, P. Ade et al., “Planck 2015 results. XIII. Cosmological parameters,” Astron.
      Astrophys. 594 (2016) A13, arXiv:1502.01589 [astro-ph.CO].
[271] A. Caputo, A. Esposito, E. Geoffray, A. D. Polosa, and S. Sun, “Dark Matter, Dark Photon and
      Superfluid He-4 from Effective Field Theory,” Phys. Lett. B 802 (2020) 135258, arXiv:1911.04511
      [hep-ph].
[272] SENSEI Collaboration, J. Tiffenberg, M. Sofo-Haro, A. Drlica-Wagner, R. Essig, Y. Guardincerri,
      S. Holland, T. Volansky, and T.-T. Yu, “Single-electron and single-photon sensitivity with a silicon
      Skipper CCD,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 119 no. 13, (2017) 131802, arXiv:1706.00028
      [physics.ins-det].
[273] L. Barak et al., “SENSEI: Direct-Detection Results on sub-GeV Dark Matter from a New
      Skipper-CCD,” arXiv:2004.11378 [astro-ph.CO].
[274] R. Peccei and H. R. Quinn, “CP Conservation in the Presence of Instantons,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 38
      (1977) 1440–1443.
[275] J. R. Ellis, J. Gunion, H. E. Haber, L. Roszkowski, and F. Zwirner, “Higgs Bosons in a Nonminimal
      Supersymmetric Model,” Phys. Rev. D 39 (1989) 844.
[276] J. Derendinger and C. A. Savoy, “Quantum Effects and SU(2) x U(1) Breaking in Supergravity Gauge
      Theories,” Nucl. Phys. B 237 (1984) 307–328.
70                                                                                         BIBLIOGRAPHY

[277] J. Frere, D. Jones, and S. Raby, “Fermion Masses and Induction of the Weak Scale by Supergravity,”
      Nucl. Phys. B 222 (1983) 11–19.
[278] V. Silveira and A. Zee, “SCALAR PHANTOMS,” Phys. Lett. B 161 (1985) 136–140.
[279] T. Binoth and J. van der Bij, “Influence of strongly coupled, hidden scalars on Higgs signals,” Z. Phys.
      C 75 (1997) 17–25, arXiv:hep-ph/9608245.
[280] B. Patt and F. Wilczek, “Higgs-field portal into hidden sectors,” arXiv:hep-ph/0605188.
[281] P. Minkowski, “µ → eγ at a Rate of One Out of 109 Muon Decays?,” Phys. Lett. B 67 (1977)
      421–428.
[282] T. Yanagida, “Horizontal Symmetry and Masses of Neutrinos,” Prog. Theor. Phys. 64 (1980) 1103.
[283] M. Gell-Mann, P. Ramond, and R. Slansky, “Complex Spinors and Unified Theories,” Conf. Proc. C
      790927 (1979) 315–321, arXiv:1306.4669 [hep-th].
[284] R. N. Mohapatra and G. Senjanovic, “Neutrino Masses and Mixings in Gauge Models with
      Spontaneous Parity Violation,” Phys. Rev. D 23 (1981) 165.
[285] J. C. Pati and A. Salam, “Lepton Number as the Fourth Color,” Phys. Rev. D 10 (1974) 275–289.
      [Erratum: Phys.Rev.D 11, 703–703 (1975)].
[286] R. Mohapatra and J. C. Pati, “A Natural Left-Right Symmetry,” Phys. Rev. D 11 (1975) 2558.
[287] R. N. Mohapatra and J. C. Pati, “Left-Right Gauge Symmetry and an Isoconjugate Model of CP
      Violation,” Phys. Rev. D 11 (1975) 566–571.
[288] G. Senjanovic and R. N. Mohapatra, “Exact Left-Right Symmetry and Spontaneous Violation of
      Parity,” Phys. Rev. D 12 (1975) 1502.
[289] M. Bauer and T. Plehn, “Yet Another Introduction to Dark Matter,” Lect. Notes Phys. 959 (2019)
      pp.–, arXiv:1705.01987 [hep-ph].
[290] E. Braaten and D. Segel, “Neutrino energy loss from the plasma process at all temperatures and
      densities,” Phys. Rev. D 48 (1993) 1478–1491, arXiv:hep-ph/9302213.
