                                     hep-ph/0012100                                                              YCTP-P12-00
                                     December 8, 2000                                                            EFI–2000-48




                                            Bounds on Universal Extra Dimensions




arXiv:hep-ph/0012100v2 29 Jun 2001
                                                  Thomas Appelquist1 , Hsin-Chia Cheng2 , Bogdan A. Dobrescu1

                                                  1 Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA∗

                                                2 Enrico Fermi Institute, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA




                                                                                   Abstract

                                                 We show that the bound from the electroweak data on the size of extra dimen-
                                             sions accessible to all the standard model fields is rather loose. These “universal”
                                             extra dimensions could have a compactification scale as low as 300 GeV for one ex-
                                             tra dimension. This is because the Kaluza-Klein number is conserved and thus the
                                             contributions to the electroweak observables arise only from loops. The main con-
                                             straint comes from weak-isospin violation effects. We also compute the contributions
                                             to the S parameter and the Zbb̄ vertex. The direct bound on the compactification
                                             scale is set by CDF and D0 in the few hundred GeV range, and the Run II of the
                                             Tevatron will either discover extra dimensions or else it could significantly raise the
                                             bound on the compactification scale. In the case of two universal extra dimensions,
                                             the current lower bound on the compactification scale depends logarithmically on
                                             the ultra-violet cutoff of the higher dimensional theory, but can be estimated to
                                             lie between 400 and 800 GeV. With three or more extra dimensions, the cutoff
                                             dependence may be too strong to allow an estimate.




                                       ∗
                                           e-mail: thomas.appelquist@yale.edu, hcheng@theory.uchicago.edu, bogdan.dobrescu@yale.edu
1     Introduction
Extra dimensions accessible to standard model fields are of interest for various reasons.
They could allow gauge coupling unification [1], and provide new mechanisms for super-
symmetry breaking [2] and the generation of fermion mass hierarchies [3]. More recently
it has been shown that extra dimensions accessible to the observed fields may lead to the
existence of a Higgs doublet [4].
  A number of studies indicate that if standard model fields propagate in extra di-
mensions, then they must be compactified at a scale 1/R above a few TeV [5]. These
studies refer, however, to theories in which some of the quarks and leptons are confined
to flat four-dimensional slices (branes). In the equivalent four-dimensional theory where
the extra dimensions are accounted for by towers of heavy Kaluza-Klein (KK) states, the
bound on 1/R is due to the tree level contributions of the KK modes to the electroweak
observables.
    In this paper we point out that extra dimensions accessible to all the standard model
fields, referred to here as universal dimensions, may be significantly larger. The key
element is the conservation of momentum in the universal dimensions. In the equivalent
four-dimensional theory this implies KK number conservation. In particular there are no
vertices involving only one non-zero KK mode, and consequently there are no tree-level
contributions to the electroweak observables. Furthermore, non-zero KK modes may be
produced at colliders only in groups of two or more. Thus, none of the known bounds on
extra dimensions from single KK production at colliders or from electroweak constraints
applies for universal extra dimensions.
   The heavy KK modes contribute, though, at loop-level to the electroweak observables,
so that some lower bound on 1/R can be set. In addition, there is a direct bound on
1/R from the non-observation of KK pair production at the Tevatron and LEP. After
presenting some general features of universal extra dimensions in section 2, we compute
the bound on their size from the electroweak data (section 3.) We then discuss the
current direct bound on 1/R from collider experiments (section 4.) Our conclusions are
summarized in section 5.




                                            1
2    The Kaluza-Klein spectrum and interactions
Our starting point is the minimal standard model in d = 4 + δ space-time dimensions.
The gauge, Yukawa and quartic-Higgs couplings have negative mass dimension, so this
is an effective theory, valid below some scale Ms . We assume a compactification scale
1/R < Ms for the δ extra spatial dimensions. The upper bound on 1/R for the class of
models being discussed is determined by the range of validity of the effective 4-dimensional
Higgs theory. To avoid fine-tuning the parameters in the Higgs sector, 1/R should not
be much higher than the electroweak scale. We study the experimental lower bound on
1/R. Given that the gauge couplings and the top Yukawa coupling are of order one at the
electroweak scale, the d-dimensional theory remains perturbative for a range of energies
above 1/R. The cutoff Ms on the d-dimensional theory is expected to be no higher than
the upper end of this range.
   We use the generic notation xα , α = 0, 1, ..., 3 + δ for the coordinates of the (4 + δ)-
dimensional space-time, but we explicitly distinguish between the usual non-compact
space-time coordinates, xµ , µ = 0, 1, 2, 3, and the coordinates of the extra dimensions,
y a, a = 1, ..., δ. The 4-dimensional Lagrangian can be obtained by dimensional reduction
from the (4 + δ)-dimensional theory,
                                  3
                          (
                                       1
                  Z                            h                                   i
       µ              δ                            αβ                    µ     a
                                                        µ     a
                                                                                     + LHiggs (xµ , y a )
                                  X
    L(x ) =           dy −                2
                                            Tr   Fi   (x  , y   )Fi αβ (x  , y   )
                                  i=1 2ĝ i
                                                                    
           + i Q, U, D (xµ , y a ) Γµ Dµ + Γ3+a D3+a (Q, U, D)⊤ (xµ , y a )
              h                                                                                           io
           + Q(xµ , y a ) λ̂U U(xµ , y a)iσ2 H ∗ (xµ , y a ) + λ̂D D(xµ , y a)H(xµ , y a) + h.c.                 (2.1)
                                                                                                                  .

Here Fiαβ are the (4 + δ)-dimensional gauge field strengths associated with the SU(3)C ×
SU(2)W × U(1)Y group, while Dµ = ∂/∂xµ − Aµ and D3+a = ∂/∂y a − A3+a are the
covariant derivatives, with Aα = −i 3i=1 ĝi Arαi Tir being the (4 + δ)-dimensional gauge
                                   P

fields. The piece LHiggs of the (4 + δ)-dimensional Lagrangian contains the kinetic term
for the (4 + δ)-dimensional Higgs doublet H, and the Higgs potential. The (4 + δ)-
dimensional gauge couplings ĝi , and the Yukawa couplings collected in the 3 × 3 matrices
λ̂U ,D , have dimension (mass)−δ/2 .
    The fields Q, U and D describe the (4 + δ)-dimensional fermions whose zero-modes
are given by the 4-dimensional standard model quarks. A summation over a generational
index is implicit in Eq. (2.1). For example, the 4-dimensional, third generation quarks
                     (0)           (0)       (0)
may be written as Q3 ≡ (t, b)L , U3 ≡ tR , D3 ≡ bR . The kinetic and Yukawa terms for

                                                             2
the weak-doublet and -singlet leptons, L and E, are not shown for brevity.
    The gamma matrices in (4 + δ) dimensions, Γα , are anti-commuting 2k+2 × 2k+2 matri-
ces, where k is an integer such that δ = 2k or δ = 2k + 1. Chiral fermions exist only when
δ is even, and correspond to the eigenvalues ±1 of Γ4+δ . Therefore, if the spacetime has an
odd number of dimensions (δ = 2k + 1), Q, U, D, L, and E are vector-like 2k+2 -component
fermions, and the (4 + δ)-dimensional theory is automatically anomaly-free. For an even
number of dimensions (δ = 2k) one may choose Q, U, D, L and E to be chiral 2k+1 -
component fermions. In order to have Yukawa couplings with the scalar Higgs field, the
SU(2)W -doublet fermions and the SU(2)W -singlet fermions must have opposite chiralities.
This guarantees that the unbroken SU(3)C and U(1)EM are vector-like, hence anomaly
free. The gravitational anomaly may easily be cancelled by gauge-singlet fermions. The
SU(2)W and U(1)Y gauge groups are chiral, so there can be (4 + 2k)-dimensional anoma-
lies involving the SU(2)W and U(1)Y gauge groups, but they can be cancelled by the
Green-Schwarz mechanism [6]. For both odd and even δ the 4-dimensional anomalies
cancel because the fermion content is chosen so that the effective theory at scales below
1/R is the 4-dimensional standard model.
   In order to derive the 4-dimensional Lagrangian from Eq. (2.1), we must specify the
compactification of the extra dimensions. The simplest choice is an [(S 1 ×S 1 )/Z2 ]k orbifold
for δ = 2k, and an [(S 1 × S 1 )/Z2]k × (S 1 /Z2 ) orbifold for δ = 2k + 1. An orbifold
of this type is a δ-dimensional torus cut in half along each of the y a coordinates with
odd a. Each component of a d-dimensional field that belongs to a representation of the
4-dimensional Lorentz group, SO(3, 1), must be either odd or even under the orbifold
projection: (y a , y a+1 ) → (−y a , −y a+1 ) for even a + 1 ≤ 2k, as well as y 2k+1 → −y 2k+1
for δ = 2k + 1. An equivalent description of the compactification is a δ-dimensional
space with coordinates 0 ≤ y a ≤ πR for odd a and −πR ≤ y a ≤ πR for even a, and
boundary conditions such that each field or its derivatives with respect to the y a’s vanish
at the orbifold fixed points y a = 0, ±πR. (Φ = 0, ∂ 2 Φ/∂y a ∂y b = 0 for odd fields, and
∂Φ/∂y a = 0 for even fields at the orbifold fixed points.)
   The Lagrangian (2.1) together with the boundary conditions completely specifies the
theory. For δ = 2, the SU(3)C × SU(2)W × U(1)Y gauge fields are decomposed in KK
modes as follows:
                     √
                                      √ X (j ,j ) µ
                           (                                                       )
                       2                                          1
                                                                
        µ   a                 (0,0) µ                                    1      2
   Aν (x , y ) =            Aν (x ) + 2         Aν 1 2 (x ) cos     (j1 y + j2 y )    ,
                  (2πR)δ/2               j1 ,j2                   R



                                              3
                    2                           1
                          X (j1 ,j2 )                                                
           µ       a
   Ab (x , y ) =      δ/2
                              Ab      (xµ ) sin   (j1 y 1 + j2 y 2 ) ,                                (2.2)
                 (2πR) j1 ,j2                   R
where the summation is over all integer values of the KK numbers j1 and j2 that satisfy
j1 + j2 ≥ 1, or j1 = −j2 ≥ 1. The gauge fields polarized in the xν , ν = 0, 1, 2, 3 directions
are even under the orbifold transformation, so that the zero-modes correspond to the
4-dimensional standard model gauge fields. On the other hand, the gauge fields polarized
along the coordinates y b , b = 1, 2 of the extra dimensions are odd under the orbifold
transformation, so that their zero-modes are projected out and no massless scalar fields
appear after dimensional reduction.
    With boundary conditions in the δ = 2 compact dimensions chosen to give the appro-
priate chiral structure for the KK zero-modes, the KK decomposition for the top quark
fields is given by
                          √
                                        √ X
                                 (
                   2                                                    1
                                                                                                    
                                                        (j ,j )
       µ
 Q3 (x , y ) = a
                     δ/2
                         (t, b)L (xµ ) + 2        PL Q3 L 1 2 (xµ ) cos   (j1 y 1 + j2 y 2 )
               (2πR)                       j1 ,j2                       R
                                                     1
                                                                           
                                (j ,j )
                       + PR Q3 R1 2 (xµ ) sin          (j1 y 1 + j2 y 2 )         ,
                                                     R
                          √
                                    √ X
                                 (
                    2                                              1
                                                                                                
                                                    (j ,j )
       µ
  U3 (x , y ) =a
                      δ/2
                          tR (xµ ) + 2        PR U3 R1 2 (xµ ) cos   (j1 y 1 + j2 y 2 )
                (2πR)                  j1 ,j2                      R
                                       1
                                                                        
                               (j ,j )
                                         (j1 y 1 + j2 y 2 )
                       + PL U3 L 1 2 (xµ ) sin              ,                    (2.3)
                                       R
where the range of values for j1 and j2 is the same as above, in Eq. (2.2). The third-
generation weak-doublet quark, Q3 = (Qt , Qb ), and weak-singlet up-type quark, U3 ,
are four-component chiral fermions in six dimensions so that their KK modes are 4-
dimensional vector-like quarks, with the exception of the zero-modes which are chiral.
The chiral projection operators that appear in the KK decomposition, PL,R = (1 ∓ γ5 )/2,
are the 4-dimensional ones.
   For δ = 1, the KK decomposition may be obtained from Eqs. (2.2) and (2.3) by setting
j2 = 0, y 2 = 0. In general, for δ = 2k + 1 one may compactify one dimension as above and
then compactify the remaining k pairs of extra dimensions, with appropriate use of the
higher dimensional chiral projection operators. For δ = 2k, the KK decomposition may
also be obtained by iterating Eqs. (2.2) and (2.3) k times. The other quark and lepton
d-dimensional fields have similar KK-mode decompositions. The Higgs field must be even
under the orbifold transformation. Only the Higgs zero-mode acquires an electroweak
                                                √
asymmetric vacuum expectation value (VEV) of v/ 2 ≈ 174 GeV.

                                                         4
   The heavy spectrum in four dimensions consists of KK levels characterized by the
mass eigenvalues
                                              pj
                                         Mj =    ,                             (2.4)
                                              R
where j ≥ 1, pj+1 > pj , and pj is given by

                                                j12 + ... + jδ2 = p2j .                           (2.5)

The degeneracy of the jth KK level, Dj , is given by the number of solutions to this equa-
tion for j1 , ..., jδ . At each level there would be Dj sets of fields, each of them including the
SU(3)C ×SU(2)W ×U(1)Y gauge fields, three generations of vector-like quarks and leptons,
a Higgs doublet, and δ scalars in the adjoint representations of SU(3)C ×SU(2)W ×U(1)Y .
   An essential observation is that the momentum conservation in the extra dimensions,
implicitly associated with the Lagrangian (2.1), is preserved (as a discrete symmetry) by
the above orbifold projection. In the case of fermions, this implies that there is no mixing
among the modes of different KK levels. The zero-mode top-quark gets a mass from its
Yukawa coupling exactly as in the 4-dimensional standard model. Given that each KK
level includes a tower of both left- and right-handed modes for each of the tL and tR
fields, there is a 2 × 2 mass matrix for each top-quark KK level. The Dj top-quark mass
matrices of the jth KK level may be written in the weak eigenstate basis as
                                                                            U3j
                                                                    !             !
                                      j    j
                                                         −Mj mt
                                     U 3 , Qt                                         .           (2.6)
                                                           mt Mj            Qjt

Here, Qjt is a four-component field describing the jth KK modes associated with tL . The
diagonal terms are the masses induced by the kinetic terms in the y a directions, while the
off-diagonal terms are the contributions from the Higgs VEV. The corresponding mass
eigenstates, U3′j and Q′jt , have the same mass,
                                                              q
                                                    (j)
                                            Mt            =   Mj2 + m2t .                         (2.7)

The weak eigenstate top KK modes are related to the mass eigenstates by
                           U3j                                                    U3′j
                                 !                                          !             !
                                                −γ5 cos αj sin αj
                                       =                                                      ,   (2.8)
                           Qjt                   γ5 sin αj cos αj                 Q′jt
where αj is the mixing angle,
                                                                  mt
                                                    tan 2αj =        .                            (2.9)
                                                                  Mj
   The b-quark KK modes have an analogous structure due to the mixing between D3j
(the left- and right-handed fields associated with bR ) and Qjb (the left- and right-handed

                                                              5
fields associated with bL ). However, this mixing may be neglected up to corrections of
order (mb /mt )2 compared with the mixing from the top-quark KK sector.
   The interactions of the KK modes may be derived from the d-dimensional Lagrangian
(2.1), using the KK decompositions shown in Eqs. (2.2) and (2.3), and by integrating
over the extra dimensions. For the one-loop computations to be considered here, it is
sufficient to know the vertices involving one or two zero-modes and two non-zero modes.
In the remainder of this section we list the relevant terms of this type that appear in the
4-dimensional Lagrangian.
   The top and bottom mass-eigenstate KK modes (i.e., the vector-like quarks Q′jt , U3′j ,
Qjb and D3j ) have the following electroweak interactions with the W ± and Z zero-modes:
                g                       4 2                              4
                                                                                          
                                                   ′j                              ′j
 LW 1 =              Zµ     sin2 αj −     sin θW U 3 γ µ U3′j + cos2 αj − sin2 θW Qt γ µ Q′jt
            2 cos θW                    3                                3
                                   ′j                         j                j
                                                                                        i
            + sin αj cos αj U 3 γ µ γ5 Q′jt + h.c. + 2gLb Qb γ µ Qjb + 2gRb D 3 γ µ D3j
          g h             ′j             ′j
                                                         i
        + √ Wµ+ − sin αj U 3 γ5 + cos αj Qt γ µ Qjb + h.c. ,                                      (2.10)
           2
where
                                   1 1               1
                            gLb = − + sin2 θW , gRb = sin2 θW .                                   (2.11)
                                   2 3               3
                                                          j
   The weak eigenstate neutral gauge bosons, Wµ3 and Bµj mix level by level in the same
way as the neutral SU(2)W and hypercharge gauge bosons in the 4-dimensional standard
                                                                                     q
model. The corresponding mass eigenstates, Zµj and Ajµ , have masses Mj2 + MZ2 and
Mj2 , respectively. These heavy gauge bosons have interactions with one zero-mode quark
and one j-mode quark (in the weak-eigenstate basis) identical with the standard model
interactions of the zero-modes.
   Likewise, there are interactions of one quark zero-mode and one quark j-mode with
the j-mode of the scalars corresponding to the electroweak gauge bosons polarized along
      j       j
y a, Wa+3 , Za+3 , Aja+3 . For δ = 1, they may be written as follows:
           e    h           ′j        ′j
                                                        ′j        ′j
                                                                                j          j
                                                                                                  i
   LW2 = iAj4 2 cos αj QtR tL − U 3L tR − 2 sin αj U 3R tL − QtL tR − QbR bL − D3L bR
           3
              g        h ′j                     ′j
                                                                                      j
                                                                                              i
        +         iZ4j Qt cj1V + cj1A γ5 t + U 3 cj2V + cj2A γ5 t + gLb QjbR bL + gRb D 3L bR
          cos θW
           g       j
                              ′j              ′j
                                                           
        + √ iW4+ cos αj QtR bL − sin αj U 3R bL + tL QjbR + h.c.                               (2.12)
             2
where
                                         1 1 2             1
                                                      
                       j
                     c1V,A = ± cos αj       − sin θW − sin αj sin2 θW ,                        (2.13)
                                         4 3               3

                                                   6
and cj2V,A are obtained by permuting sin αj and cos αj in the above expression. For δ = 2
       j      j     j
the Wa+4  , Za+4 , γa+4 scalars have similar couplings, up to sign differences, while for δ ≥ 3
the gauge bosons polarized along each pair of extra dimensions couples to a different set
of quark KK modes.
   Each non-zero KK mode of the Higgs doublet, H j , includes a charged Higgs and a
                                                                            q
neutral CP-odd scalar of mass Mj , and also a neutral CP-even scalar of mass Mj2 + Mh2 .
The interactions of the Higgs and gauge boson KK modes may also be obtained from the
corresponding standard model interactions of the zero-modes by replacing two of the fields
at each vertex with their jth KK mode.


3     Electroweak data versus extra dimensions
We study the sensitivity of the electroweak observables to the higher dimensional physics
setting in at scale 1/R. The largest contributions come from the KK modes associated
with the top-quark, but there are also corrections due to the gauge and Higgs KK modes.
QCD corrections are small and are neglected. The standard model in universal extra
dimensions is described by four unknown parameters: the Higgs boson mass Mh , the
compactification radius R, the cutoff scale Ms , and the number of extra dimensions δ.
The upper bound on the cutoff Ms is determined in terms of 1/R and the value of the
various couplings at this scale. The Higgs boson mass is bounded from above by the
requirement that the Higgs quartic coupling, λh , does not blow up (from a perturbative
point of view) at a scale significantly below Ms . We use this constraint (Mh <
                                                                              ∼ 250 GeV
[4]), and study the lower bound on 1/R, concentrating on the observables that are most
likely to yield severe constraints.
   An important question is whether the electroweak observables can be computed within
the framework of the effective, higher dimensional theory, that is, whether they are sen-
sitive to the unknown physics at scale Ms and above. We will show that in the case
of one extra dimension we can reliably ignore the effects of KK modes heavier than the
cut-off (see section 3.1). With two extra dimensions the KK modes give corrections to
the electroweak observables that depend logarithmically on the cut-off, and in more extra
dimensions the dependence is more sensitive (see section 3.2).
    Given that the large t − b mass splitting requires a hierarchy between the top and bot-
tom Yukawa couplings which in turn induces weak isospin violation in the KK spectrum,



                                              7
the parameter
                                                MW
                                                                  
                                ∆ρ ≡ αT = ∆             ,                        (3.1)
                                              MZ cos θW
which measures the splitting in the W and Z masses due to physics beyond the standard
model, is a prime suspect for constraining 1/R.
    The one-loop contribution to ∆ρ from one KK level associated with the t and b quarks
follows from Eq. (2.10) and is given by

                                           3m2t                 
                                αTjt =              fT   m2
                                                          t /Mj
                                                               2
                                                                   ,                   (3.2)
                                          16π 2 v 2
where v = 246 GeV and
                                             2   2
                        fT (z) = 1 −           + 2 ln (1 + z)
                                             z z
                                         3z 3z 2
                                             "                             #
                                   2z                
                                 =    1−    +    + O z3 .                              (3.3)
                                    3     4   5

The form of this contribution to ∆ρ is easy to understand. The factor m2t /(4πv)2 arises
from the definition of ∆ρ as the coefficient of the lowest-dimension, weak isospin-violating
term in the electroweak chiral Lagrangian [8]. The additional factor (m2t /Mj2 ) is present
because the non-zero KK modes decouple in the large mass limit.
   In addition to the top and bottom KK modes, the Higgs KK modes contribute to ∆ρ
because the VEV of the zero-mode Higgs induces isospin violation in the couplings of the
higher modes of the Higgs doublet. To leading order in Mh2 /Mj2 , one Higgs KK mode
gives
                                       α        5Mh2 + 7MW
                                                         2
                                             
                           h
                        αTj = −                                                (3.4)
                                   4π cos2 θW     12Mj2
Finally, the KK electroweak gauge bosons also contribute, giving
                                                                       2
                                       α                     (2δ + 11)MW
                                                        
                         αTjV   =−                                       .             (3.5)
                                   4π cos2 θW                    6Mj2

In each of these expressions, the factor α/ cos2 θW is present because the hypercharge
gauge interaction provides the weak-isospin symmetry breaking. The second factor is
present because the higher KK modes decouple in the large mass limit.
   The contribution to T from all the KK modes is
                                      nX
                                       max                        
                                T =          Dj Tjt + Tjh + TjV        .               (3.6)
                                      j=1


                                                     8
The upper limit nmax corresponds to the mass scale Ms at which the effective d-dimensional
theory breaks down. Note that the total number of contributing KK modes of a particular
field is                                          nX
                                                   max

                                         NKK =           Dj .                                        (3.7)
                                                  j=1

Using the experimental values for MW , MZ , mt , and α, the T parameter may be written
in the form
                        nX
                               m2                     m2t        m4t
                                        (
                         max                                                      
                T ≈ 0.76     Dj t2        1 − 0.81        + 0.65     + O   m6
                                                                            t /Mj
                                                                                 6

                         j=1   Mj                     Mj2        Mj4

                                                  M2 h
                                                                            )
                                                                    i
                                            −0.057 h2 1 + O Mh2 /Mj2            ,                    (3.8)
                                                  mt
where mt ≈ 175 GeV. The error here is about 10% due to uncertainties in mt , higher
terms in Mh , and the range of values of δ being considered. The current upper bound
on T is approximately 0.4 at 95% CL for Mh <  ∼ 250 GeV (and is somewhat relaxed for
larger Mh [9].) The experimental bound on 1/R is a function of the KK spectrum, which
depends on the number of extra dimensions. We return to this estimate in section 3.1.
   In addition to the T parameter, the corrections from new physics to the electroweak
gauge boson propagators are encoded in the S parameter defined by:
                                       8π         2
                                                                
                               S≡−          Π3Y (MZ  ) − Π3Y (0)  ,                                  (3.9)
                                       MZ2
where Π3Y (q 2 ) is the vacuum polarization induced by non-standard physics (note that
the gauge couplings are factored out according to the definition for hypercharge where
Y ≡ 2(Q − T3 )). The S parameter gets a one-loop contribution from each top-quark KK
level:
                    m2         x(1 − x)MZ2                           m2t
                   (       "                      #                  "                               #)
        1
             Z 1
Sjt = −         dx 3 t2 ln 1 −             + 2x(1 − x) ln 1 +                      .
           2π 0     MZ          Mj2 + m2t                     Mj2 − x(1 − x)MZ2
                                                                              (3.10)
Assuming that Mj2 ≫ m2t , this expression takes the form

           1 m2t      m2t      MZ2               m4         M2    3MZ4
                   "                        !                             !                      #
                                                         7                                  
    Sjt ≈         1 −     2 +                   + t4       − Z2 +             + O m6t /Mj6           .
          12π Mj2     Mj2     10m2t              Mj      3 5mt    70m4t
                                                                                                 (3.11)
    The Higgs KK mode contribution to S is given, to leading order in Mh2 /Mj2 , by

                                       Mh2 + (−3 − 2 cos θW
                                                          2
                                                            ) MZ2
                               Sjh =                              ,                              (3.12)
                                               24πMj2

                                                  9
while the gauge boson KK modes do not contribute. Using the experimental values for
MZ , mt , and cos θW , the total contribution to S may be written in the form
                    nX
                     max                 
               S=          Dj Sjt + Sjh
                    j=1

                            nX
                              m2                            m2t       m4t
                                              (
                             max

                 ≈ 10−2     Dj t2                 1 − 5.4       + 6.0     + O(m6t /Mj6 )
                        j=1   Mj                            Mj2       Mj4

                                                       M2 h
                                                                                  )
                                                                            i
                                                   +1.3 h2 1 + O(Mh2 /Mj2 )           ,    (3.13)
                                                       mt

where mt ≈ 175 GeV. This result is smaller by almost two orders of magnitude than the
one for T , assuming that the series in m2t /Mj2 and Mh2 /Mj2 are convergent. Given that the
bounds on S and T are comparable (S <       ∼ 0.2 at 95% CL), we see that once the bound
on 1/R from T is satisfied there is no relevant constraint from S. This is not surprising
because the quark KK modes are vector-like fermions and therefore contribute to S only
if their masses violate the custodial symmetry, which leads to a large T .
  Another potential constraint on 1/R arises due to the one-loop corrections of the KK
modes to the Z → bb̄ branching ratio. The vertex correction is usually encoded in the
quantity
                                                g b ∆g b + gRb ∆gRb
                             ∆Rb = 2Rb (1 − Rb ) L b L2                                    (3.14)
                                                   (gL ) + (gRb )2
                                                                         b
where Rb is the ratio of the Z decay widths into bb̄ and hadrons, while gL,R appear in the
standard model Zbb̄ couplings at tree-level, and are given in Eq. (2.11).
   The contribution to ∆gLb due to top-quark KK modes, for Mj2 ≫ m2t , is given by:
                                                                 nX
                                      α                1            max
                                                                            m2t
                                              
                           ∆gLb =                           − 1         D j
                                      4π          2 sin2 θW        j=1      Mj2
                                                          nX
                                                     −4
                                                           max
                                                                      m2t
                                   ≈ 7.2 × 10                    Dj       .                (3.15)
                                                          j=1         Mj2

There are also corrections from Higgs and gauge boson KK modes, but they are sig-
nificantly smaller. The contribution to ∆gRb is suppressed by m2b /Mj2 and may also be
neglected. The standard model prediction is RbSM = 0.2158, so that ∆Rb ≈ −0.77∆gLb ,
while the measured value is Rbexp = 0.21653 ± 0.00069 [10]. Notice that the correction to
Rb from the KK modes has the wrong sign, and therefore is tightly constrained. The 2σ
bound is ∆Rb > −7 × 10−4 , which gives ∆gLb < 9.4 × 10−4 . One can then derive a bound

                                                      10
for Dj /Mj2 , but it is easy to see (for Mj2 ≫ m2t ) that this is less severe than the bound
     P

imposed by the T parameter.
     The shift in gLb also affects the left-right asymmetry measured by SLD, which depends
on
                                          (gLb )2 − (gRb )2
                                   Ab ≡                     .                        (3.16)
                                          (gLb )2 + (gRb )2
The correction due to the KK modes is given by ∆Ab ≈ −0.29∆gLb . Using the SM
prediction, ASM
             b   = 0.935, and the measured value Aexp
                                                   b  = 0.922 ± 0.023 [10], one can easily
check that this constraint is much looser than the one from Rb .
   We expect that all other electroweak observables impose no stronger constraints on
1/R than the one from the T parameter.


3.1      Bounds on one universal extra dimension

We consider first the case of a single extra dimension. Then Dj = 1 and Mj = j/R, with
R the compactification radius, so that the summations over KK modes in Eq. (3.8) are
convergent. Extending the sums to nmax ≫ 1 gives
                              h                                         i
               T ≈ 1.2(mt R)2 1 − 0.53(mt R)2 + 0.40(mt R)4 + O m6t R6        .      (3.17)

The current upper bound on isospin breaking effects, T <
                                                       ∼ 0.4, yields a lower bound on
the compactification scale:
                                  1 >
                                        300 GeV .                               (3.18)
                                  R ∼
     The S parameter and other electroweak observables also involve convergent KK mode
sums in the 5-dimensional case. As discussed above, they are less constraining than the
T parameter.
   The convergence of each of these mode sums indicates that the electroweak observables
can indeed be computed reliably within the effective 5-dimensional theory, relevant below
the cutoff Ms . The convergence of the computations can be understood by recalling that
each is effectively a 5-dimensional integral – a 4-dimensional integral plus a KK mode
sum. The convergence of the corresponding 4-dimensional integrals for the electroweak
observables is well known, and this is not changed with only a single additional dimension.
   The reliability of these computations and the consequent lower bound 1/R >  ∼ 300 GeV
can be checked by examining higher order corrections in the effective 5-dimensional theory.
In the limit Ms ≫ 1/R, the 5-dimensional couplings become strong at the cutoff, and there

                                              11
are potentially large corrections to the one-loop result. Consider the two loop corrections,
for example. The integrals are now logarithmically divergent, but there are two additional
                                                                          √
powers of a 5-dimensional coupling, each of which is proportional to 1/ Ms . Thus these
corrections have a suppression factor of 1/(RMs ) relative to the one-loop estimate. Higher
loops can all be seen to be of this order, meaning that within the effective 5-dimensional
theory the corrections to the one-loop results can only be estimated. Nevertheless, they are
all suppressed by the factor 1/(RMs ), indicating the same for the unknown physics above
Ms . When Ms is well below the scale where the 5-dimensional couplings become strong,
the higher loops may be ignored. The unknown physics above the cutoff induces effective
operators in the d-dimensional theory suppressed by powers of Ms . After dimensional
reduction the corresponding 4-dimensional operators are further suppressed by powers of
1/(RMs ).
   To estimate the largest value of Ms below which the theory is perturbative, we note
that the loop expansion parameters can be written in the form
                                            αi (Ms )
                                  ǫi = Ni            NKK (Ms ) ,                     (3.19)
                                               4π
where the αi are the 4-dimensional standard model gauge couplings, the index i = 1, 2, 3
labels the U(1)Y , SU(2)W and SU(3)C groups, Ni = 1, 2, 3 is the corresponding number
of colors, and NKK (Ms ) is the number of KK modes below Ms . The value of Ms at which
these parameters become of order unity is the largest cutoff consistent with a perturbative
effective theory. Each of the Dj sets of fields within one KK level contributes to the
one-loop coefficients of the three β functions an amount (81/10, 4/3, −5/2). Although
the 4-dimensional SU(3)C coupling becomes more asymptotically free above each KK
level, the d-dimensional SU(3)C interaction becomes non-perturbative in the ultraviolet
before the other gauge interactions. The ǫ3 parameter becomes of order unity, indicating
breakdown of the effective theory, at roughly 10 TeV. The KK modes above that scale, as
well as operators induced by other physics above the cutoff, give negligible contributions
to the electroweak observables.


3.2    Two or more universal extra dimensions

For d ≥ 6, the T and S parameters, and other electroweak observables become cutoff
dependent. The KK mode sums diverge in the limit NKK → ∞ because the KK spectrum
is denser than the 5-dimensional case. This can again be seen by noting that the 4-
dimensional integrals plus the KK mode sums are effectively d-dimensional integrals. The

                                                12
                             1000

                             800



            (1/R)min [GeV]
                             600

                             400

                             200


                                    2   2.5   3    3.5      4      4.5      5
                                                   Ms R
     Figure 1: The lower bound on the compactification scale as a function of the cut-off,
     for δ = 2 extra dimensions. The vertical size of the shaded area is given by the loop
     expansion parameter, Nc α3 (Ms )NKK (Ms )/(4π), times the one-loop bound, and is
     a measure of the theoretical uncertainty. For Ms R >  ∼ 5 the standard model inter-
     actions become non-perturbative, impeding a reliable estimate of the electroweak
     observables.



electroweak observables (S, T, ...), convergent in four and five dimensions at one loop,
become logarithmically divergent at d = 6 and more divergent in higher dimensions. The
degeneracies Dj and masses Mj of the KK modes are listed for a toroidal compactification
in Ref. [7], and are smaller by a factor of two in the case of the orbifold considered here.
    Consider the case d = 6. The electroweak observables are logarithmically divergent
at the one loop level, indicating that within the framework of the effective d-dimensional
electroweak theory, they are unknown parameters to be fit to experiment. This is rein-
forced by the higher loop estimates which are all of this order if the cutoff is taken to be
as large as possible – where the effective d-dimensional theory becomes strongly coupled.
In this case, the electroweak observables are directly sensitive to the new physics at scales
Ms and above. It is possible, on the other hand, that the cutoff is smaller or that the
higher order estimates are such that the one loop, logarithmic terms dominate. Then the
computations (3.8), (3.13), etc., enhanced relative to the 5-dimensional case by a large
logarithm, can be used to put a rough lower bound on 1/R.
   In Fig. 1 we show the dependence of this lower bound on the ratio between the cut-off
Ms and the compactification scale. Assuming that the theory above Ms is custodially

                                              13
symmetric, the one-loop contribution to the T parameter is reliable as long as the theory
remains perturbative, roughly for Ms R < ∼ 5. The KK contributions to the one-loop
coefficients of the U(1)Y , SU(2)W and SU(3)C β functions are now (81/10, 11/6, −2),
but again the d-dimensional SU(3)C interaction becomes non-perturbative in the ultra-
violet before the other gauge interactions. The theoretical uncertainty due to higher loops
may be estimated in terms of the ǫ3 loop expansion parameter. Fig. 1 shows that the
lower bound on 1/R is increased by roughly a factor of two compared to the 5-dimensional
case, to approximately 400 − 800 GeV.
   For d ≥ 7, the cutoff dependence is more severe. The one-loop estimate (3.8) for the T
parameter, for example, is enhanced by the factor (RMs )d−6 relative to the 5-dimensional
estimate. Higher loop estimates are of the same order if the ultraviolet cutoff, Ms , is above
the scale where the couplings become nonperturbative. Clearly, no reliable estimate is
possible in this case. For smaller Ms , the one-loop result has a strong dependence on the
cutoff, but otherwise the corrections are smaller because the higher-dimensional operators
have coefficients suppressed by 1/(Ms R)δ .


4     Prospects for discovering Kaluza-Klein modes
We have shown that in the case of one universal extra dimension, accessible to all the
standard model fields, the fit to the electroweak data allows KK excitations as light as
300 GeV. Such a low bound raises the tantalizing possibility of discovering KK states in
the upcoming collider experiments.
    If the KK number conservation is exact (that is, there is no additional interaction
violating the momentum conservation in extra dimensions,) some of the KK excitations
of the standard model particles will be stable. The heavy-generation fermion KK modes
can decay to light generation fermion KK modes, e.g., b(1) → s(1) (d(1) ) + γ, and the W, Z
gauge boson KK modes can decay to lepton KK modes and neutrinos, W (1) (Z (1) ) →
ℓ(1) (ν (1) ) + ν. The KK modes of the photon, gluon, and the lightest generation fermions
are stable and degenerate in mass, level-by-level, to a very good approximation. Heavy
stable charged particles will cause cosmological problems if a significant number of them
survive at the time of nucleosynthesis [11]. For example, they will combine with other
nuclei to form heavy hydrogen atoms. Searches for such heavy isotopes put strong limits
on their abundance. Various cosmological arguments exclude these particles with masses
in the range of 100 GeV to 10 TeV, unless there is a low scale inflation that dilutes their


                                             14
abundance [12, 13]. The cosmological problems can be avoided if there exist some KK-
number-violating interactions so that the non-zero KK states can decay. The lifetime
depends on the strengths of these KK number violating interactions, which are usually
suppressed by the cutoff scale and/or the volume factor of the extra dimensions. For
collider searches, there is no difference between a stable particle and a long-lived particle
which decays outside the detector. We first assume that the KK states are stable or long-
lived. The case in which the KK states decay promptly will then be considered when we
discuss the possible KK number violating interactions.


4.1      Stable or Long-Lived KK Modes

Because of the KK number conservation, the KK states have to be produced in pairs
or higher numbers. They can only be produced at LEP if their masses are less than
ECM /2, ∼ 100 GeV. The current lower bound on the size of the extra dimensions is set by
the CDF and D0 experiments based on the Run I of the Tevatron. The largest production
cross-section is that for KK quarks and gluons. After being produced, they will hadronize
into integer-charged states. Because of the large mass, they will be slowly moving and
the signatures are highly ionizing tracks.
    For one extra dimension of radius R, the number of the quark KK modes at each
level is twice that of zero-modes, so neglecting the light quark masses, there are six KK
quarks of electric charge −1/3 and mass 1/R,q
                                                four KK quarks of electric charge 2/3 and
mass 1/R, and two KK top-quarks of mass 1/R2 + m2t . Therefore, the production cross
section for a pair of charged tracks is roughly ten times higher than the one for a q q̄ pair
of quarks of mass 1/R, σqq̄ (1/R). For 1/R = 300 GeV, σqq̄ (1/R) ≈ 0.1 pb [14].
   The current lower mass limits on heavy stable quarks are 195 GeV for charge 1/3 and
220 GeV for charge 2/3 [15]. The reach in mass would be approximately the same for two
charge-1/3 quarks as for one charge-2/3 quark. Hence, the current bound on 1/R may
be approximated as the mass limit on a charge-2/3 quark, but with a production cross
section about seven times larger1 . A dedicated study, beyond the scope of this paper, is
required to find this bound precisely. However, by naively extrapolating the mass reach
given in [15], we estimate the lower direct bound on 1/R to be in the 300 − 350 GeV
range.
   1
    The gluon KK modes further increase this effective cross-section. The production cross-section for a
pair of gluon KK modes is larger than for a pair of quark KK modes, but the probability for hadronizing
into a charged meson is significantly for a gluon KK mode.


                                                  15
   It is remarkable that the direct lower bound on 1/R competes with or even exceeds the
indirect bound set by the electroweak precision measurements. This should be contrasted
with the case of non-universal extra dimensions, where the non-conservation of the KK
number makes the indirect bound on 1/R stronger than the direct one by a factor of five
or so. Thus, Run II at the Tevatron will either discover an universal extra dimension or
else it will significantly increase the lower bound on compactification scale.


4.2    Short-Lived KK Modes

As mentioned above, the KK states can decay into ordinary standard model particles if
KK number violating effects are present. Such violations of the KK number can occur
naturally. For example, the space in which the standard model fields propagate may be
a thick brane embedded in a larger space in which gravitons propagate. In this case, the
standard model KK excitations can decay into standard model particles plus gravitons
going out of the thick brane (or other neutral fields that can propagate outside the thick
brane). The unbalanced momentum in extra dimensions can be absorbed by the thick
brane. The lifetime depends on the strength of the coupling to the particle going out of the
brane and the density of its KK modes (which depends on the volume of the space outside
the thick brane). If the KK states produced at the colliders decay promptly inside the
detector, the signatures will involve missing energy and will be similar to supersymmetry.
We assume that the KK number violating interactions are not large enough to induce a
significant single-KK-state production cross section.
   For the KK quark and gluon searches, the signature is multi-jets plus missing energy,
similar to the squarks and gluinos. At the Tevatron Run I, the lower limits of the squark
and gluino mass for the equal mass case are 225 GeV at CDF [16, 17] and 260 GeV at
D0 [18, 17]. The production cross-sections of the KK quarks and gluons are similar to
those of the squarks and gluinos. The distributions of the jet energies and the missing
transverse energy however will depend on the masses of the KK gravitons, i.e., the size of
the space outside the thick brane. We expect that the reaches in KK quarks and gluons
are comparable to those for squarks and gluinos in supersymmetric models. Run II of the
Tevatron is expected to probe squark and gluino masses up to 350–400 GeV [17], so it
could also probe KK quarks and gluons beyond the current indirect limit in this scenario.
To distinguish the KK states from supersymmetry, however, would require more detailed
studies.
   Another possibility for KK number violation is that there exist some localized in-

                                            16
teractions of the standard model fields at a 3+1 dimensional subspace (3-brane) on the
boundary or parallel to the boundary. In the effective d-dimensional theory, these would
take the form of higher dimensional operators suppressed by powers of the cutoff Ms .
Some examples are
                                                    λ
                             Z
                                 dx4 dyδ(y − y0 )      Ψ 6D Ψ ,
                                                    Ms
                                                     λ′
                             Z
                                 dx4 dyδ(y − y0 )    5/2
                                                           Ψσαβ F αβ Ψ ,
                                                    Ms
                                                λ′′
                             Z
                                   4
                                 dx dyδ(y − y0 ) 4 (ΨΓA Ψ)(ΨΓA Ψ),                        (4.1)
                                                Ms

where Ψ, F αβ are five-dimensional standard model fermion and gauge fields, and ΓA is
some combination of the γ matrices. The first contributes to the kinetic terms of the KK
states, so the KK mass spectrum would be modified after re-diagonalizing and rescaling
the kinetic terms into the canonical form [19]. The corrections (4.1) are suppressed by Ms
and we assume that the coefficients (λ, λ′ , λ′′ , ...) are small enough so that these operators
do not affect our analysis of electroweak observables. However, they could be sufficiently
large to allow decays within the detector of the pair-produced KK modes. The decay
channels depend on which KK number violating interactions are present. We discuss
the simplest two-body decays which can be induced by, e.g., the first two interactions in
eq. (4.1).
   If the interactions involving the gluon field dominate, the KK quarks and gluons decay
into jets. The signals would be multi-jets which are difficult to extract from the QCD
backgrounds at the Tevatron. However, if the interactions involving the electroweak gauge
bosons are large enough so that the decay of the KK quarks into electroweak gauge bosons
and quark zero-modes has a significant branching ratio, we can invoke the searches for
the heavy quarks. For the decay into the W bosons, the signal is similar to the top
quark. One can use the measurements of the top quark production cross section at the
Tevatron [20, 21] to put limits on the new heavy quarks. In Ref. [22], Popovic and
Simmons derived the bounds σ qH (BW )2 < 7.8 pb (12.0 pb) at D0 (CDF), where σ qH is the
cross-section for the heavy quark production, and BW is the branching ratio for the heavy
quark decaying to the W boson and an ordinary quark. Applying this result, we have
1/R >                                                                          ′
     ∼ 200 GeV for BW ∼ 50%. There is also a search for the fourth generation b quark
through the decay mode ZZbb̄ at CDF, which excluded the b′ quark mass between 100
and 199 GeV if the branching ratio is 100% [23]. This can also apply to the KK states

                                               17
of the b quark. In Run II at the Tevatron, the decays of quark KK modes into a quark
zero-mode and a photon may be also significant. Other processes, potentially relevant
for Run II, include the electroweak production of a pair of lepton KK modes with each
of them subsequently decaying into a lepton zero-mode and a photon or a W ± , and the
production of a pair of KK modes of the electroweak gauge bosons leading to a four-lepton
signal. In general, the direct bounds on 1/R are weaker and model dependent in this case.
   With more extra dimensions the production cross section is higher because of the
multiplicity of KK modes. For example, with two extra dimensions there are twice as
many KK modes of mass 1/R than in the case of one extra dimension. However, the
indirect bounds may also be significantly higher. It is not clear whether they are within
the reach of Run II. The sensitivity of the LHC, though, should be impressive, above a
few TeV.


5     Summary
We have examined the experimental consequences of higher dimensional theories in which
all the standard model fields propagate in the extra dimensions. With these “universal”
extra dimensions, contributions to precision electroweak observables arise first at the one-
loop level. In the case of a single extra dimension, where the one-loop computations can
be done reliably within the framework of the effective 5-dimensional standard model, the
electroweak observables were estimated to allow a compactification scale as low as 300
GeV. We then noted that the current lower bound from direct production experiments is
set by CDF and D0 to be in the few-hundred GeV range. Thus Run II at the Tevatron
will either see evidence for the extra dimensions or significantly raise the lower bound on
the compactification scale.
    In the case of two universal extra dimensions, the electroweak observables become
logarithmically sensitive, at one loop, to the cutoff on the effective 6-dimensional theory.
If the cutoff is taken to be as large as possible, where this effective theory becomes
strongly coupled, then the theory cannot be used to compute reliably the electroweak
observables. If, on the other hand, the cutoff is lower, with no important contributions
to the electroweak observables from higher scales, then the observables may be estimated
reliably at the one-loop level. As indicated in Fig. 1, with Ms R ≤ 5, the lower bound on
the compactification scale is estimated to be between 400 GeV and 800 GeV.
    Besides opening the possibility of experimental detection of universal extra dimensions

                                            18
in the near future, the lower bound on the compactification scale discussed here suggests
that physics in extra dimensions may be responsible for electroweak symmetry breaking.
For example, standard model gauge interactions may produce a bound-state Higgs doublet
in six dimensions [4] without excessive fine-tuning.

   Acknowledgements: We would like to thank Mike Albrow, Zacharia Chacko, Lance
Dixon, Jonathan Feng, Sheldon Glashow, Kevin Lynch, Eduardo Ponton, Marko Popovic,
Erich Poppitz, Martin Schmaltz, Elizabeth Simmons, Matt Strassler, and Neal Weiner for
helpful conversations and comments. The work of T. Appelquist and B. A. Dobrescu was
supported by DOE under contract DE-FG02-92ER-40704. H.-C. Cheng is supported by
the Robert R. McCormick Fellowship and by DOE Grant DE-FG02-90ER-40560.


References
 [1] K.R. Dienes, E. Dudas and T. Gherghetta, “Extra spacetime dimensions and unifi-
    cation,” Phys. Lett. B436, 55 (1998) hep-ph/9803466.

 [2] I. Antoniadis, “A Possible New Dimension At A Few TeV,” Phys. Lett. B246, 377
    (1990).

 [3] N. Arkani-Hamed and M. Schmaltz, “Hierarchies without symmetries from extra
    dimensions,” Phys. Rev. D61, 033005 (2000) hep-ph/9903417.

 [4] N. Arkani-Hamed, H.-C. Cheng, B. A. Dobrescu and L. J. Hall, “Self-breaking of the
    standard model gauge symmetry,” Phys. Rev. D62, 096006 (2000) hep-ph/0006238.

 [5] W. J. Marciano, “Precision electroweak measurements and ’new physics’,” hep-
     ph/9902332 and “Fermi constants and ’new physics’,” Phys. Rev. D60, 093006
    (1999), hep-ph/9903451;
    P. Nath and M. Yamaguchi, “Effects of extra space-time dimensions on the Fermi
    constant,” Phys. Rev. D60, 116004 (1999), hep-ph/9902323;
    M. Masip and A. Pomarol, “Effects of SM Kaluza-Klein excitations on electroweak
    observables,” Phys. Rev. D60, 096005 (1999), hep-ph/9902467;
    T. G. Rizzo and J. D. Wells, “Electroweak precision measurements and collider probes
    of the standard model with large extra dimensions,” Phys. Rev. D61, 016007 (2000),
    hep-ph/9906234;


                                           19
    A. Strumia, “Bounds on Kaluza-Klein excitations of the SM vector bosons from elec-
    troweak tests,” Phys. Lett. B466, 107 (1999), hep-ph/9906266;
    R. Casalbuoni, S. De Curtis, D. Dominici and R. Gatto, “SM Kaluza-Klein excita-
    tions and electroweak precision tests,” Phys. Lett. B462, 48 (1999), hep-ph/9907355;
    C. D. Carone, “Electroweak constraints on extended models with extra dimensions,”
    Phys. Rev. D61, 015008 (2000), hep-ph/9907362;
    A. Delgado, A. Pomarol and M. Quiros, “Electroweak and flavor physics in exten-
    sions of the standard model with large extra dimensions,” JHEP 0001, 030 (2000),
    hep-ph/9911252.

 [6] M. B. Green and J. H. Schwarz, “Anomaly Cancellation In Supersymmetric D=10
     Gauge Theory And Superstring Theory,” Phys. Lett. B149, 117 (1984).

 [7] H.-C. Cheng, B. A. Dobrescu and C. T. Hill, “Gauge coupling unification with ex-
     tra dimensions and gravitational scale effects,” Nucl. Phys. B573, 597 (2000), hep-
    ph/9906327.

 [8] T. Appelquist and G. Wu, “The Electroweak chiral Lagrangian and new precision
    measurements,” Phys. Rev. D48, 3235 (1993), hep-ph/9304240.

 [9] R. S. Chivukula, C. Holbling and N. Evans, “Limits on a composite Higgs boson,”
    Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 511 (2000), hep-ph/0002022.

[10] The LEP Electroweak Working Group,
     http://lepewwg.web.cern.ch/LEPEWWG/plots/summer2000/

[11] A. De Rujula, S. L. Glashow and U. Sarid, “Charged Dark Matter,” Nucl. Phys.
     B333, 173 (1990);
    S. Dimopoulos, D. Eichler, R. Esmailzadeh and G. D. Starkman, “Getting A Charge
    Out Of Dark Matter,” Phys. Rev. D41, 2388 (1990);
    R. S. Chivukula, A. G. Cohen, S. Dimopoulos and T. P. Walker, “Bounds On Halo
    Particle Interactions From Interstellar Calorimetry,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 957 (1990);
    A. Gould, B. T. Draine, R. W. Romani and S. Nussinov, “Neutron Stars: Graveyard
    Of Charged Dark Matter,” Phys. Lett. B238, 337 (1990).

[12] L. Randall and S. Thomas, “Solving the cosmological moduli problem with weak
    scale inflation,” Nucl. Phys. B449, 229 (1995), hep-ph/9407248.



                                           20
[13] D. H. Lyth and E. D. Stewart, “Thermal inflation and the moduli problem,” Phys.
     Rev. D53, 1784 (1996), hep-ph/9510204.

[14] R. K. Ellis, “Rates for top quark production,” Phys. Lett. B259, 492 (1991).

[15] A. Connolly [CDF collaboration], “Search for long-lived charged massive particles
    at CDF,” Talk at the American Physical Society (APS) Meeting of the Division of
    Particles and Fields (DPF 99), Los Angeles, CA, Jan 5-9, 1999, hep-ex/9904010.

[16] J. P. Done [CDF collaboration], Talk at the American Physical Society Centennial
     Meeting, Atlanta, GA, March 20–26, 1999.

[17] S. Abel et al. [SUGRA Working Group Collaboration], “Report of the SUGRA work-
     ing group for run II of the Tevatron,” hep-ph/0003154.

[18] B. Abbott et al. [D0 Collaboration], “Search for squarks and gluinos in events con-
    taining jets and a large imbalance in transverse energy,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4937
    (1999), hep-ex/9902013.

[19] R. Barbieri, L. J. Hall and Y. Nomura, “A Constrained Standard Model from a
     Compact Extra Dimension,” hep-ph/0011311.

[20] S. Abachi et al. [D0 Collaboration], “Measurement of the top quark pair production
     cross section in p anti-p collisions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 1203 (1997), hep-ex/9704015.

[21] F. Abe et al. [CDF Collaboration], “Measurement of the top quark mass and t anti-t
     production cross section from dilepton events at the Collider Detector at Fermilab,”
     Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2779 (1998), hep-ex/9802017.

[22] M. B. Popovic and E. H. Simmons, “Weak-singlet fermions: Models and constraints,”
     Phys. Rev. D62, 035002 (2000), hep-ph/0001302.

[23] T. Affolder et al. [CDF Collaboration], “Search for a fourth-generation quark more
                                                        √
     massive than the Z0 boson in p anti-p collisions at s = 1.8 TeV,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
    84, 835 (2000), hep-ex/9909027.




                                             21
