 SS symmetry
Review
The Neutron Lifetime Discrepancy and Its Implications for
Cosmology and Dark Matter
Fred E. Wietfeldt


                                         Department of Physics and Engineering Physics, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA;
                                         few@tulane.edu


                                         Abstract: Free neutron decay is the prototype for nuclear beta decay and other semileptonic weak
                                         particle decays. It provides important insights into the symmetries of the weak nuclear force. Neutron
                                         decay is important for understanding the formation and abundance of light elements in the early
                                         universe. The two main experimental approaches for measuring the neutron lifetime, the beam
                                         method and the ultracold neutron storage method, have produced results that currently differ by
                                         9.8 ± 2.0 s. While this discrepancy probably has an experimental origin, a more exciting prospect is
                                         that it may be explained by new physics, with possible connections to dark matter. The experimental
                                         status of the neutron lifetime is briefly reviewed, with an emphasis on its implications for cosmology,
                                         astrophysics, and dark matter.

                                         Keywords: neutron decay; neutron lifetime; beta decay




                                         1. Introduction
                                              The neutron is an ubiquitous particle in the world around us. The atomic nuclei
                                         of all atoms except for light hydrogen contain neutrons. In a stable nucleus, the energy
                                         associated with nuclear structure prevents neutrons and protons from decaying via the
                                         weak force, but a free neutron may decay because its rest energy exceeds that of the particles
                                         in their final state. This process, where a free neutron decays into a proton, electron, and
                                         antineutrino with a mean lifetime of about 880 s, is the simplest example of nuclear beta
Citation: Wietfeldt, F.E. The Neutron
                                         decay. It has important consequences in cosmology and astrophysics. While the dynamical
Lifetime Discrepancy and Its
                                         theory of the Standard Model of particle physics is well established, currently available
Implications for Cosmology and Dark
                                         theoretical methods are not able to accurately calculate the neutron decay lifetime. The
Matter. Symmetry 2024, 16, 956.
https://doi.org/10.3390/sym16080956
                                         neutron lifetime has been measured in many major experiments over the past 75 years.
                                         Two very different methods have dominated these measurements: free neutron beam
Academic Editors: Abraham A. Ungar       experiments and ultracold neutron storage experiments. Unfortunately, the most precise
and Alberto Ruiz Jimeno                  versions of these experiments disagree by about 10 s, a discrepancy of almost five standard
Received: 6 June 2024                    deviations. This is most likely due to unknown systematic effects in one or more of the
Revised: 8 July 2024                     experiments, but it is conceivable that new physics is responsible, which would have many
Accepted: 18 July 2024                   important ramifications.
Published: 26 July 2024
                                         2. Theoretical Discussion
                                               Free neutron decay is a manifestation of the charged current weak interaction whereby
                                         a negatively charged down quark is transformed into a positively charged up quark,
Copyright: © 2024 by the author.         emitting a charged W boson that immediately decays into an electron and antineutrino, as
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.       illustrated in Figure 1. The reaction is as follows:
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and                                                      n → p + e + νe                                         (1)
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://         The quantum mechanical matrix element for neutron decay follows that for bare quarks:
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
                                                                                          
4.0/).                                                      M = GV p γµ n − G A p γ5 γµ n [e γµ (1 + γ5 )ν],                     (2)



Symmetry 2024, 16, 956. https://doi.org/10.3390/sym16080956                                             https://www.mdpi.com/journal/symmetry
Symmetry 2024, 16, 956                                                                                         2 of 12



                         but with constants GV and G A that give the relative strengths of the vector and axial
                         vector contributions to the decay amplitude. According to the Conservation of Vector
                         Current (CVC) hypothesis [1,2] GV = GF Vud , where GF is the universal weak coupling
                         strength measured from muon decay and Vud = 0.97373 ± 0.00031 [3] is the first element
                         of the Cabibbo–Kobayashi–Maskawa (CKM) quark mixing matrix in the Standard Model.
                         However, the axial current is not conserved, so the value of G A is influenced by the strong
                         interaction of quarks within the neutron. Therefore, G A must be determined experimentally
                         from the neutron lifetime and neutron decay angular correlations. Including the latest
                         radiative and other theoretical corrections, Czarnecki, Marciano, and Sirlin [4] found the
                         relationship between G A /GV and the free neutron lifetime to be

                                                                       4905.7(1.7)s
                                                        τn =                              .                       (3)
                                                               |Vud   |2 (1 + 3( G     2
                                                                                A /GV ) )

                              The neutron decay matrix element M, expressed in Equation (2), determines more
                         than just the neutron decay lifetime. It also governs many other charged-current weak
                         interactions between free protons and neutrons that are important in astrophysics, solar
                         physics, and cosmology. Therefore, the experimental value of the neutron lifetime plays an
                         important role throughout physics.

                                u                                                                 u
                           n    d                                                                 d    p
                                d                                                                 u

                                                                                  ±
                                                                             W                    e




                                                                                                  νe
                         Figure 1. The Feynman diagram for free neutron decay.

                         3. Neutron Lifetime Experiments
                              The most precise experiments that measure the neutron lifetime fall into two main
                         categories: beam experiments, where a slow neutron beam passes through an apparatus that
                         simultaneously measures the rate of neutron decay via the decay products and the neutron
                         beam density; and ultracold neutron storage experiments, where neutrons are slowed to a
                         velocity that allows them to be stored, and the number that remains after some time is
                         counted. Detailed historical reviews of neutron lifetime experiments can be found in [5,6].

                         3.1. Beam Method
                               The beam method is the oldest, presented by Robson in the first serious neutron
                         lifetime measurement at the Chalk River reactor in 1950 [7], and improved and refined by
                         later experiments over many decades. The most precise of these so far is the NIST BL1
                         experiment [8,9], producing the result τn = 887.7 ± 2.2 s (2013). The neutron decay rate Ṅ
                         of a beam containing N neutrons in the fiducial decay region of the apparatus is given by
                         the differential form of the exponential decay law

                                                                               N
                                                                      Ṅ = −      .                               (4)
                                                                               τn
Symmetry 2024, 16, 956                                                                                             3 of 12



                              The decay particles, protons and/or electrons, are counted by detectors in the appara-
                         tus at rate R p , which is
                                                                           A      L ρn
                                                        R p = −ε p Ṅ = ε p beam                                 (5)
                                                                               τn
                         where ε p is the detector counting efficiency, Abeam is the beam cross-sectional area, L is the
                         length of the fiducial decay region, and ρn is the neutron density in the beam. To simplify
                         this discussion, the beam is assumed here to have a uniform density and cross section. The
                         density can be related to the neutron flux ϕn , the number of neutrons per unit area per unit
                         time passing through some point in the beam, and the beam velocity v, using the usual
                         formula ϕn = ρn v. A typical high-flux slow-neutron beam has a broad velocity spectrum,
                         so this becomes an integral:
                                                                         ϕn (v)
                                                                     Z
                                                                ρn =            dv.                                   (6)
                                                                           v
                         where ϕn (v) is the spectral flux, i.e., the flux per neutron velocity.            Combining
                         Equations (5) and (6) provides

                                                                  A     L         ϕn (v)
                                                                              Z
                                                         R p = ε p beam                  dv.                          (7)
                                                                    τn              v

                              Neutrons in the beam pass through a thin absorbing material downstream of the appa-
                         ratus decay region and are either counted in real time via an (n, α) reaction in the absorber
                         by detecting the alpha particles or by later measuring the neutron-induced radioactivity.
                         Neutron absorption cross sections generally obey the 1/v law [10], with the few exceptions
                         being materials with a very low energy absorption resonance, so the velocity-dependent
                         absorption cross section can be written as
                                                                           σth vth
                                                                 σabs =                                               (8)
                                                                              v
                         where σth is the tabulated thermal absorption cross section at the reference thermal velocity
                         vth ≡ 2200 m/s. The neutron count rate is then

                                                                                  ϕn (v)
                                                                              Z
                                                         Rn = ε 0 Abeam vth              dv.                          (9)
                                                                                    v
                         where ε 0 is defined as the probability that a neutron at the reference velocity vth that passes
                         through the absorber will produce a detected count. It contains the thermal cross section
                         σth and other efficiency factors such as the absorber thickness and the geometric efficiency
                         of the alpha detectors. Combining Equations (7) and (9) provides

                                                                        Rn ε p L
                                                                 τn =               .                                (10)
                                                                        R p ε 0 vth

                               Note that the spectral flux integrals divide out in this expression. In essence, the 1/v
                         dependence of the neutron absorption cross section precisely compensates for the 1/v
                         probability that the same neutron will decay inside the fiducial region, and so to excellent
                         approximation the neutron lifetime result is independent of neutron velocity. Equation (10)
                         seems simple enough, but precise absolute measurements of ε p and ε 0 are very challenging.
                         The fiducial length L is complicated by end effects where ε p can be difficult to determine.
                               A schematic of the NIST BL1 experiment is shown in Figure 2. The neutron beam
                         passed through a quasi-Penning trap, and when a neutron decayed inside it, the proton
                         was trapped by the magnetic field and the electrostatic potential of the electrode array. At
                         a specified frequency, typically about 100 Hz, the trap was opened by lowering the door
                         electrodes to ground. Protons were then transported through a 9.5◦ bend in the magnetic
                         field and accelerated into a silicon detector to be counted. The neutron rate was measured
                         by counting alphas and tritons from the (n, α) reaction in a deposit of isotopically enriched
Symmetry 2024, 16, 956                                                                                                 4 of 12



                         6 LiF on a thin silicon crystal wafer. An important feature of this experiment, along with

                         its predecessor that ran at the Institut Laue-Langevin in France [11], is the segmented
                         trap. The ratio Rn /R p was measured as a function of trap length, and because the end
                         effect was approximately constant for all trap lengths, it could be removed by means of
                         extrapolation, greatly simplifying the determination of L. The neutron counting efficiency
                         ε 0 was measured separately using an absolute neutron counting apparatus installed on a
                         monochromatic neutron beam. Further details of the experiment and a thorough discussion
                         of the systematic effects can be found in [8,9].

                              alpha, triton
                                detector
                                         precision                                                               proton
                                                                    B = 4.6 T
                                         aperture                                                               detector



                                                                                                            neutron beam
                                             6
                                             Li
                                                      mirror      trap electrodes    door open
                                           deposit
                                                     (+800 V)                         (ground)



                         Figure 2. Scheme of the NIST BL1 beam neutron lifetime experiment [8,11]. The neutron beam
                         passes through a proton trap. Decay protons are trapped axially by the door and mirror electrostatic
                         potentials and radially by the axial magnetic field. They are counted periodically by lowering the
                         door to the ground, as shown here. Neutrons are counted by detecting the alphas and tritons from
                         the 6 Li (n, α) reaction in a thin deposit.

                              A new generation of the NIST beam experiment, called BL3, is currently being con-
                         structed and tested. It is a larger version of the apparatus that accommodates a much
                         larger neutron beam (a factor of 25 larger area), with a new large-area segmented silicon
                         proton detector. With these increases, the proton counting rate will be more than 100 times
                         that of BL1. It incorporates several new features to improve, explore, and test systematic
                         effects. BL3 is expected to complete commissioning in 2026 and begin running at NIST
                         soon thereafter.
                              Another beam neutron lifetime experiment is currently running at J-PARC in Japan,
                         with a method quite different from that of the NIST experiments. A pulsed neutron beam is
                         admitted into a 3 He time projection chamber (TPC), where neutron decays are detected via
                         ionization by the beta electrons, and the number of neutrons in the pulse is simultaneously
                         measured via the 3 He(n, p)3 H reaction. The latest J-PARC result τn = 898 ± 19 s [12] agrees
                         with the NIST BL1 result but with a large uncertainty. The J-PARC group is currently
                         analyzing an improved dataset with an expectation of 3 s uncertainty, which could have a
                         significant impact.

                         3.2. Ultracold Neutron Storage Method
                              Ultracold neutrons (UCNs) are neutrons with a kinetic energy at the order of 100 neV
                         (velocity ∼4 m/s). This is less than the neutron effective potential energy in some material
                         surfaces, so UCNs will completely reflect from the walls of a suitably constructed bottle
                         and can be stored for many minutes (various loss mechanisms limit the ultimate storage
                         time). The gravitational potential energy of a neutron is 100 neV per meter, so UCNs can
                         be confined vertically by gravity. The neutron magnetic dipole moment is 60 neV/T, so
                         UCNs can be trapped in a strong inhomogeneous magnetic field. This ability to trap and
                         store UCNs for long periods enables the measurement of the neutron decay lifetime by
                         comparing the UCN population at different storage times. UCNs are admitted into the
                         storage apparatus, the “UCN bottle”, in a highly reproducible manner. After a storage time
                         ∆t, the surviving neutrons are extracted and counted by a neutron detector. At least two
Symmetry 2024, 16, 956                                                                                             5 of 12



                         storage times ∆t1 and ∆t2 , typically one short and one long, are used. If neutron beta decay
                         is the only means of losing neutrons from the bottle, then the neutron lifetime is obtained
                         from the ratio N1 /N2 of neutron counts following extraction.

                                                                             ∆t2 − ∆t1
                                                          τn = τstorage =                .                           (11)
                                                                            ln( N1 /N2 )

                               In the presence of additional loss mechanisms, the observed neutron storage time
                         τstorage will be smaller than the beta decay lifetime τn , i.e.,

                                                        1       1     1        1        1
                                                              =    +       +        +                                (12)
                                                     τstorage   τn   τwall   τquasi   τother

                         where τwall accounts for losses due to inelastic scattering and absorption on the bottle
                         walls; τquasi is the average lifetime of “quasitrapped” UCNs that are not trapped but have
                         trajectories that persist in the trap for a long time before escaping; and τother is due to other
                         possible losses such as residual gas interactions. Many previous UCN storage experiments
                         used material bottles, typically with hydrogen-free coatings such as Fomblin oil to reduce
                         wall scattering. Still, elastic scattering from the walls dominated τstorage , which as a result
                         was much smaller than τn . By systematically varying the surface/volume ratio of the bottle
                         and/or the UCN energy spectrum, both of which modulate the wall interaction rate, an
                         extrapolation could be made to the zero scattering point.
                               More recent UCN storage experiments have used a magnetic “bottle”, where perma-
                         nent magnets are installed in a pattern that creates a strong field gradient near the wall.
                         UCNs of one spin state (low field seekers) are strongly repelled by the field gradient and
                         reflect off the wall with no material interaction, greatly reducing wall losses. Quasitrapped
                         UCNs can be removed by means of a “cleaning” process that removes neutrons with kinetic
                         energy close to the minimum trap potential. The most well known and successful of these
                         is the UCNτ experiment at Los Alamos National Lab [13–15]. A schematic is shown in
                         Figure 3. UCNs were polarized in a 5.5 T solenoidal magnet and spin-flipped into the
                         low-field seeker state. They were then introduced through a trap door at the bottom of
                         the storage volume to fill it. The storage volume, about 3 m long and 1 m high, was lined
                         with a Halbach array of permanent magnets to reflect neutrons at the walls. UCNs were
                         trapped vertically by gravity. An array of electromagnetic coils was used to maintain UCN
                         polarization throughout the storage volume—a zero field point inside the volume can flip
                         the spin of a neutron that passes through it, which will cause it to be ejected instead of
                         reflected at the wall. After filling the storage volume, a cleaner was lowered to a speci-
                         fied height to remove, by means of scattering or absorption, all neutrons with sufficient
                         mechanical energy to reach that height, in order to eliminate quasitrapped UCNs prior to
                         commencing the storage period. Storage times from 20 s to over 1000 s were used. At the
                         end of the storage period, surviving UCNs were counted in situ using a 10 B-coated ZnS
                         scintillator detector lowered into the volume. The latest UCNτ result is the most precise
                         reported neutron lifetime value to date: τn = 877.75 ± 0.34 s [15]. Systematic UCN loss
                         mechanisms were sufficiently small that τstorage (Equation (12)) was dominated by τn and
                         no extrapolation was needed. An upgrade to the experiment, called UCNτ+, will introduce
                         an adiabatic neutron “elevator” to load the trap more efficiently. It promises a factor of two
                         reduction in uncertainty.
                          ambient field to prevent UCN depolarization. UCNs with                                                   the
                          E ≳ 38 neV are then removed (“cleaned”) [28–30,34]                                                       grou
                          during a period tclean ¼ 50 s; they are either up-scattered                                              prob
Symmetry 2024, 16, 956
                          by horizontal polyethylene sheets, or captured by                                                6 of 12
                                                                                                                                   appa
                                                                                                                                      UC
                                                                                                                                   mon
                                                                                                                                   10B-c

                                                                                                                                   moni
                                                                                                                                   detec
                                                                                                                                   inten
                                                                                                                                   diffe
                                                                                                                                   sensi
                                                                                                                                   ensem
                                                                                                                                   spect
                                                                                                                                   opera
                                                                                                                                   quali
                                                                                                                                   relati
                          FIG.3. 1.
                         Figure           The
                                     The Los AlamosUCNτ       apparatus[15].configuration
                                                       UCNτ experiment           UCNs are polarized  forin a the    2018
                                                                                                              superconducting
                         solenoid (left), pass through a spin-flipper (center), and are admitted through a trap door into of in
                          campaign, with the volumes occupied by UCNs, cleaner surfaces,
                         the storage volume (right) that is lined with a Halbach magnet array. UCNs are reflected only by melt
                          primary
                         magnetic        detector, fields
                                    and gravitational   andduring
                                                               monitors        highlighted.
                                                                   the storage period,             The
                                                                                       thus avoiding        polarizing
                                                                                                     material   interactions that
                          magnet
                         result        selects
                                in neutron losses. the high-field-seeking UCNs. UCNs are then
                                                                                                                                      Th
                          “precleaned”
                         3.3. The Discrepancyin the buffer volume, spin-flipped to the trappable
                                                                                                                                   signa
                          low-field-seeking           spin state,
                               Figure 4 shows a summary               and loaded
                                                              of all neutron  lifetime into
                                                                                        resultsthe
                                                                                                withtrap.    The uncertainty
                                                                                                      a reported    2017           thres
                         ofconfiguration
                            less than 10 s. The was
                                                  threethe
                                                        beamsame
                                                               methodas results
                                                                          that ofare Ref.
                                                                                     in good   agreement and their average Mon
                                                                                            [30].
                         τn = 888.1 ± 2.0 s is dominated by the updated NIST BL1 result [9]. There are nine UCN
                         storage experiments represented here, with six using material bottles [16–21] and three
                         using magnetic/gravitational storage [14,15,22], two of which are different runs of the
                         UCNτ experiment described above. The nine UCN results are not in good agreement,       162501-2
                                                           2
                         with a reduced chi-squared   p χν = 3.34, so the average τn = 878.36 ± 0.45 s has an error
                         expanded by a factor of χ2ν = 1.83. However the three magnetic/gravitational UCN
                         storage experiments are in much better agreement; they average to τn = 878.15 ± 0.20 s.
                         The difference between the beam method average and the UCN storage average (all nine
                         experiments) is 9.8 ± 2.1 s, a discrepancy of more than four standard deviations. The
                         difference between the beam method average and the magnetic/gravitational UCN storage
                         average (three experiments) is 10.0 ± 2.0 s, which is slightly worse. Much has been written
                         about this quite serious problem in the neutron lifetime. It is widely assumed that unknown
                         or underestimated systematic errors in one or more of the experiments are responsible.
                         However an exotic physics explanation remains possible (see Section 5). In particular, the
                         NIST BL1 experiment has been carefully scrutinized due to its controlling effect on the
                         beam average, but no smoking gun has been found so far (see [23–26] for more details). It
                         is hoped that future experiments, both in progress and planned, will solve this problem
                         and lead to a fully reliable value for the neutron lifetime.
                               Since 2019, the Particle Data Group has included only the "best eight" UCN storage results
                         in their average for the recommended value of the neutron lifetime, τn = 878.4 ± 0.5 s [3],
                         equivalent to the UCN average in Figure 4, but they note that if the NIST BL1 beam result
                         is included in thepaverage, the shift is rather small, to τn = 878.6 ± 0.6 s. In both cases, the
                         errors include a χ2ν scale factor. As a practical matter, this is a reasonable approach, but
                         it does not obviate the importance of resolving the discrepancy, which might result in a
                         significant change to the recommended value.
Symmetry 2024, 16, 956                                                                                              7 of 12




                                                 905

                                                                                                        NIST BL1
                                                                                                        LANL UCNτ
                                                 900




                          neutron lifetime (s)
                                                 895



                                                 890                     beam average = 888.1 ± 2.0 s


                                                 885


                                                 880

                                                       UCN average = 878.36 ± 0.45 s
                                                 875
                                                         1990              2000               2010          2020
                                                                                       Year

                         Figure 4. A summary of neutron lifetime experimental results with a reported uncertainty of less
                                                                               p method results disagree by 9.8 ± 2.1 s.
                         than 10 s. The averages of the beam method and UCN storage
                         The UCN average uncertainty has been expanded by χ2ν due to poor agreement between the
                         experiments. Beam experiment references: [9,11,27]. UCN storage experiment references: [14–22].

                         4. The Neutron Lifetime in Cosmology and Astrophysics
                              The Standard Big Bang Nucleosynthesis (SBBN) theory describes the formation of
                         primordial light isotopes in the first few minutes following the Big Bang. Using the well-
                         established Standard Model (SM) of particle physics, general relatively (GR), Λ cold dark
                         matter Big Bang cosmology (ΛCDM), and only one free parameter, the baryon/photon
                         ratio of the universe η, the SBBN theory predicts the relative abundances of 2 H and 4 He in
                         very good agreement with modern astrophysical measurements. This success provides a
                         remarkable confirmation of the SM, GR, and Big Bang cosmology. The basic ideas of the
                         SBBN theory are described beautifully in the book The First Three Minutes by Weinberg [28].
                         For a recent scientific review, see Cyburt, Fields, Olive, and Yeh [29].
                              In the SBBN theory, free neutrons and protons condensed from the quark-gluon plasma
                         in the period t = 0.1–100 ms, at a temperature T ≈ 1011 K. By t = 100 ms, essentially all free
                         muons and pions had decayed. Protons and neutrons remained in thermal equilibrium
                         with free leptons via weak interactions.

                                                                           p+e      ←→ n + νe                         (13)
                                                                                +
                                                                          n+e       ←→ p + νe .

                               When the reaction rates of Equation (13), which scale with temperature as T 5 , became
                         less than the Hubble parameter, which scales as T 2 , the density of particles was insufficient
                         to maintain thermal equilibrium and nucleon “freeze out” occurred. This happened at
                         t ≈ 1 s, Tfreeze ≈ 1010 K (k B Tfreeze ≈ 0.8 MeV). At the time of nucleon freeze out, the ratio
                         of neutrons to protons was set by the Boltzmann factor at the point just prior to leaving
                         thermal equilibrium, i.e.,
                                                                                        !
                                                                       ( m n − m p ) c2
                                                      n/p ≈ exp −                         = 0.17.                   (14)
                                                                          k B Tfreeze
Symmetry 2024, 16, 956                                                                                                  8 of 12



                              Neutrons and protons proceeded to form deuterons (2 H nuclei) via the reaction

                                                           n + p −→ d + γ (2.22 MeV)                                      (15)

                         but due to the high value of the photon/baryon ratio η −1 ≈ 109 , the disintegration rate of
                         deuterons exceeded the production rate until
                                                                           
                                                           −1      2.2 MeV
                                                          η exp −             ≈1                                 (16)
                                                                      kB T

                         or T ≈ 109 K, at t ≈ 10 s. After that, as the free deuteron density increased, the dominant
                         reaction due to its large cross section was the formation of alpha particles via

                                                           d + d −→ α + γ (23.9 MeV).                                     (17)

                              Other reactions also occured, but at much lower rates:
                                                                         3
                                                          d+p   −→           He + γ (5.49 MeV)                            (18)
                                                                          3
                                                          d + n −→            H + γ (6.26 MeV)
                                                       α + 3 He −→        7
                                                                              Be + γ (1.59 MeV)
                                                        α + 3 H −→        7
                                                                              Li + γ (2.47 MeV)

                               By t ≈ 5 min, virtually all primordial neutrons were bound within alpha particles
                         (4 He nuclei), with trace amounts in the other nuclei on the right side of Equation (18). It
                         took another 380,000 years for the universe to cool to the era where these nuclei could
                         combine with free electrons to make neutral atoms. During that time, the primordial
                         3 H (τ = 12.3 y) and 7 Be (τ = 53.3 d) had all beta decayed into 3 He and 7 Li, respectively,

                         leaving light hydrogen plus four primordial isotopes: 2 H, 3 He, 4 He and 7 Li. Due to the
                         expansion/cooling rate of the universe, the mass 5, 8 barriers (there are no stable A = 5 or
                         A = 8 isotopes), and the large Coulomb barriers for other reactions, nuclei heavier than
                         the above did not form in the early universe; they had to wait millions of years for stellar
                         processes to begin.
                               The primordial isotope abundance ratios, relative to hydrogen, have historically
                         been calculated as a function of η. The latest measurements of the cosmic microwave
                         background (CMB) by the Plank spacecraft have provided a sufficiently precise and robust
                         value, η = 6.104 ± 0.055 × 10−10 [30,31], for it to now be treated as an input parameter.
                         Using this value, the abundances in Table 1 follow from the SBBN theory. Yp and D/H are in
                         excellent agreement with the observed ratios from astronomical measurements of emission
                         lines in low-metallicity galactic and extragalactic clouds, which are expected to contain near-
                         primordial abundances [32]. The agreement in D/H is particularly impressive and provides
                         a powerful confirmation of the validity of the SBBN theory. The problem with 7 Li may
                         be due to the stellar depletion of lithium. From the abundances in Table 1, we see that by
                         t ≈ 5 min, more than 99.99% of primordial neutrons were bound within 4 He nuclei.
                         Therefore, the 4 He abundance ratio Yp depends almost entirely on the n/p ratio during Big
                         Bang nucleosynthesis.

                         Table 1. SBBN primordial isotope abundance ratios, using the latest CMB results for the baryon/photon
                         ratio of the universe η, and a comparison to recent astronomical measurements [32].

                          Isotope Ratio                     SBBN Prediction                  Observed
                          Yp = 4 He/H                       0.24691 ± 0.00018                0.2449 ± 0.0040
                          D/H                               2.57 ± 0.13 × 10−5               2.55 ± 0.03 × 10−5
                          3 He/H                            10.03 ± 0.90 × 10−6              no data
                          7 Li/H                            4.72 ± 0.72 × 10−10              1.6 ± 0.3 × 10−10
Symmetry 2024, 16, 956                                                                                                             9 of 12



                               The neutron decay lifetime plays a key role here. The n/p ratio during nucleosynthesis
                         depends strongly on the neutron lifetime in two ways: (1) the coupling constant factor
                         1 + 3( G A /GV )2 in Equation (3) gives the rate at which neutrons decay and also determines
                         the strength of the reactions in Equation (13), and hence the temperature at which nucleon
                         freeze out occurs which is the denominator in Equation (14); and (2) the n/p ratio decreases
                         from freeze out to t = 5 min due to the decay of neutrons to protons. This dependence is
                         nicely illustrated in Figure 5, which shows a scatter plot of SBBN-calculated Yp values with
                         input parameters varied according to their Gaussian uncertainties [32]. The 10 s neutron
                         lifetime discrepancy covers almost the full horizontal range of this plot, so it is the biggest
                         obstacle for a precise SBBN prediction for Yp .
                                                                       Cyburt et al.: Big bang nucleosynthesis: Present status


                                                                                                              TABLE IV. Constraints on the ba
                                                                                                              ent combinations of observational
                                                                                                              over Y p to create 1D η likelihood

                                                                                                              Constraints used                     η
                                                                                                              CMB only                         6.108
                                                                                                              BBN þ Y p                           4.
                                                                                                              BBN þ D                          6.180
                                                                                                              BBN þ Y p þ D                    6.172
                                                                                                              CMB þ BBN                        6.098
                                                                                                              CMB þ BBN þ Y p                  6.098
                                                                                                              CMB þ BBN þ D                    6.102
                                                                                                              CMB þ BBN þ Y p þ D              6.101


                         Figure  2. Results
                           FIG. 5.          of a SBBN calculation
                                      The sensitivity of the 4 He(Cyburt,   Fields,
                                                                    abundance    toOlive,  and Yeh [29]) showing the sensitivity
                                                                                      the neutron      example, in row 2, the value
                         ofmean
                            the primordial  helium abundance
                                 lifetime, as shown through a pY  to the neutron  lifetime.
                                                                scatter plot of our Monte Carlo               uncertainty. This is due to t
                           error propagation.
                                Another interesting approach to BBN is to treat the number ofobservational       neutrino species  abundance
                                                                                                                                        as a     (7) a
                         free parameter rather than fixed at the Standard Model values Nν = 3 pand Neff = 3.046,of Y    on  η.  We    see again  that B
                         where    Nν is the
                           nonstandard     BBN  number
                                                     (NBBN),of actual    neutrinos
                                                                  where we      allowandthe N  eff includes
                                                                                             number      of the This is  describedtointhe
                                                                                                                   contribution            more deta
                         radiation
                           neutrinodensity
                                       flavorsoftothe   universe
                                                      differ        caused
                                                              from 3.        by the
                                                                          There       distortion of
                                                                                   are many                     BBNenergy
                                                                                                       the neutrino
                                                                                                 possible              relation           by η and Y
                                                                                                                                    between
                                                                                                                                spectra
                         charged
                           choiceslepton     annihilation
                                      that could      be made  and forother possible
                                                                        using    Planckdegrees
                                                                                          data sets.of freedom
                                                                                                         In      suchYas
                                                                                                                from     p light   WIMPs.
                                                                                                                            is used.    This is close
                         Adding,     hypothetically,      the  presence     of  more    neutrino
                           particular, Planck offers results based on several combinations           species  increases  the    expansion
                                                                                                                found in Table 4 and Eq. (72)
                         rate
                           of of  thedata
                               their    universe,
                                            such aswhich       leads to an
                                                        including              increased
                                                                      polarization,         freeze
                                                                                       lensing,                 here Y p T
                                                                                                      out temperature
                                                                                                   baryon                 wasfreeze ,
                                                                                                                                 takenwhich
                                                                                                                                         to be free an
                         in turn
                           acousticshifts n/p     and Y
                                       oscillations,      p to
                                                        etc.    larger
                                                             Here    we values
                                                                          chooseasthe per  Equation
                                                                                         CMB             (14). Using
                                                                                                  data set             the   Plank    result
                                                                                                                result of marginalization over
                                                        −10 , the PDG-recommended neutron lifetime τ = 878.4 ± 0.5 s,
                         η =     uses ±both
                           that6.104      0.055 × 10
                                               temperature      and polarization (E-mode) data,                 smalln difference in the results
                                                                               Ypþand
                         and   the astronomical
                           corresponding      to the measurements
                                                        Planck TT; TE;ofEE           lowPD/H
                                                                                                                η10 ¼±6.10
                                                                                                   This Nisν = 2.898
                                                                                             set.gives                   0.141 [31] and
                                                                                                                                 (Table IV). Row
                                         ±
                           labeled as plikHM_TTTEEE_lowTEB in the Planck archive.
                         Neff   = 2.94      0.19   [29],  both   in good    agreement     with     the  Standard   Model     values. The
                                                                                                                determinations of 4 He, D, and
                         neutron
                           Using thelifetime
                                         Planckdiscrepancy
                                                    Markov chainhas andata
                                                                         unfortunate     effect here as well. The 10 s discrepancy
                                                                             (Planck Collaboration,             see, the inclusion of the observ
                           2015), weto ∆Neff
                         translates               ≈ 0.19,
                                        constructed     thewhich    is comparable
                                                             multidimensional         to the present
                                                                                    likelihoods          uncertainty in the calculation.
                                                                                                    for the     affect the determination of η an
                                The neutron
                           following            lifetime
                                         extended          also plays
                                                       parameter        an important
                                                                     chains,    base_yhe roleand
                                                                                               in stellar
                                                                                                     base_nucleosynthesis.      In particu-
                                                                                                                fiducial baryon-to-photon ratio
                         lar, the weak    fusion    reaction,
                           nnu_yhe, for the plikHM_TTTEEE_lowTEB                           data set. As
                                                                             →2 H
                                                                      p + p base      + e+as+itνassumes
                                                                                                                   The        three-dimensional
                           noted earlier, we do not use the Planck                 chain,        e,                                      (19)
                                                                                                              LPLA−base nnu yhe ðωb ; Y p ; N ν Þ is
                         isaaBBN      relationship
                              Gamow–Teller        (∆Jbetween
                                                       = 1) weakthe transition;
                                                                     helium abundance      and the
                                                                                a free proton   in the by,
                                                                                                      initiala state transforms
                                                                                                               simple 3D     correlated G
                           baryon    density.   base_yhe    refers to the  data chain
                         into a neutron inside the spin-1 deuteron. The cross section  that allows
                                                                                                 contains  the matrix
                                                                                                        these            element
                                                                                                               distributions  are single pe
                         inthe   helium (2)
                             Equation      abundance     to vary independently
                                              and is proportional      to the factorwhile    G A /GV )2 can
                                                                                     1 + 3(fixing        in Equation
                                                                                                              correct for theit non-Ga
                                                                                                                        (3), so
                           N eff ¼ the
                         requires   3.046,    and lifetime
                                          neutron    base_nnu_yhe
                                                               value asallows   both The
                                                                          an input.   the value
                                                                                            heliumof G Aexpansion
                                                                                                          /GV also about
                                                                                                                     appears    in correlat
                                                                                                                             a 3D
                           abundance ofand
                         calculations           thelight
                                            other    number    of effective
                                                         element             degrees
                                                                   processes that are of  freedomin stellar
                                                                                      important             physics,  such   as 8B
                                                                                                        Details of this prescription are
                           to vary
                         beta  decay,   responsible for the 8 B neutrino flux detected by the Homestake
                                     independently.                                                               solar neutrino
                                                                                                           The calculated      mean value
                              From hese
                         experiment      [33]. two parameter sets we have the following                 these distributions are as follo
                          two- and three-dimensional likelihoods from the CMB:
                          LPLA−base yhe ðωb ; Y p Þ and LPLA−base nnu yhe ðωb ; Y p ; N ν Þ. The                                  ωb ¼ 0.022 21
                          two-dimensional base_yhe likelihood LPLA−base yhe ðωb ; Y p Þ
                          is well represented by a 2D correlated Gaussian distribution,                                              N eff ¼ 2.754
                          with means and standard deviations for the baryon density and
                          4
                            He mass fraction                                                                                        Y p ¼ 0.261 1

                                               ωb ¼ 0.022 305  0.000 225;                         ð18Þ       These values correspond to
Symmetry 2024, 16, 956                                                                                                            10 of 12



                                  5. The Neutron Lifetime and Dark Matter
                                        Over the past decade, a number of very interesting ideas involving new physics have
                                  been proposed that could potentially explain the neutron lifetime discrepancy. Many of
                                  these rely on the fact that beam experiments measure the partial lifetime of Standard Model
                                  neutron beta decay, while UCN storage experiments measure the total lifetime of all neutron
                                  decay or disappearance modes, both known and unknown. If the neutron has an exotic,
                                  previously undetected, decay mode, then the UCN experiments would tend to measure a
                                  smaller lifetime. A prominent example is the suggestion by Fornal and Grinstein [34] that
                                  the neutron could decay into dark sector particles without inconsistency with previous
                                  experimental constraints. They considered the possibilities n → χγ, n → χe+ e− , or
                                  n → χϕ, where χ and ϕ are fermion and boson dark matter particles, respectively. The
                                  existence of massive neutron stars puts some pressure on this proposal [35–38], and the
                                  semi-visible modes with a photon or electron–positron pair in the final state have been
                                  excluded by subsequent experiments [39–41]. Another interesting suggestion [42] is that
                                  stored UCNs could be upscattered by the dark matter halo of the galaxy, which has a
                                  velocity relative to the Earth of ≈250 km/s. Very little energy transfer, ∼100 neV, is needed
                                  to remove UCNs from the storage volume, which would lead to an observed lifetime
                                  shorter than the beam neutron’s lifetime.
                                        Finally, mirror neutron oscillation has been considered as a possible explanation for
                                  the neutron lifetime discrepancy. A mirror sector that consists of a duplication of the
                                  known Standard Model particles, with minimal coupling with them other than gravity,
                                  has been proposed to explain the existence of dark matter [43]. If mirror neutrons n′ have
                                  equal mass to ordinary neutrons n, and they couple very weakly, the oscillation transition
                                  time for n ←→ n′ may be resonantly enhanced in a strong magnetic field by the dipole
                                  potential energy. The proton trap in the NIST BL1 experiment resides in a 4.6 T field, but
                                  the neutron absorber is in a low-field region, and therefore a resonant n-n′ transition could
                                  cause the density of neutrons inside the trap to be lower than in the absorber, decreasing
                                  R p relative to Rn in Equation (10) to produce a larger measured τn . A likely model for this
                                  was excluded by a recent experiment at Oak Ridge National Lab [44], but in general this
                                  idea remains viable.

                                  6. Conclusions
                                        The nearly 5-sigma beam-UCN discrepancy in the value of the free neutron lifetime
                                  is a significant outstanding problem that limits the precision of SBBN calculations and
                                  affects other astrophysical quantities. This problem is most likely due to underestimated
                                  systematic effects in the experiments and it will hopefully be resolved by current and future
                                  experimental efforts. But we should not neglect the possibility that this disagreement
                                  could be caused by new physics. While perhaps unlikely, a new physics explanation for
                                  the neutron lifetime discrepancy would have enormous consequences and may provide
                                  important clues as to the nature of dark matter.

                                  Funding: This work was supported by National Science Foundation grant PHY-2309938.
                                  Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflicts of interest in this work.

References
1.   Feynman, R.P.; Gell-Mann, M. Theory of the Fermi Interaction. Phys. Rev. 1958, 109, 193. [CrossRef]
2.   Gell-Mann, M. Test of the Nature of the Vector Interaction in Beta Decay. Phys. Rev. 1958, 111, 362. [CrossRef]
3.   Particle Data Group; Workman, R.L.; Burkert, V.D.; Crede, V.; Klempt, E.; Thoma, U.; Tiator, L.; Agashe, K.; Aielli, G.; Allanach,
     B.C.; et al. Review of Particle Physics. Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys. 2022, 2022, 083C01.
4.   Czarnecki, A.; Marciano, W.J.; Sirlin, A. Radiative corrections to neutron and nuclear beta decays revisited. Phys. Rev. D 2019, 100,
     073008. [CrossRef]
5.   Wietfeldt, F.E.; Greene, G.L. The neutron lifetime. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2011, 83, 1173. [CrossRef]
6.   Wietfeldt, F.E. Measurements of the Neutron Lifetime. Atoms 2018, 6, 70. [CrossRef]
7.   Robson, J.M. The Radioactive Decay of the Neutron. Phys. Rev. 1951, 83, 349. [CrossRef]
Symmetry 2024, 16, 956                                                                                                             11 of 12



8.  Nico, J.S.; Dewey, M.S.; Gilliam, D.M.; Wietfeldt, F.E.; Fei, X.; Snow, W.M.; Greene, G.L.; Pauwels, J.; Eykens, R.; Lamberty, A.;
    et al. Measurement of the neutron lifetime by counting trapped protons in a cold neutron beam. Phys. Rev. C 2005, 71, 055502.
    [CrossRef]
9. Yue, A.T.; Dewey, M.S.; Gilliam, D.M.; Greene, G.L.; Laptov, A.B.; Nico, J.S.; Snow, W.M.; Wietfeldt, F.E. Improved Determination
    of the Neutron Lifetime. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 111, 222501. [CrossRef]
10. Amaldi, E.; D’Agostino, O.; Fermi, E.; Pontecorvo, B.; Rasetti, F.; Segré, E. Artificial Radioactivity produced by Neutron Bombard-
    ment. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 1935, 149, 522.
11. Byrne, J.; Dawber, P.G.; Habeck, C.G.; Smidt, S.J.; Spain, J.A.; Williams, A.P. A revised value for the neutron lifetime measured
    using a Penning trap. Europhys. Lett. 1996, 33, 187. [CrossRef]
12. Hirota, K.; Ichikawa, G.; Ieki, S.; Ino, T.; Iwashita, Y.; Kitaguchi, M.; Kitahara, R.; Koga, J.; Mishima, K.; Mogi, T.; et al. Neutron
    lifetime measurement with pulsed cold neutrons. Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys. 2020, 2020, 123C02. [CrossRef]
13. Morris, C.L.; Adamek, E.R.; Broussard, L.J.; Callahan, N.B.; Clayton, S.M.; Cude-Woods, C.; Currie, S.A.; Ding, X.; Fox, W.;
    Hickerson, K.P.; et al. A new method for measuring the neutron lifetime using an in situ neutron detector. Rev. Sci. Instr. 2017,
    88, 053598. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Pattie, R.W., Jr.; Callahan, N.B.; Cude-Woods, C.; Adamek, E.R.; Broussard, L.J.; Clayton, S.M.; Currie, S.A.; Dees, E.B.; Ding, X.;
    Engel, E.M.; et al. Measurement of the neutron lifetime using a magneto-gravitational trap and in situ detection. Science 2018, 360,
    627–632. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Gonzalez, F.M.; Fries, E.M.; Cude-Woods, C.; Bailey, T.; Blatnik, M.; Broussard, L.J.; Callahan, N.B.; Choi, J.H.; Clayton, S.M.;
    Currie, S.A.; et al. Improved Neutron Lifetime Measurement with UCNτ. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2021, 127, 162501. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Serebrov, A.P.; Kolomensky, E.A.; Fomin, A.K.; Krasnoshchekova, I.A.; Vassiljev, A.V.; Prudnikov, D.M.; Shoka, I.V.; Chechkin, A.V.;
    Chaikovskiy, M.E.; Varlamov, V.E.; et al. Neutron lifetime measurements with a large gravitational trap for ultracold neutrons.
    Phys. Rev. C 2018, 97, 055503. [CrossRef]
17. Mampe, W.; Bondarenko, L.; Morozov, V.; Panin, Y. Fomin, Measuring neutron lifetime by storing ultracold neutrons and detecting
    inelastically scattered neutrons. J. Exp. Theor. Phys. Lett. 1993, 57, 82.
18. Serebrov, A.; Varlamov, V.; Kharitonov, A.; Fomin, A.; Pokotilovski, Y.; Geltenbort, P.; Butterworth, J.; Krasnoschekova, I.; Lasakov,
    M.; Taldaev, R.; et al. Measurement of the neutron lifetime using a gravitational trap and a low-temperature Fomblin coating. Phys.
    Lett. B 2005, 605, 72. [CrossRef]
19. Pichlmaier, A.; Varlamov, V.; Schreckenbach, K.; Geltenbort, P. Neutron lifetime measurement with the UCN trap-in-trap MAMBO
    II. Phys. Lett. B 2010, 693, 221. [CrossRef]
20. Steyerl, A.; Pendlebury, J.; Kaufman, C.; Malik, S.; Desai, A. Quasielastic scattering in the interaction of ultracold neutrons with a
    liquid wall and application in a reanalysis of the Mambo I neutron-lifetime experiment. Phys. Rev. C 2012, 85, 065503. [CrossRef]
21. Arzumanov, S.; Bondarenko, L.; Chernyavsky, S.; Geltenbort, P.; Morozov, V.; Nesvizhevsky, V.; Panin, Y.; Strepetov, A. A
    measurement of the neutron lifetime using the method of storage of ultracold neutrons and detection of inelastically up-scattered
    neutrons. Phys. Lett. B 2015, 745, 79. [CrossRef]
22. Ezhov, V.F.; Andreev, A.; Ban, G.; Bazarov, B.; Geltenbort, P.; Glushkov, A.; Knyazkov, V.; Kovrizhnykh, N.; Krygin, G.; Naviliat-
    Cuncic, O.; et al. Measurement of the neutron lifetime with ultra-cold neutrons stored in a magneto-gravitational trap. J. Exp.
    Theor. Phys. Lett. 2018, 107, 707. [CrossRef]
23. Byrne, J.; Worcester, D.L. The neutron lifetime anomaly and charge exchange collisions of trapped protons. J. Phys. G Nucl. Part.
    Phys. 2019, 46, 085001. [CrossRef]
24. Byrne, J.; Worcester, D.L. The neutron lifetime anomaly: Analysis of charge exchange and molecular reactions in a proton trap. Eur.
    Phys. J. A 2022, 58, 151. [CrossRef]
25. Serebrov, A.P.; Chaikovskii, M.E.; Klyushnikov, G.N.; Zherebtsov, O.M.; Chechkin, A.V. Search for explanation of the neutron
    lifetime anomaly. Phys. Rev. D 2021, 103, 074010. [CrossRef]
26. Wietfeldt, F.E.; Biswas, R.; Caylor, J.; Crawford, B.; Dewey, M.S.; Fomin, N.; Greene, G.L.; Haddock, C.C.; Hoogerheide, S.F.;
    Mumm, H.P.; et al. Comment on “Search for explanation of the neutron lifetime anomaly”. Phys. Rev. D 2023, 107, 118501.
    [CrossRef]
27. Spivak, P.E. Neutron lifetime obtained from Atomic-Energy-Institute experiment. J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 1988, 67, 1735.
28. Weinberg, S.L. The First Three Minutes; Basic Books: New York, NY, USA, 1993.
29. Cyburt, R.H.; Fields, B.D.; Olive, K.A.; Yeh, T.-H. Big Bang nucleosynthesis: Present status. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2016, 88, 15004.
    [CrossRef]
30. Planck Collaboration; Aghanim, N.; Akrami, Y.; Ashdown, M.; Aumont, J.; Baccigalupi, C.; Ballardini, M.; Banday, A.J.; Barreiro,
    R.B.; Bartolo, N.; et al. Planck 2018 results. VI. Cosmological parameters. Astron. Astrophys. 2020, 641, A6.
31. Yeh, T.H.; Shelton, J.; Olive, K.A.; Fields, B. Probing physics beyond the standard model: Limits from BBN and the CMB
    independently and combined. JCAP 2022, 10, 46. [CrossRef]
32. Fields, B.D.; Olive, K.A.; Yeh, T.H.; Young, C. Big-Bang Nucleosynthesis after Planck. JCAP 2020, 3, 10. [CrossRef]
33. Bahcall, J.N.; Davis, R., Jr. Solar Neutrinos: A Scientific Puzzle. Science 1976, 191, 264. [CrossRef]
34. Fornal, B.; Grinstein, B. Dark Matter Interpretation of the Neutron Decay Anomaly. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018, 120, 191801. [CrossRef]
    [PubMed]
35. Cline, J.M.; Cornell, J.M. Dark decay of the neutron. J. High Energy Phys. 2018, 2018, 81. [CrossRef]
Symmetry 2024, 16, 956                                                                                                                12 of 12



36. Motta, T.F.; Guichon, P.A.; Thomas, A.W. Implications of neutron star properties for the existence of light dark matter. J. Phys. G
    2018, 45, 05LT01. [CrossRef]
37. Baym, G.; Heck, D.H.; Geltenbort, P.; Shelton, J. Testing Dark Decays of Baryons in Neutron Stars. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018, 121, 061801.
    [CrossRef]
38. McKeen, D.; Nelson, A.E.; Reddy, S.; Zhou, D. Neutron Stars Exclude Light Dark Baryons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018, 121, 061802.
    [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Tang, Z.; Blatnik, M.; Broussard, L.J.; Choi, J.H.; Clayton, S.M.; Cude-Woods, C.; Currie, S.; Fellers, D.E.; Fries, E.M.; Geltenbort, P.;
    et al. Search for the Neutron Decay n → X + γ, Where X is a Dark Matter Particle. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018, 121, 022505. [CrossRef]
    [PubMed]
40. Sun, X.; Adamek, E.; Allgeier, B.; Blatnik, M.; Bowles, T.J.; Broussard, L.J.; Brown, M.A.-P.; Carr, R.; Clayton, S.; Cude-Woods, C.; et
    al. Search for dark matter decay of the free neutron from the UCNA experiment: n → χ + e+ e− . Phys. Rev. C 2018, 97, 052501R.
    [CrossRef]
41. Klopf, M.; Jericha, E.; Märkisch, B.; Saul, H.; Soldner, T.; Abele, H. Constraints on the Dark Matter Interpretation n → χ + e+ e− of
    the Neutron Decay Anomaly with the PERKEO II Experiment. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019, 122, 222503. [CrossRef]
42. Dawid, M. APS April Meeting 2022, session T12. Neutron-Axion Scattering and the Neutron Lifetime Puzzle. Bull. Am. Phys. Soc.
    2022, 67, 6.
43. Berezhiani, Z.; Comelli, D.; Villante, F.L. The early mirror universe: Inflation, baryogenesis, nucleosynthesis and dark matter. Phys.
    Lett. B 2001, 503, 362. [CrossRef]
44. Broussard, L.J.; Barrow, J.L.; DeBeer-Schmitt, L.; Dennis, T.; Fitzsimmons, M.R.; Frost, M.J.; Gilbert, C.E.; Gonzalez, F.M.; Heilbronn,
    L.; Iverson, E.B.; et al. Experimental Search for Neutron to Mirror Neutron Oscillations as an Explanation of the Neutron Lifetime
    Anomaly. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2022, 128, 212503. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
