                                                        Historical origins of quantum entanglement in particle physics a

                                                                                                     Yu Shib
                                                   Wilczek Quantum Center, Shanghai Institute for Advanced Studies, Shanghai 201315, China
                                                              University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China and
                                                                  Department of Physics, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China




arXiv:2507.13582v1 [physics.hist-ph] 18 Jul 2025

                                                   a
                                                       The Chinese version of this article was published as Y. Shi, Historic origin of quantum entanglement in

                                                       particle physics: C. S. Wu, T. D. Lee, C. N. Yang and Other Predecessors, Micius Forum, March 17,

                                                       2023, available at https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/gs3UxMjvXv1ert1kPu8npg; and also as Y. Shi, Historic

                                                       origin of quantum entanglement in particle physics, Progress in Physics 43 (3), 57-67 (2023). available at

                                                       https://pip.nju.edu.cn/CN/10.13725/j.cnki.pip.2023.03.001. For earlier papers on contribution of C. S.

                                                       Wu to quantum entanglement, see also Y. Shi, Chien-Shiung Wu as the experimental pioneer in quantum

                                                       entanglement: a 2022 note, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 40, 253000 (2025); Y. Shi, Scientific Spirit of Chien-

                                                       Shiung Wu: From Quantum Entanglement to Parity Nonconservation, arXiv:2504.16978
                                                   b
                                                       Yu shi@ustc.edu.cn


                                                                                                        1
                                              Abstract
     In this paper, the historical origins of quantum entanglement in particle physics are systemati-
cally and thoroughly investigated. 1957, Bohm and Aharonov noted that the Einstein-Podolsky-
Rosen correlation had been experimentally realised in the 1949 experiment of Chien-Shiung Wu
and Shaknov. This was the first time in history that spatially separated quantum entanglement
was explicitly realised in a controlled experiment. Wheeler first proposed such an experiment as
a test of quantum electrodynamics, but his calculation was in error; the correct theoretical calcu-
lations came from Ward and Price, as well as from Snyder, Pasternack and Hornbostel, and the
result was in accordance with Yang’s 1949 selection rule. After the publication of Bell’s inequality
in 1964, it was considered whether it could be tested by using the Wu-Shaknov experiment. This
gave an impetus to the field, and a new experiment was done by Wu’s group, though it was not
successful as a test of Bell inequality violation. In 1957, Tsung-Dao Lee, Reinhard Oehme and
Chen Ning Yang established the quantum mechanical description of the kaons and found that the
neutral kaon is a two-state system. In 1958, based on an approach similar to Yang’s 1949 selection
rule, Goldhaber, Lee and Yang were the first to write down the entangled states of kaon pairs, in
which a single kaon can be charged or neutral. This gave, for the first time, quantum entanglement
of internal degrees of freedom of high-energy particles other than photons. In 1960, as unpublished
work, Lee and Yang discussed the consequences of quantum entanglement of neutral kaon pairs.
We also describe several physicists in the past, especially Ward.



     Keywords: electron-positron pairs, quantum entanglement, entangled photons, pseudoscalar
mesons, entangled mesons, kaons



I.     INTRODUCTION


     In 1935, A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen pointed out that local realism is in conflict
with the completeness of quantum mechanics [1]. This is known as the Einstein-Podolsky-
Rosen (EPR) paradox, and the correlation discussed is known as the EPR correlation,
which Schrödinger coined quantum entanglement [2]. The original example discussed in
EPR paper was the entanglement between the positions or momenta of two particles, which
are continuous variables. In 1951, D. Bohm gave a spin 12 (discrete variable) version of

                                                 2
the EPR paradox [3]. In 1964, J. Bell suggested that local realism leads to an inequality,
later called Bell inequality, which is violated in quantum mechanics [4]. Later, experimental
results were found to violate Bell inequalities, in consistency with quantum mechanics [4].
   Before quantum entanglement was studied in optics, atomic physics and condensed mat-
ter physics and other areas of low-energy physics, particle physics had provided concrete
examples of quantum entanglement and played a certain historical role. The key players of
parity revolution, especially Chien-Shiung Wu, Chen Ning Yang and Tsung-Dao Lee, have
also contributed to this less known field. For many years, I have been introducing these
contributions of theirs, in meetings, research papers as well as historical and popular arti-
cles. In November 2007, at the Conference in Honor of C. N. Yang’s 85th birthday, I gave
a presentation entitled ‘Professor Yang and Particle Physics”, the abstract of which reads:
“Some of the researches of Professor Chen Ning Yang are related to quantum entangled
states in particle physics.’ [6] On the occasion of the International Symposium Commem-
orating the 110th Birth Anniversary of Chien-Shiung Wu on 31 May 2022, the title of my
presentation was entitled ‘Scientific Spirit of Chien-Shiung Wu: From Quantum Entangle-
ment to Parity Nonconservation’, and the abstract reads: ‘In 1950, Chien-Shiung Wu and
her student published a coincidence experiment on entangled photon pairs that were created
in electron-positron annihilation. This experiment precisely verified the prediction of quan-
tum electrodynamics. Additionally, it was also the first instance of a precisely controlled
quantum entangled state of spatially separated particles, although Wu did not know about
this at the time.’
   More than four months after my talk on Wu’s contributions, 2022 Nobel Prize in Physics
was awarded to Alain Aspect, John Clauser and Anton Zeilinger, ‘for experiments with
entangled photons, establishing the violation of Bell inequalities and pioneering quantum
information science.’ In my review of this Prize [5], I mentioned two examples of quantum
entanglement in particle physics, one being entangled photons produced by annihilation of
a positron and a electron, and the other being entangled mesons, and the historic role of
Wu-Shaknov experiment was emphasized. Bearing the same title as this review, I gave a
talk at the Fall Meeting of the Chinese Physical Society in November 2022, with the abstract
including the sentence that ‘I would also like to take this opportunity to introduce the related
work of Chien-Shiung Wu, Tsung-Dao Lee and Chen Ning Yang.’ [5]
   This paper provides an in-depth review of the details of this topic and its development,

                                              3
clarifying some of the history and disclosing some of the lesser noticed aspects. For example,
with respect to the entangled photons produced by electron-positron annihilation, following
the initial work of John Wheeler, several theoretical physicists have made important contri-
butions to this subject. As another example, Yang’s famous 1949 photon selection rule is
also closely related to the subject. The Nobel Prize winning work on parity nonconservation
by Chen Ning Yang and Tsung-Dao Lee resolved θ − τ puzzle, and identified these two
kinds of particles as the same, now called kaons. Their follow-up work on kaons laid the
theoretical foundation for later discussions of meson entanglement. In 1958, M. Goldhaber,
Lee and Yang discussed the kaon entangled states, giving the first entanglement of internal
degrees of freedom of particles other than photons. This is of historical significance, though
they did not pay attention to the entanglement issue. Later, in an unpublished work, Lee
and Yang discussed entanglement of kaons, referring it as EPR correlation.



II.     QUANTUM ENTANGLEMENT OF HIGH ENERGY PHOTONS


      A.   Entangled photons from electron-positron annihilation


      In the 1930s, based on the Dirac equation and quantum electrodynamics, Dirac and a
group of physicists studied the so-called pair theory, referring to the theory of the creation
and annihilation of pairs of electrons and positrons. In 1946, Wheeler, in a paper that won
an award from the New York Academy of Sciences, systematically discussed the formation
of electron-positron bound states, the simplest being a positronium. He also discussed how
to test the pair theory, suggesting that a way is to detect the photons produced from the
electron-positron annihilation [7]. Wheeler pointed out that the annihilation mainly comes
from the spin singlet state of the positronium, i,e, the quantum state with total spin 0, so if
the orbital angular momentum is also 0, the total angular momentum is 0, thus the linear
polarisations of the two photons moving back to back from the electron-positron annihila-
tion must be orthogonal to each other, so that the total angular momentum is conserved.
Wheeler suggested that in the experiment, each photon is scattered separately and then de-
tected respectively, and the events with both photons being detected were recorded through
coincidence measurement.
      Here the photons are scattering by electrons, known as Compton scattering. For each

                                             4
FIG. 1.   From electron-positron annihilation, two photons are created moving to opposite direc-
tions, and are scattered by electrons in the crystals respectively. Picture by Yu Shi at 2023.


photon, the polarization direction determines the moving direction after scattering. So if
the polarizations of the two photons are perpendicular to each other, then with a large
probability, the moving directions are perpendicular to each other. The Compton scattering
plays a role of polarization measurement, but as we will explain later, this ‘measurement’ is
incomplete.
   For each photon, the angle between the directions of motion before and after scattering
is called the scattering angle. When two photons moving in opposite directions are each
scattered by an electron, even if their scattering angles are equal, the directions of motion
are not necessarily parallel, because on the plane perpendicular to the direction of motion
before scattering, the azimuths can be different (Fig. 1). Wheeler suggested to study, for
the case that the scattering angles of the two photons are the same, the asymmetry between
the coincident counts of the subcase that the scattering directions are perpendicular and of
the subcase that they are parallel. An asymmetry of two quantities is the difference between
the two divided by the sum of the two. This asymmetry depends on the scattering angle.
Wheeler calculated that when the scattering angle is 90◦ , the asymmetry is maximal when
the azimuthal difference is 74◦ 30′ .
   Wheeler came up with the original idea, but his calculation was erroneous. The correct
result was given independently by two groups. The paper by J. C. Ward and M. Pryce was

                                                5
received on 18 June 1947 [8], while the paper by H. Snyder, S. Pasternak and J. Hornbostel
was received on 24 November 1947 [9]. These two groups both calculated that the asymmetry
reaches the maximum 2.85 when the scattering angle is 82◦ , making correction for Wheeler’s
result. It was claimed that R. H. Dalitz also obtained the result independently but did not
publish it [10].

   The polarisations of the two photons produced by the electron-positron annihilation are
correlated or, in the language more commonly used today, quantum entangled. Wheeler did
not explicitly write down the quantum state of the entangled photons, but his calculations
were clearly based on the polarization entangled state, since he made it clear that the
electron and positron are in the spin singlet states, i.e. antisymmetric states, and that the
two photons produced by the annihilation have “similar polarization phenomena”.

   But Ward and Price noted that Wheeler was mistaken about the momentum state. They
published a short paper reporting only the results of the calculations, without writing ex-
plicitly the quantum states. But this work was part of Ward’s PhD thesis [10–12]. His PhD
thesis stated in details that the momentum state of the photon pair is also an antisymmet-
ric state, which ensures that the overall state of the two photons are symmetric, obeying
bosonic statistics. In today’s notation, the quantum state of the photon pair can be written
as √12 (|x⟩|y⟩ − |y⟩|x⟩)(|k⟩| − k⟩ − | − k⟩|k⟩, where |x⟩ and |y⟩ represent the two orthogonal
linearly polarised states, and |k⟩ and | − k⟩ represent the momentum states for the two
opposite directions of motion respectively.

   The paper by Snyder, Pasternak, and Hornbostel gave the correct quantum state with
detailed calculations. In their abstract, they stated that photon scattering acts as a “partial
analysis” of the polarisation of the other photon. Although a factor of 2 is missing in the
number of photon pairs that are perpendicular to each other and the number of photon pairs
that are parallel to each other [11], the antisymmetry is not affected.




   B.   Stories of these physicists


   It is worth inserting here a little introduction to some of these physicists.

                                              6
   1.   Price


   Price was a student co-supervised by M. Born and R. H. Fowler at Cambridge University
in England. He also visited Princeton during his studies, and learnt from W. Pauli and J.
von Neumann, and later became Born’s son-in-law. The solar neutrino conjecture usually
attributed to B. Pontecorvo was initially an idea of Price, when they were both working
at the Chalk River Laboratories in Canada during WWII [13, 14]. In 1946, Price returned
to Oxford, and Ward became his first graduate student. The problem Price suggested to
Ward was to examine Wheeler’s result on the electron-positron annihilation, and suggested
the use of polarisation entangled states as a starting point [10, 11] Ward recalled later:“This
was my first class in quantum mechanics, and actually also the last one, since the rest were
just techniques that could be learnt from books.” [10]



   2.   Ward


   The other part of Ward’s PhD thesis was to extend J. Schwinger’s electron self-energy
renormalisation from first order to all orders [10, 11]. After a year as a tutor at the University
of Sydney, he returned to Oxford to defend his PhD thesis, followed by two years of research
at Oxford, discovering the Ward’s identity, which became his most famous work, showing
that renormalisation succeeded because gauge invariance connects different infinities. This
is a profound result and became an important element in quantum field theory. Then he
visited the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton for a year. He was listening to a
seminar on the two-dimensional Ising model when he had the idea of using combinatorial
methods for this. He published a paper on this with M. Kac in 1952.
   On 6 March 2023, I asked Prof. Yang: “in 1952, while in Princeton IAS, Ward collabo-
rated with Kac on Ising model, by developing a combinatorial formulation. It is not clear
how this work was influenced by your work on Ising model and phase transition. Did he
ever tell you about this work?” Prof. Yang immediately answered, “He did. And I quickly
wrote a paper based on his work.. ” Yang was referring to the fact that in the paper on
the unit circle theorem of phase transitions by him and Lee, they extended the Kac-Ward
method from zero magnetic fields to imaginary magnetic field, which became an example
for the zero-point distribution of the grand partition function discussed in their paper. In-

                                               7
terestingly, Yang’s idea also arose when listening to a seminar on the two-dimensional Ising
model, this time on the Kac-Ward method [15, 16]. I asked Prof. Yang: “who gave this
seminar?” Prof. Yang replied: “By both.”
   Every job of Ward had not been long before he became a professor at Macquarie Uni-
versity in Australia at 1967. In 1955, he returned to the UK to work on the hydrogen
bomb project. After being given the tip “fission, then fusion, then neutron shielding”, he
re-discovered the Uram-Teller design of four years earlier in the United States, especially the
radiation implosion. He returned to the United States the following year [10, 11]. Ward’s
crucial contributions has never been officially recognised by the UK government, although
both himself and A. Salam wrote to Margaret Thatcher about it.
   Around 1960, Ward (then in the USA) collaborated with Salam (then in UK) on gauge
field theory. In 1961, they proposed a SU(3) theory of strong interactions. And in 1964,
he obtained the U(1)×SU(2) electroweak theory, which Glashow had obtained three years
earlier. Weinberg presented the U(1)×SU(2) electroweak theory with spontaneous symmetry
breaking in 1967, and Salam proposed a similar theory in a class in the same year, and in
a Nobel Symposium in the following year. Glashow, Salam, and Weinberg shared the 1979
Nobel Prize in Physics [17].
   On 27 July 2021, I asked Prof. Chen Ning Yang about the 1979 Nobel Prize in Physics.
Prof. Yang mentioned that “Glashow’s prize was based on his paper in early 1960s proposing
SU 2 × U 1.” I said: “Glashow did that under the bold assumption that there the gauge
particles are massive. OK, the unification scheme was already correct. Salam said that he
and Ward also did this independent. But the publication was in 1964, 3 years later. Then
he claimed he also did what Weinberg did, but only in conference.” Yang said: “many
people suspect that Salam and Weinberg got together, and decided to cut Ward out. In
the early1990s Ward suddenly appeared in my SB office. He complained about being left
out of the Nobel. He also complained that England did not acknowledge his contribution
to the Brittish hydrogen bomb. At the IAS in the early 1950s I was the one who greatly
appreciated his originality.” In February 2022, I mentioned again: “ J. C. Ward claimed
that he was responsible for the design of hydrogen bomb of UK.” Yang replied: “He did say
that, when he was quite old.”
   Ward had important achievements, although he published only about twenty papers in
his lifetime [10–12].

                                             8
  3.   Snyder


  Snyder was a student of J. Oppenheimer. In 1939, they proposed the “continuous grav-
itational collapse” [18]. In 1947, Snyder published a paper on quantised spacetime [19],
which, incidently, was further discussed by Chen Ning Yang as a PhD student in the same
year [20]. In the 1950s, Snyder, together with E. D. Courant and Livingston, proposed the
principle of strong focusing of sychrotrons [21, 22], which was used at CERN and Brookhaven
Laboratory. Snyder died at the age of 49 [23].


  4.   Pasternak


  Pasternak was one of the first theorists to focus on the phenomenon that came to be known
as the Lamb shift [24]. In 1934, W. Houston and Y. M. Hsieh of the California Institute
of Technology discovered that the Balmer line series of the hydrogen atom spectrum (the
spectral lines emitted when an electron jumps from a higher energy level to the second
level) deviated from the prediction of the Dirac equation. Inspired by Oppenheimer and
N. Bohr, they correctly pointed out that this comes from the self-energy of electrons due
to coupling with the electromagnetic field. R. C. Gibbs and R. C. Williams of Cornell
University observed the same phenomenon and attributed the cause to the shift of the zero
angular momentum energy level in the second shell (2s). In 1938, while working on his Ph.D.
at Caltech, Pasternak, after discussions with Houston, also made the same conclusion that
the zero angular momentum energy level of the second shell layer (2s) shifts, but attributed
the cause to the electron-nucleus interaction. Later, this phenomenon was even called the
Pasternak effect, which inspired W. Lamb and R. Retherford to use high-precision microwave
techniques to measure the difference between the energy level with zero angular momentum
(2s) and that with angular momentum quantum number 1 (2p) in the second shell, later
known as the Lamb shift [25]. Lamb was awarded the Nobel Prize for this. Pasternak later
became an editor of the Physical Review [26].


  5.   Wu-Shaknov experiment


  In 1949, Wu and her student I. Shaknov studied the quantum-entangled photons pro-
duced from the electron-positron annihilation by measuring their angular correlation after

                                            9
respective scattering [27], and confirmed the theoretical predictions of Wheeler, Ward-Pryce,
and Snyder-Pasternak-Hornbostel.
   Prior to the work of Chien-Shiung Wu and Shaknov, theoretical studies triggered experi-
ments by at least two groups, but the experimental results were unsatisfactory and could not
give a definitive conclusions, the problem being the efficiency of the photon detectors and
the experimental conditions as written in the Wu-Saknov paper: “The recently developed
scintillation counters have proved to be reliable and efficient gamma-ray detectors.” [27]
   Wu and Shaknov have increased the efficiency of the scintillation counter, as an efficient
photon detection, to 10 times that of the Geiger-Müller counter, resulting in a 100 times
increase in the coincidence counting rate. They used two photomultiplier tubes and two an-
thracene crystals. In the cyclotron in Colombia, they bombarded Copper 64 with deuterons
to produce positrons. Then a positron annihilated with an electron, producing two photons,
which are scattered by electrons in the two anthracene crystals respectively. In their exper-
iment, the mean scattering angle was very close to 82◦ , the theoretical value that gives the
maximal asymmetry. In coincidental measurements, one detector was kept fixed and the
azimuthal angle of the other detector was taken as 0◦ , 90◦ , 180◦ and 270◦ , respectively. The
asymmetry was measured to be 2.04 ± 0.08, which is very close to the theoretical value of 2,
calculated for their geometrical arrangement [27]. They gave the final words on testing the
predictions of quantum electrodynamics on this problem.



   6.   Yang’s selection rule


   Wu-Shaknov experiment was fully consistent with Yang’s selection rule (a particle of
spin 1 cannot be decay into two photons). In 1949, based on the invariance of rotation and
inversion, Chen Ning Yang presented the selection rule for the decay of a particle into two
photons [16, 28]. This work is also directly related to meson decay, which we shall discuss
below, and it also discusses the electron-positron annihilation we discussed above.
   The first sentence of this paper of Yang says that Wheeler had pointed out that a positro-
nium in the triplet state cannot decay through annihilation with the emission of two photons.
It goes on to say that the same is true of vector and pseudovector mesons. It cites the papers
that led to Wu-Shaknov experiment, the one by Wheeler and the two followup theoretical
papers, which noted that the polarisations of the two photons are perpendicular to each

                                             10
other [7–9]. Yang showed that these are all consequences of the selection rules due to in-
variance of rotation and that of inversion. During his time at the University of Chicago,
Yang also cited Snyder twice, once in this paper, and another time in a paper on quantized
spacetime.
   Yang’s paper on this selection rule was received on 22 August 1949 and published on 15
January 1950, while the paper by Wu and Shaknov was received on 21 November, later than
the receipt of Yang’s paper, but was published on 1 January 1950, which was earlier than
the publication of Yang’s paper. Apparently, they and Yang did not know each other’s work
at that time.



   7.   Connection with the concept of quantum entanglement


   Prior to 1950, the concept of photon pairs generated by electron-positron annihilation,
including the papers by Yang and by Wu and Shaknov, was not connected with the concept
of quantum entanglement. Now we come to the trend of quantum entanglement.
   In 1935, a few months after the publication of the EPR paper, Schrödinger coined the
term “quantum entanglement” for EPR correlation, but did not think it made sense. He
believed that the EPR paradox stemmed from taking non-relativistic quantum mechanics
beyond its range of applicability. Therefore, he also discussed the possibility that after the
separation of particles, the superposition coefficients are out of phase, and the quantum
entanglement automatically disappears and the state degenerates into a probabilistic mix-
ture of direct product states, i.e., the different direct product states appear with a certain
probability. This not only avoids the EPR paradox, but also does not contradict the exper-
iments that had already been done at that time, which did not involve entanglement. Of
course, at that time, there were no entanglement experiments, so Schrödinger stated that
this was a hypothesis. He wrote three articles on this topic, two in English and one in
German [2, 29, 30]. W. Furry also wrote two papers [31, 32] examining quantum entangled
states, i.e., coherent superpositions of direct product states, and probabilistic mixing of di-
rect product states, as the two different cases. In contrast to Schrödinger, who questioned
the plausibility of entangled states, Furry argued that it is the case of inconsistency with
quantum mechanics that is implausible. They both discuss the difference between the two
cases, but only Schrödinger’s second English article specifically postulates that after the

                                             11
separation of EPR entangled pairs, their state changes from entangled state to probabilistic
mixing [29]. In the later literature, this assumption of Schrödinger and his questioning of
quantum entanglement have been frequently misunderstood as having been made by Furry.
The timeline of the publications of several papers by Schrödinger and Furry is: Schrödinger’s
first English paper (1935), Schrödinger’s German paper (1935), Furry’s first paper (1936),
Schrödinger’s second English paper (1936), Furry’s second paper (1936). Furry’s second
paper cites Schrödinger’s first English paper and his German paper. Schrödinger’s Ger-
man paper discussed measurement-induced disappearance of entanglement, and proposed
the famous Schrödinger’s cat paradox [29].
   As can be seen, Einstein and Schrödinger were worthy masters who did not like the
probabilistic interpretation of quantum mechanics and did not participate in the subsequent
development on this basis, but when needed, were able to make a profound analyses within
the theoretical framework of quantum mechanics. Their theoretical analyses are familiar to
us today.
   In 1951, Bohm gave a discrete-variable (spin-1/2) version of the EPR paradox. In 1957,
Bohm and his student Y. Aharonov first connected the EPR paradox with real physical
experiments. They pointed out that in the case considered by EPR there are no interactions
between particles and their wave functions do not overlap, but at that time there was
no experimental evidence that quantum mechanics could be applied to such a many-body
problem, leading to the EPR paradox. Einstein himself, in a discussion with Bohm, said
that perhaps when the particles are separated far enough away from each other, quantum
mechanics automatically fails to apply to such many-body problems [33].
   Bohm and Aharonov noted that at that time, practically discrete-variable quantum en-
tanglement could only be studied in the polarization states of photons, which were produced
in the electron-positron annihilation, and they noted that there had already been such an
experiment by referring the Wu-Shaknov paper (Shaknov was missed in the reference) [33].
Bohm and Aharonov did not use the term “entanglement”, but rather “correlation”. They
carefully investigated the effect of correlation (entanglement) in the coincident measurement
of photon pairs after Compton scattering. The results showed that only entangled states
can give theoretical values consistent with Wu-Shaknov experimental results, whereas the
a probabilistic mixture of direct product states discussed by Schrödinger and Furry leads
to very different results. Bohm and Aharonov noted only Furry’s discussion and did not

                                              12
mention Schrödinger’s discussion.
   Thus, the Wu-Shaknov experiment did produce polarization entangled states of photons,
suggesting that the EPR correlation is indeed a physical property. This was the first time
in history that an explicit and spatially separated quantum entanglement was achieved. In
today’s notation, this quantum entangled state is √12 (| →⟩| ↑⟩ − | ↑⟩| →⟩). So the Wu-
Sakhnov experiment not only accurately verified a prediction of quantum electrodynamics,
but also became a pioneer of quantum entanglement experiments.
   In 2015, Chen Ning Yang pointed out that Wu-Shaknov experiment “was the first ex-
periment on quantum entanglement, which is a very hot new area of research in the 21st
century” [34]. Since most quantum states underlying physical phenomena are entangled, I
would like to emphasize, as in the abstract, is that Wu-Shaknov experiment was the first
experiment explicitly realizing spatially separated quantum entanglement.



   8.   Can the Wu-Shaknov experiment be used to test Bell inequality?


   Bell inequality, published in 1964, is an inequality satisfied by several correlation functions
calculated under the assumption of local realism. In the case of photons, for example, each
correlation function describes the correlation between polarisation components of two pho-
tons in different directions. In order for the correlation functions to violate Bell inequality,
the two chosen directions cannot be parallel or perpendicular, but at other angles.
   Is it possible to test Bell inequality by using the setup of Wu-Shaknov experiment? After
the publication of Bell inequality, some physicists did look into this question and found that
it would not work.
   A. Shimony and M. Horne noted that in the Wu-Shaknov experimental setup, the photon
polarisations detected on both sides are either parallel or perpendicular to each other, and
cannot be changed to other angles [35].
   There is another problem, the polarisation of photons in the Wu-Shaknov experiment is
“measured” through Compton scattering, but the direction of scattering is described in terms
of a wavefunction, and there is a probability distribution over all directions, without locking
to a particular direction, although the probability is maximal in the direction perpendicular
to the polarisation. Therefore the coincidence of the photon pair does not fix the polarisation
direction, and is not a perfect measurement.

                                              13
   Moreover, the Wu-Shaknov experiment studied high-energy photons, the polarisations of
which cannot be measured by polarisers and polarising beam splitters as in the case of low
energy photons. Such devices would be broken by high-energy photons. Later on, quantum
entanglement of photon polarisation was mainly studied by using low-energy photons, as in
atomic physics, optics, condensed matter physics and other fields, becoming an important
part of quantum information science and flourishing, and three physicists received the 2022
Nobel Prize in Physics for their work in this area.
   Of the three Nobel Laureates, J. Clauser received the prize in part for his work with
A. Shimony, M. Horne, and R. Holt to extend Bell inequality to the CHSH inequality [36].
We note that the origin of CHSH inequality was related to their analyses of Wu-Shaknov
experiment.
   At that time, Clauser constructed for the Wu-Shaknov experiment a local hidden-variable
theory [37]. The result confirmed that Wu-Shaknov experiment was not suitable for testing
Bell inequality. Clauser also noted the special angle between the polarizations needed for
the measurements in the Wu-Shaknov experiment, and visited Wu to confirm this [38].
   Clauser’s visit caused Wu’s interest in testing Bell inequality. She and two graduate stu-
dents, L. R. Kasday and J. Ullman conducted a new experiment. This time, they measured
the coincident probabilities of two photons at various scattering and azimuthal angles. Their
paper was completed in 1974 and published in 1975 [39]. The paper referred to Yang’s 1949
selection rule for photon pair production.
   Strictly speaking, however, the new experiment of Wu’s group was still not suitable
for the Bell test, because, as mentioned above, the polarisation of high-energy photons
cannot be measured perfectly, and there is always a distribution of the scattered photons
as described the wave functions. However, Kasday, Ullman and Wu noted that if two
additional assumptions are made that (1) the polarizations can be perfectly measured and
(2) the quantum formula for Compton scattering is correct, then the experimental results
are consistent with quantum mechanics, and inconsistent with Bell’s inequality.
   Overall speaking, the two works of Chien-Shiung Wu and her students on high-energy
entangled photons, 25 years apart, contributed to the early study of quantum entanglement
and the Bell test. Although they did not rigorously prove the violation of Bell inequality, the
experimental results demonstrated quantum entanglement. They were known to specialists
on quantum foundations, for example, were referred to by John Bell in his papers.

                                             14
   In 1975, M. Lamehi-Rachti and W. Mittig realized the entangled state of two spin-halves
originally envisioned by Bohm. They bombarded a hydrogen-containing target with a proton
beam and obtained a spin singlet state consisting of two protons. Under some auxiliary
assumptions, the experimental results violated the Bell inequality [40].



III.    MESON ENTANGLEMENT


   A.    Lee, Oehme and Yang: neutral kaons as a quantum two-state system


   Usually, the names of Chien-Shiung Wu, Chen Ning Yang and Tsung-Dao Lee are as-
sociated together because of parity nonconservation in weak interactions. The 1957 Nobel
Prizes awarded to Chen Ning Yang and Tsung Dao Lee was based on their theoretical work
in 1956, which had been initiated by the so-called θ − τ puzzle [16, 41, 42]. Parity noncon-
servation suggests that θ and τ are the same particle, later called kaon. There exist charged
and neutral kaons. They are pseudoscalar particles, in the sense that the quantum state
changes sign under spatial inversion. Other similar pseudoscalar mesons include B mesons,
D mesons, and so on.
   Interestingly, there are also two neutral kaons, each one of which is the antiparticle of the
other, constituting a two-state system. Here, the discrete variables are flavour or strangeness.
Two equal weight superposed states of a particle and an antiparticle states are eigenstates of
C (charge conjugation) or CP (charge conjugation and parity) . Since CP is not conserved
in weak interactions, the mass-lifetime eigenstates (e.g., the long-lived and short-lived states
of kaons) are slightly different from the CP eigenstates.
   Kaons (and other similar mesons) can be described by using the simple Schrödinger
equation of quantum mechanics, as started by Lee, Oehme and Yang (LOY) in 1957 [43].
In 1955, M. Gell-Mann and A. Pais proposed that the eigenstates of C or CP are formed
by superposed states of particle state and antiparticle state. However, at that time, they
assumed that both P and C are conserved, implying that the production of the eigenstates
of C or CP represents the production of the flavor eigenstates with equal probability [44].
LOY considered that every discrete symmetry may be broken, so there exists a coherent
superposition of particle and antiparticle. This truly made it analogous to spin 12 .
   In May 2014, I went to CERN to attend a workshop, and my presentation was about

                                             15
mesonic entanglement. On 8 May, I wrote an email to Prof. Chen Ning Yang, saying
that kaon decay and neutrino oscillation can be described as simple quantum mechanical
two-state or three-state systems, under Wigner-Weisskopf approximation, asking , ‘Are these
approaches started by you?’ The Wigner-Weisskopf approximation is an approximation that
makes the decay exponential with time. In 12 hours, Prof. Yang replied, ‘Yes, the whole
mixing matrix idea was initiated by the LOY paper, [57e]. We used the Weisskopf-Wigner
formalism to describe the time evolution of a system in which all 3 discrete symmetries may
be broken. At the time, this description was not really needed, since it was believed by every-
body that K1 and K2 did not mix, (because of Gell-Mann-Pais). We developed the general
case of mixing for completeness. After1964, our formalism became THE FORMALISM. It
was generalized later to the 3 neutrino case.’



   B.   Goldhaber, Lee and Yang: the earliest written meson entangled states


   Entangled states of mesons also first appeared in a paper by them together with Gold-
haber, although they did not pay attention to the issue of quantum entanglement. In 1958,
Goldhaber, Lee and Yang first discussed the quantum state of a pair of K mesons (θ) [45].
However, they considered that each particle can be in four basis states, two neutral states
and a positive and negative unit charge states. Although they did not discuss from the per-
spective of quantum entanglement, these two-particle are indeed all entangled states, and
four of the entangled states are superpositions of two-particle product states with0 total
electric charge. .
   It is worthwhile to note that the method of obtaining the entangled states of the inter-
nal degrees of freedom of these mesons is similar to the one used by Yang in giving the
selection rule in 1949. The latter is limited to to the production of two photons in the pres-
ence of electromagnetic or strong interactions based on conservations of angular momentum
and parity, while the quantum states of the meson pairs are based on the conservations of
strangeness, charge conjugation and isospin for strong interactions, in the same way as the
1949 selection rule. The conservation of the total variable of the pair naturally leads to a
variety of possibilities for individual particles, therefore the total state is likely entangled.
   It is interesting to note that their paper reads, ‘We shall show that by the combined use
of the isotopic-spin rotation operator and the charge conjugation operator, there exist some

                                              16
interesting correlations, not only in production but also between some of the decay modes
of the θ and θ̄’ [45]. Production is in the basis of strangeness, while ‘decay mode’ is in CP
basis. The authors wrote each quantum state on both bases, and noted correlation in each
basis. The ‘interesting correlations’ are quantum entanglement. So Goldhaber, Lee and
Yang touched on the nature of quantum entanglement.
   On 10 February 2012, I told Prof. Yang: “I am writing a paper on something about
some analyses on entangled (EPR correlated) kaon pairs, a subject which can be traced to
your paper Goldhaber-Lee-Yang 1958 on θ − θ̄. Nowadays, in ϕ factory of Italy, kaons are
produced as EPR pairs.’ Yang answered: ‘Please send me a copy of your paper.”

[1] In the entangled states of kaons written down by Goldhaber, Lee and Yang, there is
superposition between charged and neutral states, with 4 of the entangled states being
superpositions of states with positive and negative unit charges and neutral particle and
antiparticle states. If we forbid the quantum coherence between charged and neutral states,
as a superselection rule, then all these 4 entangled states reduce to the antisymmetric su-
perposition of neutral particle and antiparticle states, similar to spin singlet states.
   According to a review paper by D. R. Inglis in January 1961 [46], in a meeting of the ZGS
Users Group at Argonne National Laboratory on 28 May 1960, Lee discussed the possibility
of correlated kaons similar to EPR question, resulted from proton-antiproton annihilation.
   The Inglis paper includes a chapter on the unpublished work of Lee and Yang, which
gave the entangled state of neutral kaons similar to the spin singlet state, where the K 0 and
K̄ 0 are analogous to spin up and spin down, respectively, and from this one can calculate
the probability that both particles are K̄ 0 . According to this paper, Lee and Yang noted
that it is impossible for the two neutral kaons to be observed as both K 0 ’s or both K̄ 0 ’s at
a same time. They also calculated the probability that the two particles are observed to be
both K̄ 0 ’s at different moments.
   The unpublished work of Lee and Yang is referenced in this paper as the following: T D.
Lee and C.N. Yang (unpublished); Professor Lee personal communication by letter and at
a meeting of the “ZGS Users Group” at Argonne, May 28, 1960).
   A paper by T. B. Day, also published in January 1961, extended on the unpublished work
of Lee and Yang [47], with the citation: “ T. D. Lee and C. N. Yang, reported by T. D. Lee
at Argonne National Laboratory, May, 1960 (unpublished).” Interestingly, Dai’s article also
discussed the similarity to photon pairs produced from the electron-positron annihilation,

                                             17
as we discussed above.
   My own general citation for the origin of meson entanglement is as follows: “T.D. Lee
and C.N. Yang, described in D.R. Inglis, Rev. Mod. Phys. 33 (1961) 1; T.B. Day, Phys.
Rev. 121 (1961) 1204.”
   In my email to Yang on 21 August 2006, I mentioned, ‘Recently I wrote a paper on
neutral kaons (to appear in Phys. Lett. B), making a bold proposal of introducing ideas of
quantum information to the realm of particle physics. I was already thinking about it when I
visited you in Stony Brook three years ago. In fact, it is ultimately based on your work with
Lee circa 1960, noting that a neutral kaon pair can be created in Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen
state with (J,P)=(0,-). This work seems unpublished, but accounted in a paper by Inglis.’
   Indeed, such neutral meson entangled states have since been widely produced and used
in meson factories [48–56]. M. Jammer, in his famous book ‘Philosophy of Quantum Me-
chanics’ [57], by quoting Inglis and Day’s article, referring to the unpublished work of Lee
and Yang, as well as Lee’s report at Argonne.
   Jammer also mentioned that he had interviewed Lee on 12 March 1973, and he was
told that Lee had noticed that the kaon correlation is related to EPR correlation, and
was different from that of the classical ensembles. Jarmer wrote: “Lee gave a talk at
Argonne National Laboratory on some striking effects of quantum mechanics in the large.
In the course of his lecture he discussed certain correlations which exist, as he pointed
out, between two simultaneously created neutral K-mesons (kaons) moving off in opposite
directions. Realizing that the situation under discussion is intimately related to the problem
raised by Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen, he soon convinced himself that classical ensembles
(or, for that matter, systems with hidden variables) could never reproduce such correlations.
But due to the complications caused by the finite lifetime of kaons-for infinite lifetime the
situation would ”degenerate” into that discussed by Bell-he did not derive any conclusion
equivalent to Bell’s inequality but assigned the further elaboration of these ideas to his
assistant Jonas Schürtz, who, however, soon began to work on another project.” Yarmer
also footnoted, “Interview with T. D. Lee, March 12, 1973. Professor Lee made it clear that
all the credit should be given to Professor Bell.” [57]
   In 1986, Lee published a paper entitled “Are black holes black bodies?” It discussed
quantum entanglement, called EPR experiment by him, across the horizon, noting that
depending on the quantum state, radiation may look like blackbody radiation, and may

                                            18
be very different [58]. As examples of EPR experiments and the global nature of quantum
states, the paper cites the articles by Kasday, Ullman and Wu, and by Goldhaber, Lee
and Yang, but it did not mention the papers by Inglis and by Day’s, which describe the
unpublished work of Lee and Yang, neither it mentioned Jammer’s book or his own report
at the Argonne Laboratory.
  In 1996, I borrowed a copy of Jammer’s book from the library of the Physics Department
at Bar-Ilan University in Israel. The librarian The librarian said, ‘Did you know that
Professor Jammer is at our department?’ What a coincidence. It turns out that Jammer
was the founder of this department and was once the president of the University. Later, I
had some discussions with Jammer, though didn’t obtain from him any more information
about the unpublished work of Lee and Yang.
  In August 2019, I emailed the article by Inglis and the relevant pages of Jammer’s book
to Prof. Yang. Also in this month, Prof. Wang Chui Lin had helped me to look for written
material about Lee-Yang unpublished work on neutral kaon entanglement, Lee’s report at
the Argonne Laboratory, and first-hand accounts of his correspondence with Inglis, but none
was found.



  C.    Friedberg’s work


  According to Jammer, R. Friedberg did some unpublished work in this area [57]. Fried-
berg had been a student of Lee, and remained in Columbia as Lee’s long-time collaborator.
It is not known whether this work of Friedberg was advised by Lee.
  In 1967, unaware of Bell’s work, Friedberg applied the assumption of locality to spin
measurements, obtaining results that contradicted quantum mechanics. In 1968, he told
Jammer about this work, and in 1969, he wrote about it in an unpublished paper: R.
Friedberg, “Verifiable consequences of the Einstein -Podolsky-Rosen criterion for reality”
(unpublished, 1969). [57].
  Friedberg first reformulated the criterion for reality as follows. For two systems, it is
possible to measure the first system without disturbing the second system, and it is also
possible to measure the second system without disturbing the first system. If the results of
the two measurements match exactly, then this result is part of the reality, even without
actually measuring it.

                                           19
   He then consideres that each system has three quantities x, y, and z, all taking the value
of 1 or −1. For each system, any two quantities can be measured simultaneously, since
one can be measured directly and the other can be measured on the EPR entangled state
by measuring the other. One can thus obtain the average values of the products satisfy
⟨xy⟩ + ⟨yz⟩ + ⟨xz⟩ ≥ −1. However, for quantum mechanical spin, if x, y, and z correspond
to the 3 components of the spin, it can be shown that they satisfy (⟨xy⟩ + ⟨yz⟩ + ⟨xz⟩)2 ≥ 1,
which can violate the inequality ⟨xy⟩+⟨yz⟩+⟨xz⟩ ≥ −1. W. Bücher from Germany obtained
a similar result in 1967 [57].
   Friedberg did another unpublished work in 1969, giving a simplified proof of the Kochen-
Specker theorem [57]. The Kochen-Specker theorem states that, under non-contextual as-
sumption, it is not possible to self-consistently assign a deterministic value to each observ-
able.
   For the Wu-Shaknov experiment, Friedberg has told Jammer that the unentangled case
considered by Furry could be represented in terms of Bell inequality, and that the corre-
sponding correlation function is different from that for the entangled state, which is a cosine
function, which is multiplied with a coefficient not exceeding 1/2 in giving the former [57].



IV.     FINDING THE 0 TO 1 TRAIL


   We now see that the early work on quantum entanglement in particle physics played
a crucial historical role in promoting the study of quantum entanglement. Take the work
of Bell for an important example [59], his two famous earliest papers “On the problem of
hidden variables in quantum mechanics” and “On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox”,
published in 1966 and 1964, respectively (the former had been written earlier) cited Bohm-
Aharonov 1957 papers; a 1971 paper “Introduction to the Hidden-Variable Question” cited
the papers by Day and by Inglis; a 1975 paper “On wave Packet Rudection in the Coleman-
Hepp Model” cited Jammer’s book, saying “See in particular references to T. D. Lee (p. 308)
and R. Friedberg (pp. 244, 309, 324)”, and cited a contribution by Kasday to a conference
together with the paper by Kasday, Ullman and Wu.
   On 10 December 2022, in an email to Prof. Yang, I said, “Bell inequalities finally got
Nobel Prize, though not to Bell himself. I remember you mentioned in SPI (Yang’s Selected
Papers I) that when you visited CERN, you told John Bell your work on ODLRO, and Bell

                                             20
proved some of your conjectures. Any more memories of this man?” Prof. Yang immediately
replied, “He was very good.”




   On 11 March 2023, after the present paper was almost complete, I expressed my opinion
to Prof. Yang, ‘I would like to make a point that 1958 Goldhaber-Lee-Yang paper is very
important in the perspective of entanglement. It reads: “We shall show that by the combined
use of the isotopic-spin rotation operator and the charge conjugation operator there exist
some interesting correlations, not only in production but also between some of the decay
modes.” My two cents: 1. It used the same method as Yang’s 1950 selection rule, and
derived kaon entangled states as the production, just as in the case of photon pair. 2. Just
as the photon pair in Yang’s selection rule can be entangled, kaon pairs are entangled, and
it was already noted that the decay mode are entangled (though this term was not used).
3. Here it was not constrained that each kaon in the product must be neutral. Later people
only considered neutral kaons. This paper was the first noting that two kaons (or any kinds
of particles besides photons) can be entangled.’




   In the unpublished work by Lee and Yang in 1960, the joint probability calculated for
the neutral kaon entangled state (and a later focus of attention of the calculation and
measurement of such entangled state, analogous to the photon coincident probability) was
a manifestation of the correlation of decay modes referred mentioned in 1958.




   We now emphasize the breakthrough from 0 to 1, but in history, it has not always been
a quick fix. Over time, the contributions of some scientists in the 0 to 1 process may have
been forgotten, especially if those scientists are not well known. Even famous scientists may
not always be remembered for their original efforts in certain areas, especially if those fields
were not well known at the time. It is worthwhile to sort out, examine, and learn from the
efforts, both successful and not-so-successful, that have been made along the way in science.

                                             21
   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS



   I would like to thank Prof. Chen Ning Yang for his communications. This paper has been
supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. T2241005).




 [1] EINSTEIN A, PODOLSKY B, ROSEN N. Can quantum-mechanical description of physical
    reality be considered complete? Phys. Rev. 1935, 47: 777.
 [2] SCHRÖDINGER E. Discussion of time-probability relations between separated systems,
    mathematical proceedings of the cambridge philosophical society. Cambridge University Press,
    1935, 31(4): 555.
 [3] BOHM D. Quantum theory. New York: Pretence- Hall, 1951.
 [4] BELL J. On Einstien-Podolsy-Rosen paradox. Physics, 1964, 1: 195.
 [5] Y.   Shi,   The    road   of   quantum   entanglement:     from   Einstein   to   2022   Nobel
    Prize in Physics,      Chinese Journal of Nature 44 (6),           455-465 (2022),    available
    at https://www.nature.shu.edu.cn/CN/10.3969/j.issn.0253-9608.2022.06.005. The video of
    the talk at the 2022 Fall meeting of Chinese Physical Socity is available at
    https://www.koushare.com/live/details/12750?vid=37918
 [6] SHI Y. Prof. C. N. Yang and quantum entanglement in particle physics, proceedings of the
    conference in honor of C N Yang’s 85th birthday. Ed: Ge M L, Oh C H, Phua K K. Singapore:
    World Scientific, 2008, p. 521.
 [7] WHEELER J. Polyelectrons. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., 1946, 48: 219.
 [8] PRYCE M H L, WARD J C. Angular correlation effects with annihilation radiation. Nature,
    1947, 160: 435.
 [9] SNYDER H, PASTERNACK S, HORNBOSTEL J. Angular correlation of scattered annihi-
    lation radiation. Phys. Rev. 1948, 73: 440.
[10] WARD J C. Memoirs of a theoretical physicist. Opt. J., 2014.
[11] DOMBEY N. WARD J C. Biographical memoires of fellows of royal society. Opt. J., 2021,
    70, 419.
[12] DALITZ R H, DUARTE F J. John Clive Ward. Phys. Today, 2000, 53(10): 99.

                                               22
[13] SHI Y. How the ghost particles the neutrinos appeared. Chinese Journal of Science 2019,
    71(5): 46.
[14] SHI Y. Clarification of early history of neutrino. Mod. Phys. Lett., 2016, 31: 1630043.
[15] LEE T D, YANG C N. Statistical theory of equations of state and phase transitions. II. Lattice
    gas and Ising model. Phys. Rev., 1952, 87(3): 410.
[16] YANG C N. Selected papers 1945-1980 with commentary[ M]. Beijing: Company Publishers,
    1983.
[17] SHI Y. The Guard of Science: Steven Weinberg. Journal of Low Temperature Physics, 2022,
    44: 251.
[18] OPPENHEIMER J R, SNYDER H S. On continued gravitational contraction. Phys. Rev.,
    1939, 56: 455.
[19] SNYDER H S. Quantized space-time. Phys. Rev., 1947, 67: 38.
[20] YANG C N. On quantized space-time. Phys. Rev., 1947, 72: 874.
[21] COURANT E D, LIVINGSTON M S, SNYDER H S. The strong-focusing synchrotron - a
    new high energy accelerator. Phys. Rev., 1952, 88(5): 1190.
[22] COURANT E D, SNYDER H S. Theory of the alternating-gradient synchrotron. Ann. Phys.,
    2000, 3: 360.
[23] HARTLAND S. Snyder orbitury. Phys. Today, 1962, 15: 78.
[24] CREASE R P, MANN C C. The second creation. New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1986.
[25] BROWN L.. The birth of particle physics. Ed: HODDESON L, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
    versity Press, 1983.
[26] GOUDSMIT S A. Simon Pasternack. Phys. Today 29, 4, 87 (1976).
[27] WU C S, SHAKNOV I. The Angular correlation of scattered annihilation radiation. Phys.
    Rev., 1950, 77: 136.
[28] YANG C N. Selection rules for the dematerialization of a particle into two photons. Phys.
    Rev., 1950, 77: 242.
[29] SCHR?DINGER E. Die gegenwartige situation in der quantenmechanik. Naturwissenschaften,
    1935, 23: 807.
[30] SCHR?DINGER E. Probability relations between separated systems. Mathematical Proc.
    Cambridge Phil. Soc., 1936, 32: 446.




                                               23
[31] FURRY W H. Note on the quantum-mechanical theory of measurement. Phys. Rev., 1936,
    49: 393.
[32] FURRY W H. Remarks on measurements in quantum theory. Phys. Rev., 1936, 49: 476.
[33] BOHM D, AHARONOV Y. Discussion of experimental proof for the paradox of Einstein,
    Rosen, and Podolsky. Phys. Rev., 1957, 108: 1070.
[34] YANG C N. C S Wu’s contributions: a retrospective in 2015. Int. J. Mod. Phys. A, 2015, 30:
    1530050.
[35] BROMBERG J. A. Shimony interview[DB/OL]. [2022- 05-20]. https://www.aip.org/history-
    programs/nielsbohr- library/roal-histories/25096.
[36] CLAUSER J F, HORNE M A, SHIMONY A, HOLT R A. Proposed experiment to test local
    hiddenvariable theories. Phys. Rev. Lett., 1969, 23: 880.
[37] CLAUSER J F. Early History of Bell’s Theorem, Quantum [Un]speakable: from bell to quan-
    tum information. Ed: BERTLMANN R, ZEILINGER A. Berlin: Springer, 2002.
[38] WICK D. The infamous boundary seven decades of heresy in quantum physics. New York:
    Springer, 1998.
[39] KASDAY L R, ULLMAN J D, WU C S. Angular correlation of compton-scattered annihilation
    photons and hidden variables. Il Nuovo Cimento B (1971-1996), 1975, 25: 633.
[40] LAMEHI-RACHTI M, MITTIG W. Quantum mechanics and hidden variables: a test of Bell’s
    inequality by the measurement of the spin correlation in low-energy proton-proton scattering.
    Phys. Rev. D, 1976, 14: 2543.
[41] LEE T D, YANG C N. Question of parity conservation in weak interactions. Phys. Rev., 1956,
    104: 254.
[42] SHI Y, Beautyof Physics: Scientific Contributions of ChenNingYang, Journal of Low Temper-
    ature Physics, 2022, 44: 1; SHI Y. Beauty and Physics:13 important contributions of Chen
    NingYang, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 29 (17),1475001 (2014).
[43] LEE T D, OEHME R, YANG C N. Remarks on possible noninvariance under time reversal
    and charge conjugation[ J]. Phys. Rev., 1957, 106: 340.
[44] GELL-MANN M, PAIS A. Behavior of neutral particles under charge conjugation. Phys. Rev.,
    1955, 97: 1387.
[45] GOLDHABER M, LEE T D, YANG C N. Decay modes of a (θ + θ̄) system. Phys. Rev., 1958,
    112: 1796.


                                              24
[46] INGLIS D R. Completeness of quantum mechanics and charge-conjugation correlations of
    theta particles. Rev. Mod. Phys., 1961, 33: 1.
[47] DAY T B. Demonstration of quantum mechanics in the large. Phys. Rev., 1961, 121: 1204.
[48] SHI Y. High energy quantum teleportation using neutral kaons. Phys. Lett., 2006, 75.
[49] SHI Y, WU Y L. CP measurement in quantum teleportation of neutral mesons. Euro. Phys.
    J. C, 2008, 55: 477.
[50] HUANG Z, SHI Y. Extracting rephase-invariant CP and CPT violating parameters from
    asymmetries of time-ordered integrated rates of correlated decays of entangled mesons. Euro.
    Phys. J. C, 2012, 72: 1900.
[51] SHI Y. Exact theorems concerning CP and CPT violating in C = ?1 entangled state of
    pseudoscalar neutral mesons. Euro. Phys. J. C, 2012, 72: 1907.
[52] SHI Y. Some exact results on CP and CPT violations in a C = ?1 entangled pseudoscalar
    neutral meson pair. Euro. Phys. J. C, 2013, 73: 2506.
[53] HUANG Z, SHI Y. CP and CPT violating parameters determined from the joint decays of C
    = +1 entangled neutral pseudoscalar mesons. Phys. Rev. D, 2014, 89: 016018.
[54] SHI Y, YANG J. Time reversal symmetry violation in entangled pseudoscalar neutral charmed
    mesons. Phys. Rev. D, 2018, 98: 075079.
[55] SHI Y, YANG J. Entangled baryons: violation of inequalities based on local realism assuming
    dependence of decays on hidden variables. Euro. Phys. J. C, 2020, 80: 116.
[56] SHI Y, YANG J. Particle physics violating cryptononlocal realism. Euro. Phys. J. C, 2020,
    80: 861.
[57] JAMMER M. The philosophy of quantum mechanics: the interpretations of quantum me-
    chanics in historical perspective. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1974.
[58] LEE T D. Are black holes black bodies?. Nucl. Phys. B, 1986, 264: 437.
[59] BELL M, GOTTFRIED K. John S Bell on the foundations of quantum mechanics. ED: VELT-
    MAN M. Singapore: World Scientific, 2001.




                                              25
