arXiv:2504.16978v1 [physics.hist-ph] 23 Apr 2025
                                                                    Scientific Spirit of Chien-Shiung Wu:
                                                            From Quantum Entanglement to Parity Nonconservation



                                                                                                Yu Shi
                                                    Wilczek Quantum Center, Shanghai Institute for Advanced Studies, Shanghai 201315, China
                                                              University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China
                                                               Department of Physics, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
                                                                                          yushi@fudan.edu.cn


                                                       In 1950, Chien-Shiung Wu and her student published a coincidence experiment on entan-
                                                       gled photon pairs that were created in electron-positron annihilation. This experiment
                                                       precisely verified the prediction of quantum electrodynamics. Additionally, it was also
                                                       the first instance of a precisely controlled quantum entangled state of spatially separated
                                                       particles, although Wu did not know about this at the time. In 1956, Wu initiated and led
                                                       the so-called Wu experiment, which discovered parity nonconservation, becoming one of
                                                       the greatest experiments of the 20th century. As Chen Ning Yang said, Wu’s experiments
                                                       were well known for their precision and accuracy. Experimental precision and accuracy
                                                       manifested Wu’s scientific spirit, which we investigate here in some detail. This paper is
                                                       the translated transcript of the speech the author made at the International Symposium
                                                       Commemorating the 110th Anniversary of the Birth of Chien-Shiung Wu, on May 31,
                                                       2022. The above abstract is the translation of the original abstract of the speech.

                                                       Keywords: Chien-Shiung Wu; quantum entanglement; electron-positron annihilation; en-
                                                       tangled photons; parity nonconservation

                                                       PACS Nos: 03.67.Mn, 12.20.Fv, 01.65.+g




                                                      This paper is the English written version of a speech at the International Sym-
                                                   posium Commemorating the 110th Birth Anniversary of Chien-Shiung Wu, held
                                                   on May 31, 2022 and organized by Southeast University (one of the descendents of
                                                   the alma mater of Wu), in which speeches were given by Chen Ning Yang, Tsung-
                                                   Dao Lee, Shing-Tung Yau, Wu’s son Vincent Yuan, along with many distinguished
                                                   physicists and scholars a .
                                                      We review the scientific contributions and scientific spirit of Chien-Shiung Wu. In

                                                   a A poster of this symposium and the pdf file of the slides of the present speech, with text

                                                   translated to English, are ancillary files available on the abstract page of the present paper
                                                   at arxiv.org. The program and the abstracts of speeches of the symposium are available at
                                                   https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/9l4FTpHErzS8IED-zqs6hQ. The video of the whole conference is
                                                   available at https://news.sciencenet.cn/htmlnews/2022/5/479979.shtm. The video of the present
                                                   speech is also available at https://www.koushare.com/video/details/164531. The Chinese slides
                                                   of the present speech are available at https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/lilZY3ClxvfP9Q8DSt2j_A.
                                                   The Chinese transcript was published in Micius Forum on June 2, 2023, available at
                                                   https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/inwKeaTyI9FxT-qEEgsKDA.


                                                                                                   1
                                         Y. Shi


particular, we emphasize the two contributions indicated in the title, i.e., quantum
entanglement and parity nonconservation.

1. Overview of Chien-Shiung Wu’s academic career and research
First, I give a comprehensive overview of all the research that Chien-Shiung Wu
performed throughout her academic career. For this purpose, I looked at all her
papers with the help of the Web of Science, so the references listed in the slides are
in the format of this database.

1.1. China
Chien-Shiung Wu graduated from the National Central University in 1934. Her the-
sis was entitled “Verification of the Bragg diffraction equation of X-rays in crystals”,1
and was supervised by Shih-Yuan Sze. After working for a year as a teaching assis-
tant in the Department of Physics at Chekiang University, with the recommendation
of the department head, T. C. Chang, she joined the Institute of Physics, Academia
Sinica, in Shanghai, where she studied gas spectroscopy under the supervision of Z.
W. Ku.2
    The fields of physics Chien-Shiung Wu was initially exposed to through her un-
dergraduate thesis work and one-year work in Shanghai were not in nuclear physics,
but had much in common with radioactivity. Shih-Yuan Sze, who was only three
years older than Chien-Shiung Wu, had worked on nuclear spectroscopy under the
supervision of Madame Curie, earning a Doctor of Science. This was also in the
same area as Wu’s later research on β rays and nuclear physics. Z. W. Ku was the
first female Doctor of Physics in China and studied spectroscopy under the guidance
of D. M. Dennison at the University of Michigan.
    As a result of Z. W. Ku’s recommendation and advice, Wu was admitted by the
University of Michigan to study at her own expense, and was financially supported
by her uncle. On her way to Michigan, Wu visited Berkeley, where she was so
impressed, especially by Ernest O. Lawrence’s cyclotron, that she wanted to stay
in Berkeley. The cyclotron had been invented by Lawrence, so it was an ideal place
for studying physics. Another important factor that influenced Wu’s decision was
that she cared a lot about gender equality, and there was gender discrimination
at the University of Michigan. In addition, there were a lot of Chinese students
at the University of Michigan at the time, and Wu didn’t want her socializing
be dominated by fellow Chinese students. So she stayed in Berkeley. Her decision
reflected her devotion to physics as a woman.

1.2. Berkeley
Let us now look at Wu’s PhD and postdoctoral work at Berkeley. Her PhD su-
pervisor was Ernest O. Lawrence, and Wu’s first published work was on β decay
under Lawrence’s guidance.3 The process β decay is the decay, governed by the weak

                                           2
                  From quantum entanglement to parity nonconservation


interaction, of neutrons into protons, antineutrinos and electrons, with the latter
called β rays. Wu studied X-rays excited by β rays and emitted by radioactive lead.
Interestingly, this part of her PhD linked her previous undergraduate thesis work
and the main area of her career, β decay, including her future experiment on parity
nonconservation.
    Wu proceeded to do research with Emilio Segrè for a few years, obtaining her
PhD in 1940, and then she stayed on with Segrè for a further two years as a postdoc.
She was Segrè’s first student after he moved to the United States from Italy. So while
her nominal PhD supervisor was Lawrence, Segrè was her mentor.
    One of the very important pieces of work of Wu under Segrè’s supervision,
which was another part of her PhD thesis work, was to study the radioactivity of
xenon. This was produced in the fission of uranium, by using neutrons produced in
cyclotrons, and involved identifying two radioactive isotopes of xenon. This work
was published as two papers in 1940.4, 5 Some data from that work was unpublished
at that time because of confidentiality considerations.
    Later, this data played a large role in the Manhattan Project, which was the
programme to develop the world’s first atomic bomb during World War II. It was
discovered, that in nuclear reactors, the chain reaction producing plutonium from
uranium and xenon was hindered or even stopped soon after it started, and was
commonly known as “poisoning”. Enrico Fermi and others found that this was be-
cause the xenon absorbed neutrons, which were needed in large quantities for the
chain reaction to continue. So the data on the absorption of neutrons by xenon
isotopes were needed, which Segrè disclosed had been obtained by the pre-war work
of Wu and himself. Plutonium was the raw material for the plutonium bomb that
was later dropped in Hiroshima, and Wu’s data played a big role in this. In 1945,
Wu and Segrè used the results of the pre-war experiments to publish a paper.6
    During her postdoctoral period, Wu also used a cyclotron to produce neutrons
for the study of radioactive mercury, in collaboration with Gerhart Friedlander, a
graduate student of Professor (and future Nobel Prize winner) Glenn T. Seaborg.7, 8


1.3. 1942 - 1948 and Wartime work
After her postdoc work was completed Wu went, in 1942, to the eastern United
States and did two years’ teaching. The first year was at Smith College (a women’s
college), where Nancy Reagan was studying theatre at that time. Also at Smith
was Xide Xie (later the President of Fudan University, in Shanghai), who came five
years later to do her master’s degree under the tutelage of Gladys Anslow, who had
known Wu at Berkeley and hired Wu at Smith.2 Wu carried out her second year
of teaching at Princeton University, where she taught a group of military officers
for a few months. Thanks to the influence of Lawrence, who won the Nobel Prize
in 1939 and played an important role in Manhattan Project, Wu joined Columbia
University in 1944 working on the Manhattan Project and she stayed on after the
war.

                                          3
                                         Y. Shi


    Wu worked in the department headed by John R. Dunning, who was an im-
portant figure in the Manhattan Project and was responsible for gaseous diffusion
separating uranium isotopes. Natural uranium is a mixture of two isotopes, 235
and 238, and to build a uranium bomb, it must be enriched with 235. However,
the uranium bomb later dropped on Nagasaki was made from electromagnetically
separated uranium 235 at the Oak Ridge Laboratory, rather than gaseous diffu-
sion separation. Later, two students of Dunning, James Rainwater and William W.
Havens Jr., went on to become professors at Columbia University before Wu, and
Rainwater received a Nobel Prize for his work on the theory of nuclear structure.
These three people were collaborators of Wu. For many years after the war, they
were acknowledged in Wu’s papers not coauthored by them. .
    They contributed a lot to the Manhattan Project, but because the wartime
work was classified, published a series of papers only after the war. From 1946 to
1948, they published about 8 papers on the slow neutron effect of hydrogen and
other elements. From 1947 to 1948, they published about 7 papers on sensitive
radioactive detectors of β rays, photons and other particles. Wu’s experience on
this research had a very deep influence on her later career. So in addition to her
pre-war data on xenon isotopes, Wu had a great deal of other work to contribute
directly to the Manhattan Project.
    These were essentially work done during the war, with papers published one
after the other after the war, some with extensions. This work has been often mis-
understood as having started after the war.


1.4. Wu’s β Decay Research Before the Parity Revolution
After the war, Wu also began to open up a new field, that of β decay. She studied
the physics of β decay, and compared her experiments with theory. Even before
discovering parity nonconservation in weak interactions, Wu had already published
about 53 papers on β decay or closely related subjects, such as the capture of
electrons by the atomic nucleus.
    Wu became a leading expert on β decay, and published more than 50 papers on
this subject decay during this period. Tsung-Dao Lee once said that in the field of β
decay, no one could compare with Chien-Shiung Wu.9 However, she only became an
associate professor in 19522 and a full professor in 19589 after the discovery of parity
nonconservation, probably because of unfair treatment she received as a woman.
    During this period, Wu’s most important work was the verification of Fermi’s
theory of β decay.10 This is one of the great theories in the history of physics and
was Fermi’s greatest theoretical contribution, extending quantum electrodynamics
to weak interactions at lower energies. Starting with the Fermi’s β-decay theory,
quantum field theory was transformed from a formal theory initially proposed by
Wigner and Pauli to a physical theory, making the creation and annihilation of par-
ticles physical concepts, and ultimately a theoretical framework for particle physics.
At that time there were also competing theories, such as those of Konopinski and

                                           4
                  From quantum entanglement to parity nonconservation


Uhlenbeck. Wu found that previous validation experiments had been done poorly,
with samples too thick. In her own experiment with R. D. Albert, in which cobalt 60
(60 Co) was attached to a thin layer, they was very careful and precise. She was ex-
perienced in making instruments and skilled in assembling and operating them, and
these played a great role in her work. Indeed, these strengths were very important
factors also in her later success.
    In the words of Chen Ning Yang, “Fermi’s theory was proved correct! Wu be-
came the leading scientist in the field of β decay experiments!".11 One can see the
meticulousness of Wu’s experiments, and her skills of assembling and operating the
instruments.

1.5. Positronium, electron-position annihilation and quantum
     entanglement
Prior to the discovery of parity violation, a relatively small amount of Wu’s work was
on electron-positron annihilation. An electron and a positron can form positronium,
which is similar to an atom-like structure, and which annihilates when the electron
and the positron come together. From 1950 to 1957, Wu published 6 papers on this
subject.
    The first work of Wu on this subject was to accurately verify the predictions
of quantum electrodynamics with her student Irving Shaknov.12 This paper was
submitted in the same year as the one testing Fermi theory, and published the
following year.
    In retrospect, this work is closely related to a currently active area, namely the
realisation of quantum entanglement of photon polarization. The purpose of Wu
and Shaknov was to test the predictions of quantum electrodynamics, however, it
also became a pioneering work on quantum entanglement. Later I will review more
about this work.

1.6. Parity nonconservation
Certainly, the most important work of Wu was the experiment on parity noncon-
servation, that was carried out with her collaborators in 1956 and early 1957, and
is known as the “Wu experiment”. In 1956, Chen Ning Yang and Tsung-Dao Lee
proposed the possibility of parity nonconservation in weak interactions, and sug-
gested a few experiments.13 Thanks to their discussions with Wu and Goldhaber,
one of the suggested experiments was the β decay of polarized cobalt 60 nuclei. In
collaboration with several low-temperature physicists at the U.S. Bureau of Stan-
dards, Wu completed the experiment and found that parity was not conserved ,14
which was a revolutionary breakthrough. Being polarized means that the spin of
the nuclei has a definite value. Whether or not parity is conserved was shown here
by whether or not the number of electrons decaying out of the nuclei, along and
against the direction of the spin of the nuclei, are equal. The Wu experiment found
that they were not equal.

                                          5
                                        Y. Shi


   We note that β decay of cobalt 60 had already been studied by Wu in testing
Fermi theory.10

1.7. Wu’s research after parity revolution
Chien-Shiung Wu kept up with the times, and did a lot of work after the parity
revolution.
    In 1957, Wu published a paper on gas scintillation counters for detecting slow
neutrons.
    Wu continued to work on β decay for many more years. From 1962 to the 1985,
she published about 16 papers on β decay, including pioneering work on double β
decay. The subject of double β decay is still a frontier in particle physics today,
because if there are no neutrinos in double β decay, the neutrinos are Majorana
fermions, which are the antiparticles of themselves, so that the neutrinos produced
by one β decay are immediately absorbed by the other β decay. This problem is so
far inconclusive, and experiments are still being done.
    The most important work of Wu in β decay during this period was on the so-
called vector current conservation, which she and her students confirmed in 1963.
    In the 1970s Wu did a lot of work with the Mössbauer effect to study haemoglobin
or other substances. From 1973 to 1978, she published about 15 papers on the
subject. In this way, Wu was also a pioneer in the field of biological physics.
    In the 1970s and 1980s, Wu also worked on so-called exotic atoms, in which
an electron is replaced by another particle, such as muon, pion or another meson.
People studied the interaction between this particle and the nucleus. From 1974 to
1984, Wu published about 23 papers on exotic atoms and muon capture of nuclei.
    In the 1970s, Wu returned to electron-positron annihilation. It was noted that her
previous work with Shaknov showed the existence of quantum entanglement. After
the Bell inequality was proposed, Wu and students tried extending their previous
work into one that tested Bell’s inequality, and published a paper in 1975. We will
review it below.
    Wu also worked on techniques of nuclear orientation. In the 1957 experiment she
led on parity nonconservation, where it was crucial to polarize the nucleus. This is
also called nuclear orientation, i.e., to orientate the spin of the nucleus, which was
achieved by cryogenic techniques. Later on, Wu specialized in this technique and its
application in nuclear physics, especially for the study of nuclear structure. From
1976 to 1985, She published about six papers on this subject.

1.8. Conservation of vector current
In 1956 Yang and Lee raised the possibility that the parity may not be conserved in
weak interactions, and then the experiment led by Wu found that parity is indeed
not conserved. So what exactly does a weak interaction theory look like? How to
develop a theory of weak interactions? How to extend and improve Fermi’s β decay
theory into a general weak interaction theory? Three groups of scientists at the

                                          6
                  From quantum entanglement to parity nonconservation


time proposed vector-axial vector theories, also called universal Fermi interaction
theories. One of these groups was Feynman and Gell-Mann, whose theory had a key
assumption called conservation of vector current, which explained that the coupling
constants for different weak decays, e.g. β and µ decays, were equal. This is because
the protons and neutrons in the nucleus have to be renormalized, so some imaginary
particles are created, which also have to take part in the weak interaction. The
consequence is that the vector current is conserved, resulting in the same coupling
constants for β and muon decays.
    Gell-Mann pointed out that the theoretical assumption of conservation of vector
current leads to the so-called weak magnetism. This is similar to the difference in
magnetic moments of protons and neutrons in quantum electrodynamics, and can
be verified by direct experimental measurements using decays of 12 B and 12 N . But
the experiments had been unsuccessful.
    Enter Wu in 1963. Wu and her students Y.K. Lee and L.W. Mo completed such
an experiment,15 which confirmed weak magnetism, thus verifying the conservation
of vector current and contributing to the establishment of the electroweak unification
theory.
    Wu once concluded in a review article: “The conserved vector current hypothesis
for weak interactions has been confirmed experimentally and has served as a guiding
principle for the modern gauge theory of strong and weak interactions, where it is
predicted as a necessary consequence of vector gauge theory.” 16 Wu was at the
forefront of the subject as an experimental physicist.
    In a retrospect at 2015, Yang listed four papers of Chien-Shiung Wu, the one
verifying Fermi theory, the one on photon correlation or quantum entanglement,
the one on parity violation, and the one on conserved vector current.11


1.9. President of the American Physical Society
Chien-Shiung Wu served as the President of the American Physical Society from
1975 to 1976. One of her articles is her speech as President in 1976,17 from which
we can learn what American physicists were doing at that time. Nuclear Physics:
understanding the charge distribution of atomic nuclei through electron scattering;
scattering of protons by atomic nuclei; atomic nuclei absorbing pions and jumping
to rotating highly excited states; µ atoms (an exotic atom with a muon replacing an
electron in the atom) verifying quantum electrodynamics; parity nonconservation
in nucleon scattering; heavy ion collisions to study rapidly rotating atomic nuclei,
nuclear disintegration. Cosmic rays: possible magnetic monopoles. Synchrotron ra-
diation applications in biology, solid state physics, chemistry. Biophysics: addition of
heavy atoms to protein molecules, X-ray diffraction; with respect to haemoglobin,
both synchrotron radiation and the Mössbauer spectra from Columbia group re-
vealed differences in various cases. Solid state physics: measuring local magnetic
fields in solids with muons. Particle physics: g − 2 experiments with muons to test
lepton universality; positronium; charmonium J/ψ.

                                           7
                                       Y. Shi


    Among the areas mentioned above, Wu’s own group was involved in the study
of exotic atoms; the magnetic monopole has not been found to the present day; the
study of haemoglobin by Mössbauer spectroscopy was a result of Wu’s own group;
the g − 2 experiment of muons to test lepton universality is an important area
that has continued to this day, with some most recent advances; the charmonium
(consisting of a charm quark and an anti-charm quark) was discovered by Samuel C.
C. Ting’s group and the Richter group in 1974, with the names J and ψ respectively,
and later called J/ψ, with Ting and Richter sharing the 1976 Nobel Prize in Physics.


2. Details of Wu’s work on electron-positron annihilation and
   quantum entanglement
We now look at the details of Wu’s early work on electron-positron annihilation and
quantum entanglement.
    In 1946, in order to test quantum electrodynamics, John Wheeler suggested to
study the annihilation of positroniums, each consisting of a positron and an elec-
tron, and to probe the photon pairs created. The annihilation comes mainly from
the spin singlet state of the positronium, i.e., the quantum state with total spin
0. Therefore, if the orbital angular momentum is also 0, then the total angular
momentum is 0, thus for the two photons produced from the positronium annihila-
tion that are moving in opposite directions, the linear polarizations of the photons
must be orthogonal to each other. In today’s terms, these two photons are quantum
entangled.
    Wheeler considered that each photon enters a crystal separately, and is scattered
by electrons, thus changes the direction of motion, and is then detected separately.
There are various possibilities for the direction in which each photon is scattered,
and Wheeler proposed to study the asymmetry between the probabilities of the
scattering directions being perpendicular and being parallel (defined as the differ-
ence between the two divided by the sum of the two) if the scattering angles of
the two photons are equal (the scattering angle is the deviation from the incoming
direction). The asymmetry is related both to the scattering angle and to the differ-
ence between the azimuthal angles of the two photons. Further careful calculations
were made by the group of J. C. Ward and M. Pryce and by the group of H. Snyder,
S. Pasternack and J. Hornbostel. It was calculated that the asymmetry reaches the
maximum 2.85 when the scattering angle is 85◦ .
    Before Wu, experiments by others had been done, but none were good. In 1949,
Wu and Shaknov gave the final word (published on the first day of 1950). Using a
photon detector 10 times more sensitive than the others, they did an experiment
that well confirmed the theory.12 In considering the angular spread around the
optimal angle, the maximum of asymmetry is 2.00. The Wu-Shaknov experimental
value was 2.4 ± 0.08.
    In 1935, Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen proposed that quantum mechanics does
not satisfy the so-called local realism, which is analogous to classical probability

                                         8
                  From quantum entanglement to parity nonconservation


theory, where it is assumed that there is an objective reality behind the probabil-
ities, even though we do not know the values of certain variables. Could quantum
mechanics be reduced to such a situation? Einstein said no. But he felt that local
realism always holds and cannot be violated, so he said that there were problems
with quantum mechanics and that it was not yet a complete theory. Their argument
used quantum entangled states, although they didn’t use the term quantum entan-
glement. After their paper was published, Schrödinger coined the term quantum
entanglement.
     In 1957, the year of the discovery of the parity nonconservation, David Bohm
and his student Yakir Aharonov pointed out18 that the experiment of Wu and
Shaknov had produced an entangled state of photon polarization, and that Bohm
and Aharonov had used the term “correlation” to stand for quantum entanglement
and demonstrated that the experimental results of Wu and Shaknov would not
have been possible if the photons had not been entangled (or “correlated” in their
term). This is why the work of Wu is so relevant to quantum entanglement. The
experiment of Wu and Shaknov was the first experimental realization of a spatially
well-separated quantum entangled state.
     From today’s viewpoint of quantum entanglement, Wu-Shaknov result showed
that the two photons were indeed quantum entangled, that is, instead of a product of
separate quantum states of individual photons, and hence independent of each other,
the quantum state of the two photons is a single entity √12 (|hi|vi − |vi|hi), where
|hi and |vi are horizontal and vertical polarized states of each photon, respectively.
     In the 1964, John Bell proposed an inequality that is always satisfied by local
realism (hidden variable theories), which came to be known as Bell’s inequality, and
there are some entangled states in quantum mechanics that violate Bell’s inequality,
so if it is experimentally shown that Bell’s inequality is indeed violated, in agreement
with quantum mechanics, then it implies that there is something wrong with local
realism.
     In order to test Bell’s inequality, an experimental setup needs to satisfy certain
conditions, where the polarizations measured on both sides are neither parallel nor
perpendicular. However, the polarizations measured in the experimental setup of
Wu and Shaknov could only be either parallel or perpendicular to each other, so
could not be used to test Bell’s inequality.
     In 1975, Wu decided to return to this field and with two students, L. R. Kasday,
J. D. Ullman, and measured coincidence of two photons in a wide range of polar and
azimuthal angles, which can be neither parallel nor perpendicular to each other, and
obtained the experimental result.19 The experimental result could be regarded as a
demonstration of quantum entanglement, being consistent with the entangled state
and contradict the non-entangled state. But can this result be used to test Bell’s in-
equality? In fact, it cannot be used to genuinely test the inequality because here the
detection of the photons is through Compton scattering, and after Compton scatter-
ing, the direction of flight of each photon is not locked to its polarization direction,
i.e. the flight direction does not in one to one correspondence to the direction of

                                           9
                                             Y. Shi


polarization, but there is a probability distribution. Indeed, calculation based on
local realism can also give the results of Compton scattering. Nevertheless, if two
additional assumptions are made: (1) the polarization can be measured perfectly,
(2) the quantum mechanical formulation of Compton scattering is correct, then the
experimental results are consistent with quantum mechanics and inconsistent with
Bell’s inequality.
    Later studies of entangled photons were done with low-energy photons that
could be measured directly with a polarizer b . High-energy photons can destroy the
polarizers. Contemporary quantum information science is booming and low energy
photons are among the major agents of it.


3. Details on parity nonconservation
Now we look into the details of the discovery of parity nonconservation in weak
interactions.
    In 1956, one of the mysteries at the forefront of particle physics was the θ − τ
puzzle. The θ and τ are two strange particles with the same mass and same lifetime,
so appear to be a same particle, but they decay differently, into 2 and 3 pions
respectively. In particle physics, the parity of each particle is 1 or −1, and the total
parity of a group of particles is the product of the parities of all these particles. Now,
the parity of each pion is −1, so if one assumes that the total parity is conserved
during the decay process, one can deduce that the parities of θ and τ are not the
same, being 1 and −1 respectively. So there are two possibilities. One possibility is
that the two particles are the same particle, and parity is not conserved. The other
possibility is that the parity is conserved but the two particles are different, however
it is then hard to understand why they have exactly the same mass and lifetime.
At that time, there was a confusion of ideas in the physics community, and whether
or not parity is conserved was discussed without distinguishing different kinds of
interactions.
    The ideas of Chen Ning Yang (then based in Institute for Advanced Study at
Princeton, but was at Brookhaven Laboratory for an extended visit) and Tsun-Dao
Lee (at Columbia University) were as follows.20, 21 Regarding parity, one should
distinguish between two kinds of processes, one is the kind of processes of particle

b In a few months after the present speech, 2022 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to Alain

Aspect, John Clauser and Anton Zeilinger, “for experiments with entangled photons, establish-
ing the violation of Bell inequalities and pioneering quantum information science”. I further dis-
cussed the historic role of Wu-Shaknov experiment in Y. Shi, The road of quantum entangle-
ment: from Einstein to 2022 Nobel Prize in Physics, Chinese Journal of Nature 44 (6), 455-
465 (2022), available at https://www.nature.shu.edu.cn/CN/10.3969/j.issn.0253-9608.2022.06.005,
and Y. Shi, Historic origin of quantum entanglement in particle physics: C. S. Wu, T.
D. Lee, C. N. Yang and Other Predecessors, Micius Forum, March 17, 2023, available
at https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/gs3UxMjvXv1ert1kPu8npg; Y. Shi, Historic origin of quan-
tum entanglement in particle physics, Progress in Physics 43 (3), 57-67 (2023). available at
https://pip.nju.edu.cn/CN/10.13725/j.cnki.pip.2023.03.001.


                                               10
                   From quantum entanglement to parity nonconservation


production, which is dominated by strong interactions and conserves parity, and
the other is the kind of processes of particle decays, which is dominated by weak
interactions, in which whether the parity is conserved or not needs to be tested;
thus the θ − τ puzzle was extended to a general problem of weak interactions,
that is, a problem in the whole area of weak interactions, allowing the possibility
that parity is conserved in strong and electromagnetic interactions, but may not be
conserved in weak interactions. Therefore knowledge on this problem can be gained
by studying other weak interaction processes. If the weak interactions violate parity
conservation, then θ and τ could be the same particle, decaying into different final
states with different parities, and the θ − τ puzzle would be resolved. They sorted
out the problem.
    Yang and Lee turned to other systems dominated by weak interactions. The
most studied process of weak interactions is β decay, so they studied whether or
not parity is conserved in β decay. This was a major strategic shift that played a
key role in the final victory.
    First, they naturally examined whether previous experiments on β decay had
already decided whether or not parity is conserved. They did specific calculations.
In weak interactions, in addition to parity-conserving terms, they took into account
additional terms that did not conserve parity, and then calculated the experimen-
tally observable quantities, especially the distribution of electrons produced from β
decay.
    Tsung-Dao Lee and Chien-Shiung Wu were both in the physics department at
Columbia University, so in May, Lee went to talk to Wu, an expert on β decay,
who lent Lee the anthology on β decay edited by K. Siegbahn. Yang had worked
together with Jayme Tiomno on β decay in 1950, and the experience and results
came in handy. In fact, this Lee-Yang parity paper cited the Yang-Tiomno paper.
    The calculations by Yang and Lee showed that whether or not parity is conserved
does not affect the results of previous experiments, which thereby cannot be used
as evidence of parity conservation (an exception was unearthed later in 1959). They
later realized that the reason was that these previous experiments measured scalars,
which always remained constant under parity transformation, i.e. spatial inversion
or reflection, and did not involve pseudoscalars, which reverse the signs under parity
transformation, i.e. spatial inversion or reflection, so the previous experiments, had
not really tested parity conservation; if the pseudoscalars were measured, whether
or not they remained unchanged under spatial inversion or reflection depended on
whether or not parity is conserved, and this was what needed to be experimentally
test.
    They noted that one such pseudoscalar is what is now called helicity, which is
the average of the component of some momentum in some spin direction, or vice
versa. If parity is conserved, then the helicity is 0; if parity is not conserved, then the
helicity is nonzero. They realized that a simple way of verifying this is to measure,
for β decay of a nucleus with a given spin (called a polarized nucleus), whether it
emits as many electrons upwards as it does downwards.

                                            11
                                       Y. Shi


    In Brookhaven Laboratory, Maurice Goldhaber told Yang that nuclei had al-
ready been polarized by low temperature techniques. In Columbia, Lee asked Chien-
Shiung Wu whether pseudoscalar quantities like helicity had been measured. Wu
said no, only scalar quantities had been measured, and asked whether anyone had
any idea on it. Lee mentioned polarized nuclei from reactors. Wu had great mis-
giving about this approach, and suggested to use the cobalt 60 nuclei polarized
by the demagnetization method, which is just the low temperature technique. Wu
later recalled that she made this suggestion also because she had been following
this technique for several years, and the spin nature of cobalt 60 does not lead to a
reduction of possible asymmetries in decay.22
    So polarized cobalt 60 became an experimental candidate that was discussed in
Lee-Yang paper. They also discussed mesons and hyperons as experimental candi-
dates. Firstly, parity nonconservation would lead to an electric dipole moment in
a Λ hyperon. Second, consider a pion impinging on a proton, producing a Λ hy-
peron,which then decays into a pion and a proton, and using the momenta of the
three particles, the incident pion, the Λ hyperon, and the product pion, to form a
vector triple product, which is a pseudoscalar. By measuring whether or not the
range of its values is symmetric, one can test for parity conservation. Thirdly, con-
sider that a pion decays into a muon, which further decays into an electron, and
if parity is not conserved, the spin of the muon is mostly along the direction of
motion, resembling a polarized nucleus, and the distribution of electrons from the
decay of muon is not symmetric.
    Immediately after Wu suggested the use of polarized cobalt 60 to Lee, it occurred
to Wu that this experiment was a golden opportunity for a β decay experimentalist
and should not be missed, and that even if the experiment would demonstrate
parity conservation, it would still be meaningful in giving an upper bound of parity
violation and thereby stopping conjectures about it. She also felt that she had to
do the experiment immediately before the rest of the physics community realised
the importance. For this reason she abandoned her original travel plan to attend an
international conference in Geneva and then return to the Far East, even though it
would have been her first trip back after 20 years away from China.
    Thus Wu began to prepare for the experiment. Firstly, in the new version of
the nuclear data, the spin of cobalt 60 was changed, meaning that it was not as
suitable as she had originally considered for testing parity conservation. Through
experimentation, Wu and her assistant determined that the new value of the spin
was incorrect and that the original one was correct. This also manifested the sci-
entific spirit of Wu, who did not follow the crowd. She also learnt low temperature
techniques from the low temperature group in her department.
    There were two difficulties in this experiment. One was to place the electron
detector in a cryostat at the liquid nitrogen temperature and have it work, and the
other was to place the sample of cobalt 60 in a surface layer that would remain
polarized for a sufficient period of time. The principle of polarization is that a
weak magnetic field at low temperatures causes the electrons in a paramagnetic

                                         12
                  From quantum entanglement to parity nonconservation


crystal to align themselves in a certain direction, which in turn, through hyperfine
interactions, causes the spin of the nucleus to align in that direction.
    On 4 June 1956, Wu telephoned Ernest Ambler of the National Bureau of Stan-
dards in Washington, D.C., inviting him to collaborate. Amber enthusiastically
accepted. The polarization of cobalt 60 had been achieved by the low-temperature
physics group led by Nicholas Kurti of Oxford University a few years earlier, and the
first author of the paper had been none other than Ambler, who had been Kurti’s
graduate student.
    In June and July, Wu tested the β detector, considering many technical issues.
The theoretical paper by Tsung-Dao Lee and Chen Ning Yang was submitted on
22 June. On 24 July, Wu called Ambler again, who sent a rough drawing of the
cryostat a few days later, and then went on holiday for two weeks, according to
Wu’s reminiscence later.22
    In August, Wu studied the effect of magnetic fields on β counting, and the
scattering of β particles by cerium magnesium nitrate (CMN) crystals.
    In mid-September, Wu went to the National Bureau of Standards in Washington,
D.C., to meet with Ambler for the first time, and was joined in the collaboration by
R. P. Hudson, R. W. Hayward, and D. D. Hoppes; Hudson had also been a student
of Kurti. On her third visit to the Bureau of Standards, Wu brought two CMN
crystals containing cobalt 60. A large number of CMN crystals were later grown at
Columbia University by Wu and her assistants.
    In mid-December, the collaborative group saw for the first time a very large
asymmetric signal, meaning that the number of electrons emitted upwards and
downwards were very different.
    But Wu felt that a systematic examination was needed to rule out other factors
before making an announcement to the public. She later recalled22 that one Thurs-
day, while walking past Lee’s office in the Pupin Building, the physics Building of
Columbia, she encountered Lee and Yang, and was asked about the experiment.
Wu told them that the effect was large and reproducible, but explained that it was
only a preliminary result. A week later, the collaborative group began to rule out
other possible factors.
    Wu also recalled22 that on Christmas Eve, in heavy snow, she arrived in New
York by train from Washington, D.C., and called Lee to tell that the asymmetry
parameter had almost reached −1, meaning that the vast majority of electrons were
moving in the direction opposite to the direction of the cobalt 60 polarization.
    This result showed the correctness of the two-component theory of neutrino, that
is, neutrinos are always left-handed while antineutrinos are always right-handed,
which had been worked out by Lee and Yang under the premise of parity noncon-
servation in the summer, but had not been submitted because it had not yet been
known experimentally whether parity is indeed nonconserved in weak interactions.
Now they submitted this paper, which was received on 10 January.23 On the other
hand, according to an analysis of the three discrete symmetries (parity, time re-
versal, and charge conjugation, i.e., positive-negative particles) just completed by

                                          13
                                       Y. Shi


Lee, Reinhard Oehme and Yang, the parity asymmetry is so large as found by Wu
experiments that the charge conjugation symmetry should be violated as well. The
theoretical paper by the three of them was received on 7 January.24 Thus, the
Wu experiment not only discovered that parity is indeed not conserved, but also
promoted the theoretical work of Lee and Yang.
     As mentioned earlier, Yang and Lee’s paper also suggested an experiment on the
decay from pion to muon and then to electron (π − µ − e), where the parity non-
conservation leads to an asymmetric distribution of electrons. The Nevis laboratory
affiliated with Columbia University regularly produced this process. At Brookhaven
Laboratory, when Yang met Leon M. Lederman from the Nevis Lab, Yang suggested
that Lederman to use the facilities at the latter’s hand to test parity conservation,
Lederman joked that he would do it if he had a smart graduate student as a slave.20
     Rumors about Wu experiment had spread during the Christmas holidays. On
4 January 1957, at a routine Friday Chinese luncheon of Columbia physics depart-
ment, Lee commented that Wu experiment had a large effect. Lederman attended
this luncheon. That evening, Richard L. Garwin, Lederman and Marcel Weinrich
began the π − µ − e experiment. The experiment was very simple, and the result
was very clear. At 6:00 a.m. on the 8th, Lederman called Lee: “the law of parity is
dead.” 25
     Now a crisis arose; Wu experiment promoted Lee-Yang theory and triggered
the π − µ − e experiment, but the final confirmation of the conclusions of the Wu
experiment itself had not yet been completed. The 2nd to the 9th of January was
the most stressful period for Wu’s collaborating group.
     Now the Garwin-Lederman-Weinrich experiment had been done, and although
Wu was not very happy, her group remained relentless until other factors were ruled
out and the results were fully confirmed. Wu recalled that at 2:00 a.m. on 9, the
group celebrated their overthrow of the law of parity.22
     On the morning of the 13th, in room 831 of the Physics Building at Columbia
University, Wu, Garwin, Lederman, Weinrich, Lee and Yang held a discussion meet-
ing.
     On 15 January, a press conference was held at Columbia University, hosted by
Isidor Rabi, a senior member of the Physics Department, and attended by all the
members of the two experimental groups and Lee. The papers of the two groups
were received by Physical Review on the same day, and were published back to
back on 15 February, with Wu’s in the lead. The following day the New York Times
headlined.
     Parity nonconservation in weak interactions was discovered by Wu’s group. The
Garwin-Lederman-Weinrich experiment was done only after the results of Wu were
known. In addition, Valentine Telegdi of the University of Chicago had been working
independently on the π − µ − e experiment since the summer, but proceeded very
slowly, and after learning about the news about the Wu experiment and the Garwin-
Lederman-Weinrich experiment, rushed to submit a manuscript, which turned out
to be problematic and was published one issue late.

                                         14
                  From quantum entanglement to parity nonconservation


    Yang and Lee found, after specific calculations, that there was no previous ex-
perimental proof of parity conservation in weak interactions, and pointed out several
types of critical experiments to test whether parity is conserved in weak interactions.
However, they did not say that parity must be conserved or not, and in fact they
also proposed the parity doublet state in the framework of parity conservation to
solve the θ − τ puzzle. Whether or not parity is conserved requires an experimental
ruling.
    Parity conservation has long had an intuitive appeal and has been regarded
as natural, sacred, and very useful, especially in nuclear physics. As a result, the
parity paper of Yang and Lee was universally despised, disagreed with and even
ridiculed.26
    But it took great courage for Chien-Shiung Wu to decide to do a β decay exper-
iment on cobalt 60. In Yang’s words, the insight of Wu was unique. If the Lee-Yang
paper had given a clear theoretical prediction of whether or not parity is conserved
in weak interactions, there would have been many people rushing to do such exper-
iments instead.
    Wu’s initial decision to go ahead with the experiment and her insistence on con-
tinuing to verify the experimental result after the result of the Garwain-Lederman-
Weinrich experiment all demonstrated the greatness of Wu.
    The Wu experiment proved that parity is indeed non-conserved in β decay,
causing a huge shock to the entire physics community, and became one of the most
important experiments in physics in the 20th century.
    James W. Cronin, who won the 1980 Nobel Prize for his discovery of charge-
conjugation-parity (CP) nonconservation, once said, “The great discovery of Chien-
Shiung Wu started the golden age of particle physics.” It is a mistake and a pity
that the Nobel Prize was never awarded to Wu. Of course, the origin of this great
discovery was the pioneering theoretical work of Yang and Lee.
    When I was a student at Nanjing University, I had the privilege of listening to a
lecture given by Wu as an alumnus of the University, and I still remember the scene
when she said the English word ball, probably talking about the cobalt 60 nucleus.


4. Chien-Shiung Wu: A Great Experimental Physicist
In conclusion, Chien-Shiung Wu was a great experimental physicist.
    We can summarize some of the qualities of Chien-Shiung Wu: intelligent, calm,
diligent, hard-working, focused, undaunted by difficulties, and dedicated to science.
She has done what her father said when she was a child: “Fear no difficulties, work
hard, and keep moving forward”.
    As Chen Ning Yang said, “The research works of Ms Chien-Shiung Wu were well
known for their precision and accuracy”. This is related to characteristic of many
Chinese women, but it is also a manifestation of her scientific spirit. I hope this
encourage more women to devote themselves to science.
    Wu’s research areas and achievements were closely related to her years of expe-

                                          15
                                        Y. Shi


rience and expertise. She attached importance to the development of experimental
techniques and instruments, as well as to physical significance, following impor-
tant theories and verifying them with experiments. She has been working in related
fields, especially β decay, since her student days.
    Her experimental work had significant theoretical implications, such as verifying
Fermi’s theory of β decay, the prediction of quantum electrodynamics on photon
coincidence and quantum entanglement, parity nonconservation, conservation of
vector current, and double β decay, indicating that she kept track of the cutting-
edge theories of the time.
    Whether she had to falsify or confirm an important theory, she went for it,
believing that even if it seemed obvious to common sense, if experimental evidence
was lacking, it was worth doing.
    I think the most valuable thing of all: putting scientific rigour above competition
and honour. This is a great example of her scientific spirit. She was competitive,
but worked under scientific rigour even when priority and credit were at stake. She
insisted on double-checking her own results when priority and credit were at risk,
and when others had already obtained very clear experimental results. This is very
valuable. Indeed, the Wu experiment on parity nonconservation, while respected
for publication, did suffer from a loss of priority. This was one of the factors in
her losing the Nobel Prize. If the Garwin-Lederman-Weinrich experiment had not
existed, there would have been a larger possibility that she would have shared the
Nobel Prize with Yang and Lee, and the other factors for not winning the Nobel
Prize would have been difficult to work.
    Chen Ning Yang’s comment on Chien-Shiung Wu quoted above was from a
eulogy written by Yang in April 1997 following Wu’s death in February that year
(translated from Chinese by Yang himself): “The research works of Ms Chien-Shiung
Wu were well known for their precision and accuracy. But her great success was
down to another more fundamental reason: in 1956, people did not want to do
experiments to test parity conservation. Why was she willing to do this such a
difficult experiment? Because she had the penetrating perception that even if parity
conservation is not overthrown, this fundamental law of nature must be tested. Here
resides her greatness.”
    Later, Yang also wrote: “I once said that there are three necessary conditions
for success in scientific research: Perception,Persistence, and Power. Chien-Shiung
Wu satisfied all these three conditions. Her experiment on parity nonconservation
met with many difficulties. The 9th chapter of the Biography of Chien-Shiung Wu
vividly describes how she persevered and overcame all kinds of difficulties with her
Power. The most important thing was her vision: at that time, many other first-rate
physicists thought that such a difficult experiment was not worth doing because it
was just another proof that the parity is indeed conserved. But she had the unique
insight that the conservation or not of parity in weak interactions had not been
studied in the past, so it was a worthwhile experiment regardless of the results.
This is where her vision was exceptional.” 27

                                          16
                   From quantum entanglement to parity nonconservation


    Tsung-Dao Lee said: “She was one of the most outstanding physicists of the
20th century, who made great achievements in experimental physics research and
played an extremely important role in advancing the development of contemporary
physics.” 9
    Lee also said: “When Madam Curie passed away, Albert Einstein once wrote,
‘At a time when a towering personality has come to the end of her life, let us not
merely rest content with recalling what she has given to mankind in the fruits of
her work. It is the moral qualities of its leading personalities that are perhaps of
even greater significance for a generation and for the course of history than purely
intellectual accomplishments · · · Her strength,her purity of will · · · her objectivity,
her incorruptible judgment, all these were of a kind seldom found joined in a single
individual · · · Once she had recognized a certain way as the right one, she pursued
it without compromise and with extreme tenacity.’ I think that in remembering
Chien-Shiung Wu, it is only fitting that we apply to her the words of Einstein
praising Madame Curie.” 9
    The scientific life of Chien-Shiung Wu is situated in the context of 20th century
history of China and the world. Segrè, the mentor of Wu, wrote a passage about Wu,
Yang and Lee, which was later quoted by Yang in his speeches: “This trio of Chinese
physicists shows what China’s future contribution to physics could be if that great
country overcomes the period of revolutionary convulsions and resumes its historic
role as one of the leaders of civilization, as witnessed by the early European travelers,
to their astonishment.” 28

Acknowledgment
Throughout the years, I have made numerous discussions with Prof. Chen Ning Yang
regarding topics covered in this speech. Prof. Yang encouraged me to write contri-
butions of Chien-Shiung Wu, including her early work on quantum entanglement,
leading to my English note written in early 202229 and the present speech. This
work is supported by National Nature Science Foundation (Grant No. T2241005
and No. 12447214).

References
 1. H. Yang, Madame Curie’s Chinese disciple (in Chinese), Modern Physics Knowledge
    19(6), 67-68 (2007).
 2. T. C. Chiang, C.S. Wu: The First Lady of Physical Science (in Chinese), Fudan
    University Press, Shanghai 1997. English Translation: T. C. Chiang, tranlated by T.
    F. Wong, Madame Wu Chien-Shiung: The First Lady of Physics Research, World
    Scientific, Singapore (2014).
 3. C. S. Wu, The continuous x-rays excited by the β-particles of P-15 (32), Phys. Rev.
    59 (6),481-488 (1941).
 4. C. S. Wu and E. Segrè, Some fission products of uranium, Phys. Rev. 57 (6), 552-552
    (1940).
 5. C. S. Wu, Identification of two radioactive xenons from uranium fission, Phys. Rev.
    58 (10), 926-926 (1940).

                                           17
                                         Y. Shi


 6. C. S. Wu and E. Sègre, Radioactive Xenons, Phys. Rev. 67 (5-6), 142-149 (1945)
 7. C. S. Wu and G. Friedlander, Radioactive isotopes of mercury, Phys. Rev. 60(10),
    747-748 (1941).
 8. G. Friedlander and C. S. Wu, Radioactive isotopes of mercury, Phys. Rev. 63(7/8),
    0227-0234 (1943).
 9. Tsung-Dao Lee, Chien-Shiung Wu and the experiment on parity nonconservation,
    Science (Chinese) 49 (5), 3-10 (1998).
10. C. S. Wu and R. D. Albert, The β-ray spectra of Cu64 and ratio of N+ /N− , Phys.
    Rev. 75 (7) , 1107-1108 (1949).
11. C. N. Yang, C. S. Wu’s Contributions: a Retrospective in 2015, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A
    30 (20), 1530050 (2015).
12. C. S. Wu and I. Shaknov, The angular correlation of scattered annihilation, Phys.
    Rev. 77(1), 136-136 (1950).
13. T. D. Lee and C. N. Yang, Question of parity conservation in weak interactions. Phys.
    Rev. 104 (1), 254-258 (1956).
14. C. S. Wu, E. Ambler, R. W. Haywood, D. D. Hoppes and R. P. Hudson, Experimental
    Test of Parity Conservation in Beta Decay, Phys. Rev. 105(4), 1413-1415 (1957).
15. Y. K. Lee, L. W. Mo and C. S. Wu, Experimental test of conserved vector current
    theory on β spectra of B12 and N12, Phys. Rev. Lett. 10 (6), 253 (1963).
16. C. S. Wu, The Universal Fermi Interaction and the Conserved Vector Current in Beta
    Decay, Rev. Mod. Phys. 36, 618-632 (1964).
17. Chien-Shiung Wu, The state of US physics-1976, Physics Today 29, 23-30 (1976).
18. D. Bohm, Y. Aharonov, Discussion of Experimental Proof for the Paradox of Einstein,
    Rosen, and Podolsky, Phys. Rev. 108, 1070 (1957).
19. L. R. Kasday, J. D. Ullman and C. S. Wu, Angular correlation of compton-scattered
    annihilation photons and hidden variables, Nuovo Cimento B 25(2), 633-661 (1975).
20. C. N. Yang, Selected Papers 1945-1980 With Commentary (W. H. Freeman and Com-
    pany Publishers, 1983).
21. G. Feinberg (Ed.), T.D. Lee: Selected Papers. Volume 3, Birkhauser, Boston, 1986.
22. B. Maglich (Ed.), Adventures in experimental Physics, γ Volume, World Science Ed-
    ucation (January 1, 1973).
23. T. D. Lee and C. N. Yang, Parity Nonconservation and a Two-Component Theory of
    the Neutrino, Phys. Rev. 105, 1671 (1957).
24. T. D. Lee, R. Oehme and C. N. Yang, Remarks on possible noninvariance under time
    reversal and charge conjugation, Phys. Rev. 106 (2), 340-345 (1957).
25. L. Lederman and D. Teresi, The God Particle, (Houghton Mifflin, New York, 1993).
26. Y. Shi, 13 important scientific contributions of Chen Ning Yang, Physics (Chinese),
    43 (1), 57-62 (2014); Yu Shi, Beauty and physics: 13 important contributions of Chen
    Ning Yang, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 29, 1475001 (2014); Yu Shi, Brief Overview of C. N.
    Yang’s 13 Important Contributions to Physics, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 30, 36 (2015).
27. C. N. Yang’s Dawning Volume (Chinese), ed. F. Weng (World Scientific, Singapore,
    2008).
28. E. Segrè, From X-rays to Quarks: Modern Physicists and Their Discoveries, (Dover
    Publication, Mineola, 2007).
29. Y. Shi, Chien-Shiung Wu as the experimental pioneer in quantum entangle-
    ment: A 2022 note, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 40, 2530001 (2025); also available at
    https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.06458




                                           18
