                                                                                                                 NSF-KITP-09-110




                                             Holography from Conformal Field Theory

                                        Idse Heemskerk1 , Joao Penedones2 , Joseph Polchinski2 , James Sully1




arXiv:0907.0151v3 [hep-th] 5 Oct 2009
                                                        1
                                                            Department of Physics, University of California,
                                                                Santa Barbara, California 93106, USA
                                                               2
                                                                   Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics
                                                             Santa Barbara, California 93106-4030, USA




                                                                                Abstract

                                            The locality of bulk physics at distances below the AdS length scale is one of the
                                        remarkable aspects of AdS/CFT duality, and one of the least tested. It requires that the
                                        AdS radius be large compared to the Planck length and the string length. In the CFT
                                        this implies a large-N expansion and a gap in the spectum of anomalous dimensions.
                                        We conjecture that the implication also runs in the other direction, so that any CFT
                                        with a large-N expansion and a large gap has a local bulk dual. For an abstract CFT
                                        we formulate the consistency conditions, most notably crossing symmetry, and show
                                        that the conjecture is true in a broad range of CFT’s, to first nontrivial order in 1/N 2 :
                                        in any CFT with a gap and a large-N expansion, the four-point correlator is generated
                                        via the AdS/CFT dictionary from a local bulk interaction. We establish this result
                                        by a counting argument on each side, and also investigate various properties of some
                                        explicit solutions.
1     Introduction

AdS/CFT duality maps a higher dimensional bulk into a lower dimensional boundary[1, 2, 3].
This means that excitations that are coincident in the boundary CFT may be far apart in
the bulk. From the point of view of the CFT they should be able to interact directly, but
the bulk picture makes it clear that they cannot. The purpose of this paper is to develop a
better understanding of this bulk locality from the boundary CFT point of view.

    In Sec. 2 we discuss general issues. We first review the distinction between locality at
the AdS-radius scale and at sub-AdS distances. The former is reasonably apparent in the
CFT, while the latter, which is implied by AdS/CFT duality, is remarkable and mysterious.
We then review the use of scattering experiments to probe the locality of bulk physics, and
to relate it to the form of the CFT four-point function. We examine the extent to which
current tests of AdS/CFT duality probe sub-AdS locality. Finally, we make a conjecture,
to the effect that bulk locality follows from the existence of a large gap in the spectrum of
operator dimensions.

   In Sec. 3 we develop the general constraints acting on CFT’s, most notably the operator
product expansion (OPE) and crossing, with the goal of either showing that they imply
the conjecture, or finding a counterexample. We then specialize to a theory having only
one low-dimension single-trace operator, a scalar, with a Z2 symmetry. This is not a full-
fledged quantum field theory, in that it does not have an energy-momentum tensor, but
after a thorough study of this system it will be straightforward to extend the results to
scalar correlators in a complete CFT.

    In Sec. 4 we set out to solve the constraints to first order in 1/N 2 . An infinite set of solu-
tions is generated via the AdS/CFT dictionary, starting from a local four-scalar interaction
in the bulk. In this context, the locality conjecture asserts that all solutions are obtained in
this way. For solutions whose intermediate spins are bounded above we show by a counting
argument that our conjecture holds. We obtain some explicit solutions in d = 2 and d = 4.

   In Sec. 5 we switch to the bulk point of view. We calculate four-point amplitudes arising
from various local bulk interactions, resolve them into partial waves, and show that the
results agree with those found from the abstract CFT conditions. In Sec. 6 we identify the
Lorentizian CFT singularity associated with bulk locality, and show that it arises from the
sum over partial waves.

    In Sec. 7 we discuss issues of convergence of the sum over solutions. We show that
all solutions are obtained as limits of the bounded-spin solutions found earlier, and so the


                                                 1
conjecture is true in this model. In Sec. 8 we extend the model by dropping the Z2 symmetry,
and by the addition of the energy-momentum tensor to the system. With this, the conjecture
is shown to hold in a rather general set of CFT’s. We also discuss issues with higher dimension
single-trace operators.

   In Sec. 8 we discuss future directions and implications. Our work closes off a potential
loophole in the AdS/CFT correspondence, relating a mysterious property of the four-point
function to an intuitive property of the spectrum of operator dimensions. It provides a
derivation of the low energy sector of AdS/CFT duality, from the assumptions of a large-N
expansion and gap in the spectrum of dimensions, but without an explicit string construction.
Thus it may be of use in applications such as condensed matter systems and cosmological
spacetimes.

    Various technical results are collected in the appendices.


2     General considerations

2.1    Coarse and sharp locality

When the separation l of the excitations in the bulk is larger than the AdS radius R, it is
not so hard to understand why they do not interact in the CFT. Focusing on the AdS factor,
it is the radial direction r that is emergent. There is an approximate identification of gauge
theory energy with radius,
                                           E ∼ r/R2 .                                        (2.1)

This arises from the warping of the space: the same bulk excitation, at different r, will have
different energies as seen in the gauge theory. Locality in r then follows from locality in CFT
energy, as exhibited for example by the renormalization group.

    This effect is actually a bit of a red herring, as we will soon explain, but it is interesting
to explore it further. Does locality in energy mean, for example, that a high-energy particle
will pass through one’s body? Remarkably, yes, if it is prepared correctly. (We thank Lenny
Susskind for asking this, and for volunteering to test the effect.) A proton from a high energy
beam or a cosmic source would scatter inelastically and shower, and increasing its energy
would just lead to a bigger shower. However, if the proton is created by a local operator not
too far away from Lenny, and with sufficiently large boost, then its constituents will spread
very little before reaching him. From the point of view of low energy fields, it is then nearly
invisible: since it is a color singlet, its leading nuclear interaction is its parametrically small


                                                2
dipole moment, and so for large enough boost it will pass through him without interaction.
This is known as color transparency [4]. We should also worry about the electromagnetic
interaction, but we can suppress this in the same way by considering a charge zero state, for
example an atom, again producing all constituents at a point. In term of AdS/CFT duality,
what is happening is that the particle is produced at the r = ∞ boundary, and passes by
Lenny before falling into the IR where he lives.1 Notice that what plays the role of E in
Eq. (2.1) is really the inverse size of the system, its internal state, and not its center of mass
energy.

       We can expect this locality in energy only to hold approximately, to δE/E = O(1), and
so locality in r holds only to a resolution δr/r = O(1). Given the radial part of the AdS
metric, ds2 = R2 dr 2 /r 2 , this implies a spatial resolution down to l ∼ R. However, AdS/CFT
implies much more. We expect local field theory in the bulk to hold at least down to the
string scale ls , while the AdS scale R = λ1/4 ls is parametrically larger in the regime where
there is a bulk spacetime of small curvature.

  In discussing scalings we are focusing on the AdS5 × S 5 case, but the principle is general.
We should note that the existence of the bulk spacetime requires both large g 2 N = λ and
large g −2 N = N 2 /λ (by S-duality), so N must also be large. In other words, the string
scale can never be larger than the Planck scale. It can be equal, or absent as in M theory
duals, in which case the Planck scale lP governs both the large-N expansion and the gap in
dimensions. In particular, the AdS radius is lP times a power of N.

    Thus, energy-radius holography nicely explains part of the emergence of the bulk space-
time, but also misses a critical aspect. The existence of locality down to a fixed physical
scale that can be parametrically smaller than the AdS length remains a mystery in the CFT.
Thus, we refer to coarse holography and sharp holography, and it is the latter that we seek
to explain.2

   It has been argued that sharp holography emerges from the matrix structure of the gauge
theory, e.g. [5, 6]. The Eguchi-Kawai model [7] may be a useful parallel, in that spacetime
emerges from the color structure on a single site. In the present work, however, this color
structure will not play a direct role. We will be focusing on the large anomalous dimensions
at strong coupling, and will not inquire into their origin in the gauge theory dynamics. It
would be valuable to have a clearer understanding of their dynamical origin, and this may
   1
     The connection between color transparency and holography was pointed out by Matt Strassler (private
communication).
   2
     In an earlier version we referred to these as ‘horizon’ and ‘sub-horizon’ locality. We thank John McGreevy
for pointing out that this is poor terminology.



                                                      3
well involve the color structure.


2.2      Scattering and the four-point function

The locality properties can be translated into a quantitative statement about gauge theory
amplitudes via a scattering thought experiment [8, 5, 9, 10, 11].3 Consider the CFT four-
point function                      * 4              +
                                      Y
                                         O(ti , ebi ) ,                             (2.2)
                                               i=1

where the CFT lives on [Lorentzian time × S 3 ]. From the bulk point of view, the CFT
operators create and destroy excitations at the boundary. Taking t1,2 to the past of t3,4 ,
we can think of this as corresponding to a 2-to-2 scattering process. In order to probe the
locality structure, we must convolve with sources fi so as to focus the excitations into narrow
beams,                              * 4 Z                                             +
                                     Y
                              A=              dti d3 ebi fi (ti , ebi )O(ti , ebi )       .            (2.3)
                                       i=1

For large R the packets can have both small δti and δei and also an energy-momentum
spread that is small compared to the mean value in the packet. They then focus in a region
small compared to the AdS length.

   Now, if the beams intersect, as in Fig. 1, the amplitude A will be large. However, if we
change slightly the location or momentum of a source, then the beams will miss, and the
amplitude will drop off rapidly. From the point of view of the bulk theory this is clear, but
again in the boundary it is mysterious: it appears that a small change in the form of A leads
to a large change in its value.4

    This property can be nicely recast as the statement that the CFT four-point function has
a certain singularity when the operators are aligned so as to allow a classical bulk scattering
process to occur [10]. For example, if the initial particles start diametrically opposite and
with equal energies at time t1,2 = −π/2, they will meet in the center of global AdS at t = 0,
scatter into new (but still opposite) directions, and reach diametrically opposite points on
the boundary at time t3,4 = +π/2. The four-point function is therefore singular when
   3
     For other approaches to this question see Refs. [12, 13].
   4
     Refs. [9, 11] identify ‘backgrounds’ to the thought experiment, and refine the conditions that must be
satisfied by the wavepackets, but they do not contradict the assertion that one can probe physics below the
AdS scale. In particular, the backgrounds discussed in Ref. [11] drop out in the flat spacetime limit defined
in Ref. [8, 5].




                                                        4
      Figure 1: Four-point correlator with wavepackets aligned to intersect in the bulk.

                                      e), (+π/2, eb′ ), (+π/2, −b
the arguments are (−π/2, eb), (−π/2, −b                         e′ ), and in all conformally
equivalent configurations.

  This singularity is not present in general CFT’s, for example not in the weakly coupled
N = 4 theory (there is a weaker singularity at the same point). Rather, it emerges in the
strong-coupling limit. In Sec. 6 we will describe the singularity in more detail, and compare
it with what we find in the CFT. For now, the main lesson is that to study the bulk locality
properties we should look at the CFT four-point function. Note that the forms of the two-
and three-point functions are fully determined by conformal symmetry, but that of the four-
point function is not. In fact, in all dimensions it is determined by symmetry up to a function
of two real cross ratios. This function carries dynamical information, in particular regarding
the locality of the bulk theory.


2.3     Current understanding

AdS/CFT duality has been subjected to many tests. Indeed, every time we apply it in a
new way we have the possibility that it will lead to implausible or incorrect results, signaling
a failure of the duality. The tests are of many types, for example

                                               5
   • BPS states and amplitudes

   • Behavior under symmetry breaking and RG flow

   • Calculations using integrability

   • Numerical tests, both by light-cone methods and by Monte Carlo

   • Comparison with experiment, in heavy ion physics

This list is not exhaustive, and in each category there are many separate tests. So we can ask,
do any of these test sharp holography? Studies of BPS states and amplitudes, integrability
calculations, and numerical tests are thus far limited to the spectrum of operator dimensions,
and the two- and three-point functions, and do not probe the four-point function where
locality becomes visible. Renormalization group behavior depends only on the energy-radius
relation associated with AdS scale holography, and applications to real QCD would seem to
be too coarse to distinguish sub-AdS scales.

      Thus, a possible way in which AdS/CFT duality might break down is through the failure
of sub-AdS holography [9].5 Perhaps the symmetries of theory, together with energy-radius
holography, imply only that the gauge theory reconstructs some version of the bulk string
theory that is smeared over the AdS radius. Thus, by investigating the constraints imposed
by the axioms of conformal field theory, we expect either to identify what such a smeared
theory might be, or to exclude this possibility.

   We should note some other possible tests of sub-AdS locality that have been suggested
to us. The recent application of AdS/CFT duality to the N = 4 S-matrix [14] involves
detailed properties of higher-point functions.6 However, the only amplitudes for which there
is a fairly strong all-orders understanding are the on-shell four and five point functions [15],
which are highly constrained by symmetry [16], whereas we need at least the off-shell four-
point function. The scattering of brane probes, rather than supergravity excitations, might
make locality more manifest.7 For example, in the BFSS matrix model such scattering is used
even in the weakly coupled limit to study the gravitational force law. However, we note that
even in this model nontrivial strong coupling effects are needed to ensure the duality, and so
we suspect that there must be some issue analogous to what we study. Finally, if the famous
factor of 3/4 in the partition function [17] were confirmed by gauge theory reasoning, it would
  5
    We thank M. Douglas and S. Giddings for discussions of this possibility.
  6
    We thank S. Dubovsky and D. Gross for this observation.
  7
    We thank E. Silverstein for raising this point.



                                                    6
imply that the bulk theory is sensitive to the precise form of the Schwarzschild metric, even
below the AdS scale.8


2.4     A conjecture

The AdS/CFT dictionary [1, 2, 3] relates the dimension of any CFT operator to the mass
of the corresponding bulk state,

                                          ∆(∆ − 4) = m2 R2 .                                          (2.4)

Kaluza-Klein excitations have masses of order 1/R, and so their dimensions are of order one.
String excitations have masses of order 1/ls = λ1/4 /R, and so their dimensions are of order
λ1/4 . To have local physics below the AdS scale, we must have a hierarchy between the AdS
and string scales, or λ ≫ 1. In this case, the great majority of operators, all of those dual
to string excitations, have parametrically large dimensions.

    This gap in dimensions is a striking and unusual property of the CFT. We see that it
is implied by sharp holography, and it is natural to conjecture that the implication runs in
the other direction as well. That is, in any CFT in which most operators get parametrically
large anomalous dimensions, there will be a bulk dual with sub-AdS locality. A plausible
precise statement is this: Conjecture: any CFT that has a large-N expansion, and in which
all single-trace operators of spin greater than two have parametrically large dimensions, has
a local bulk dual.

   The discussion in Sec. 2.1 in the d = 4, N = 4 context shows that sub-AdS locality is
possible only when N is parametrically large. More generally, bulk locality implies that the
AdS radius must be large compared to the Planck length, and so there must be some expan-
sion parameter in the CFT that corresponds to the gravitational loop expansion in the bulk.
We will refer to this as a large-N expansion, even in the absence of an explicit Lagrangian
description of the CFT. In particular, the bulk loop expansion allows us to distinguish
single-particle states from multi-particle states, and so we designate the corresponding op-
erators as single-trace and multi-trace by analogy with the known examples.9 The essential
property of the expansion is that the connected expectation values of single-trace operators
are suppressed compared to the disconnected expectation values.10
   8
     We thank L. Susskind for this observation.
   9
     A large-N expansion usually implies that the Hamiltonian is itself a single-trace operator, and we make
this assumption explicit in order to exclude known exceptions in which a CFT is coupled to itself or to an
otherwise-decoupled CFT through multi-trace interactions [18]. This assumption will make an interesting
appearance in Sec. 4.3.3. We thank E. Silverstein and O. Aharony for emphasizing these exceptions.
  10
     Note that this is true for large-N vector models as well as matrix models, but that vector models do

                                                     7
   The single-trace condition picks out operators that are dual to single-particle states. It
would seem to be necessary that all single-trace operators of spin greater than two have large
dimension, because we know of no low-energy effective theory that would be a candidate to
describe their bulk physics.11 So we are conjecturing that the strongest necessary condition
that we can identify is actually the sufficient condition. If this is true, then the condition for
sub-AdS locality is reduced from a rather mysterious property of the four-point function to
a much more intuitive property of the operator dimensions, which can be determined from
the two-point function.


3     CFT constraints

3.1     Generalities

Conformal field theories are constrained by the operator product expansion (OPE), conformal
invariance, crossing, unitarity, and modular invariance.12 The general form of the OPE is
                                                 X
                                Oi (x)Oj (0) =         x∆k −∆i −∆j ckij Ok (0)                         (3.1)
                                                   k

(Lorentz indices suppressed). This has a finite radius of convergence in any correlator, given
by the distance to the nearest other operator. The OPE coefficients ckij and the operator
dimensions ∆i can thus be regarded as the data defining the CFT, subject to the other
constraints.

   We are interested in CFT with a parameter λ, such that some operator dimensions
become parametrically large while the remainder have a finite limit. Interior to the radius
of convergence xc , the total contribution of the high-dimension operators is parametrically
suppressed as (x/xc )∆large . We will thus study the limiting theory, in which the low-dimension
operators have a closed operator algebra among themselves.

    Using the OPE twice reduces the four-point function to the two-point function:
                                           X                  X
                                 Aijkl =        cmij cmkl =       cmik cmjl .                          (3.2)
                                            m                 m

not have large gaps in their dimension. Thus the latter are expected to have duals in which quantum
gravitational effects are small but string effects are of order one [19].
  11
     In AdS there are consistent interacting theories of higher spin fields (see [20] for a recent review).
However, these theories are non-local because they contain an infinite tower of fields with increasing spin
and interactions with unbounded number of derivatives.
  12
     For classic work on this subject see Refs. [21]. For applications to AdS/CFT correlators see Refs. [22].


                                                       8
Indices are lowered with the two-point function, which can be given a conventional nor-
malization; we have suppressed the coordinate dependence for simplicity. The OPE can
be applied in two ways with overlapping radii of convergence, as indicated. The crossing
condition is the equality of these two sums, and it is a strong constraint on the cijk .

    Unitarity would give positivity conditions on the terms in the sums (3.2). However, this
will not be of use to us, because we will be working in the 1/N 2 expansion. The leading
terms will be manifestly positive, but the first correction, where the issue of bulk locality
arises, can have either sign.

   Modular invariance will also not be useful to us, for two reasons. First, it relates low-
dimension operators to high-dimension operators, as in the Cardy relations, while we are
interested in the present work only in relations among the low-dimension operators. Second,
the set of local operators in a 4d CFT is isomorphic to the gauge theory quantized on S 3 . The
partition function would then be given by the amplitude on S 3 × S 1 . Here there is no large
diffeomorphism interchanging the spatial and time directions, to give a modular invariance
relation. We could consider instead the CFT on T 3 × S 1 , for example, where there would
be constraints from large diffeomorphisms, but then there is no direct connection to the
spectrum of operators.

   In summary, we will be solving the constraints arising from the OPE, conformal invari-
ance, and crossing on the algebra of low dimension operators.


3.2    A scalar model

The OPE governs the behavior of the four-point correlator when any two operators become
coincident. Our assumption about operator dimensions translates directly into information
about these limits. Bulk locality, on the other hand, is related to a singularity in this
correlator at Lorentzian points corresponding to classical scattering. These points are not
conformally equivalent to those governed by the OPE, as we will review in Sec. 6, so there is
not an immediate link between our assumption and the result that we hope to derive from
it. Rather, we must use the other constraints in combination with our assumption in order
to derive general restrictions on the correlator. As we will explain, this will in effect require
that we find the general solution to the crossing condition.

   The idea of finding all CFT’s subject to general consistency conditions is an old one. It
has been realized most fully in the case of rational conformal field theory, where there is the
additional assumption of an extended conformal symmetry such that the spectrum contains


                                               9
only a finite number of irreducible representations. In our case, the additional assumption
is a restricted set of low-dimension operators.

  In the simplest CFT, the only low dimension single-trace operator would be the energy-
momentum tensor, so that the corresponding bulk dual would involve only gravity.13 How-
ever, we will take an even simpler model, in which the only low dimension single-trace
operator is a scalar O of dimension ∆. After a thorough study of the crossing constraint in
this system, it will be quite simple to include also the energy-momentum tensor in the OPE,
and so constrain the scalar correlator in a full-fledged CFT.

       As an aside, a CFT without an energy-momentum tensor would seem to be an oxymoron.
What it is missing is an operator that could evolve the CFT state from one time to the next;
it is a set of correlators without a notion of causality. We must measure the boundary state
at every time in order to reconstruct the bulk state at a single time, and so there is no
holography, as should be expected for a theory without gravity in the bulk. This does not
affect its use as warmup for us, as the form of the crossing condition is very similar to that
in a full CFT. This model could actually arise as a sector of an AdS compactification in
which there is a light scalar with self-interaction much stronger than gravity, working in the
approximation that gravity decouples.

       We will further assume a Z2 symmetry O → −O, so that the operator O does not itself
appear in the OO OPE. The lowest dimension operator in the OPE, aside from the unit
operator, is then the double trace O2 , with dimension 2∆ + O(1/N 2). All other double-trace
operators are obtained by differentiating one or the other of the O in O2 . Total derivatives
generate conformal descendant operators, whose contribution is determined by symmetry in
terms of those of the primary operators. To list all primary operators we need consider only
                ↔    →   ←
the difference ∂ = ∂ − ∂ acting between the two O’s. A complete set of primary double-trace
operators is
                                        ↔       ↔    ↔ ↔
                              On,l ≡ O∂µ1 . . . ∂µl (∂ν ∂ ν )n O − traces ,                        (3.3)

such as to be traceless on the µ’s. This has spin l and dimension ∆n,l = 2∆+2n+l+O(1/N 2).

   The contribution of higher-trace operators in the OPE is absent at the order in 1/N 2 in
which we work. We normalize O to be 1/N times a trace of adjoint variables, so that the
two-point function and disconnected four-point function are of order N 0 . The connected four-
  13
    Note that our focus is orthogonal to that in Ref. [23]. That paper is largely concerned with high-
dimension black hole states, which we have decoupled, while the 2+1 dimensional bulk has no light propa-
gating fields. Correspondingly all correlators of the energy-momentum tensor in that work are immediately
determined by holomorphy. However, there may be an interesting story that includes both directions.




                                                    10
point function is of order 1/N 2 .14 The double-trace O2 appears in the OO OPE at order
N 0 , and the square of this term gives the disconnected four-point function. The leading
connected contribution comes from the order 1/N 2 correction to this OPE coefficient, times
the N 0 coefficient. It also gets a contribution from the order 1/N 2 shift of the dimensions
of the double-trace operators. Triple-trace terms do not enter due to the Z2 symmetry, and
quadruple-trace terms enter first at order 1/N 4 .


3.3       Constraints in the scalar model

We consider the Euclidean four-point function. Using conformal invariance, we can bring
the operators to lie in a single plane, with complex coordinate z, and then to the standard
positions 0, 1, ∞, z. This is familiar from the string world-sheet, but in any dimension there
are two independent cross-ratios, which can be combined into z.

       The remaining information from conformal invariance determines the contributions of
the descendants in terms of the primaries, and so the four-point function is represented in
terms of a sum over primaries:
                                                       X∞ X ∞
                                                1                      g∆(n,l),l (z, z)
            hO(0)O(z, z)O(1)O(∞)i ≡ A(z, z) =      ∆
                                                     +         p(n, l)                  .              (3.4)
                                              (zz)     n=0 l=0
                                                                          (zz)∆

(In taking z4 → ∞, a factor of (z4 z 4 )∆ is implicitly introduced to give a smooth limit.)
The first term corresponds to the unit operator (vacuum), and the sum runs over the pri-
mary double trace operators (3.3). Here p(n, l) is the square of the OPE coefficient, and
g∆(n,l),l (z, z) are the conformal blocks, representing the total contribution of the conformal
family over the given primary.

       For d = 2 [24],
                                    k(E + l, z) k(E − l, z) + k(E + l, z) k(E − l, z)
                    gE,l (z, z) =                                                                      (3.5)
                                                         1 + δl,0
with
                                                                                  
                                       β                               β β
                           k(β, z) = z Fβ/2 (z) ,
                                       2            Fβ/2 (z) = F        , , β, z       ,               (3.6)
                                                                       2 2
where F (a, b, c, z) denotes the standard hypergeometric function 2 F1 . For d = 4 [24],
                            zz
           gE,l (z, z) =       [k(E + l, z) k(E − l − 2, z) − k(E + l, z) k(E − l − 2, z)] .           (3.7)
                           z−z
  14
    The operator O can get an anomalous dimension at order 1/N 2 . This will give a correction to the discon-
nected four-point function that is of the same order as the leading connected contribution. However, crossing
does not mix these two 1/N 2 contributions to the four-point function and so we ignore the disconnected
correction.

                                                     11
Note that in the d = 2 case only the SO(2, 2) symmetry is being used and not the full Virasoro
algebra, which would be much more constraining. Consequently, the crossing condition is
very similar in d = 2 and d = 4, and we will study the d = 2 case first because it is slightly
simpler.

   The crossing condition implies that l must be even (from interchanging the vertex oper-
ators at z and 0 or at 1 and ∞ via a conformal transformation), and also that

                                         A(z, z) = A(1 − z, 1 − z) .                                        (3.8)

This is the only remaining condition to be satisfied.

       As we have discussed, we will necessarily be solving in the 1/N expansion,
                                                      1
                            A(z, z) = A0 (z, z) +       A1 (z, z) + . . . ,
                                                     N2
                                                     1
                               p(n, l) = p0 (n, l) + 2 p1 (n, l) + . . . ,
                                                    N
                                                           1
                               ∆(n, l) = 2∆ + 2n + l + 2 γ1 (n, l) + . . . .                                (3.9)
                                                         N
Then                                               ∞ X
                                                     ∞
                                                   X
                            ∆
                       (zz) A0 (z, z) = 1 +                    p0 (n, l) g2∆+2n+l,l (z, z) ,               (3.10)
                                                   n=0 l=0
                                                        even

and
                     ∞ X
                     X ∞
        ∆                                                                          1 ∂
 (zz) A1 (z, z) =               p1 (n, l) g2∆+2n+l,l (z, z) + p0 (n, l)γ1 (n, l)        g2∆+2n+l,l (z, z) . (3.11)
                     n=0 l=0
                                                                                   2 ∂n
                         even




4        Solving the constraints

4.1         General considerations

How constraining is crossing?15 The unknowns p(n, l) and ∆(n, l) are indexed by two integers.
Equation (3.8) is a function of one complex or two real variables. Equivalently, by analytic
continuation in the real and imaginary parts of z we can regard z and z as independent, and
the crossing equation is a holomorphic function of two variables. By expanding in suitable
complete sets of functions of z and of z we get equations indexed by two integers. Thus
  15
    We should note the recent papers [25, 26], which derive useful constraints on operator dimensions from
general CFT properties. These papers use the constraint from unitarity, so we will not be able to apply the
same approach, but they provide a nice example of the power of the crossing condition.


                                                        12
there seems to be a rough equality between the number of equations and the number of
unknowns, but whether the number of solutions is zero, finite, or infinite depends on the
detailed structure.

     In the 1/N expansion, in fact, we can readily identify an infinite number of solutions.
If we have a scalar field theory in the bulk of AdS space, it defines boundary correlators
via the AdS/CFT dictionary [1, 2, 3]. These are conformally invariant and Bose symmetric,
and by inserting a complete set of intermediate states in the bulk we can derive the OPE.
Therefore these correlators at tree level will satisfy all of our conditions to order 1/N 2 . A
λφ4 bulk interaction, or any quartic interaction with additional derivatives, will provide a
solution (a trilinear interaction is forbidden by the Z2 symmetry). Going to higher orders in
1/N 2 we will encounter nonrenormalizable divergences in the bulk, since we have decoupled
the stringy physics, but at each order we can define a renormalized solution at the cost of
new parameters, representing the unknown contribution of the high-dimension operators.

   Any such solution will be local by construction. In Sec. 6 we will verify that these satisfy
the formal locality condition of [10]. Further, it is expected that any local theory can be
derived from a local Lagrangian, at least if it has a weak coupling expansion as is necessarily
the case here. It follows that one form of our locality conjecture is simply that the solutions
constructed from local bulk Lagrangians make up all solutions of the crossing condition. In
the current setting our goal is to show this, or to find a counterexample.

     We would like to be able to just count solutions. For example, we could restrict to bulk
interactions with a maximum number of derivatives, and make the corresponding restriction
on the CFT, and then see if the solutions are equal in number. The independent interactions
with up to six derivatives are φ4 , φ2 φ;µν φ;µν , and φ2 φ;µνσ φ;µνσ , using integration by parts and
the equations of motion. The AdS curvature tensor is expressed in terms of the metric, so
we need not include interactions involving the background curvature. As we will show in
Sec. 5, an interaction with 2k derivatives in the bulk corresponds to perturbations p1 (n, l),
γ1 (n, l) growing as n2k+const. in the CFT. Thus we could count the number of solutions whose
large-n behavior is bounded by a given power, and compare with the number of interactions
with the corresponding number of derivatives.

    In fact it will be simpler to look at the spins of the intermediate states. The interaction
 4
φ destroys and creates only two-particle states of spin 0, and so the corresponding p1 (n, l),
γ1 (n, l) are nonzero only for l = 0. The interaction φ2 φ;µν φ;µν creates and destroys two-
particle states of spin 0 or 2, as does φ2 φ;µνσ φ;µνσ (note that the spin must be even, by Bose
symmetry). Thus, we will count bulk interactions according to the maximum spin that they


                                                 13
can couple to, and similarly will count CFT solutions by the maximum value of l for which
the perturbation is nonzero. In Sec. 7 we will discuss the completeness of the solutions found
in this way.

   Let us now count the bulk interactions with four scalars plus derivatives. Counting
such operators up to total derivatives and equations of motion is equivalent to counting
flat space S-matrices. We can count these by starting with monomials in the Mandelstam
variables, sa tb uc with a ≥ b ≥ c, and Bose-symmetrizing. However, operators proportional
to s + t + u = 4m2 (where m2 is an arbitrary scalar mass) are not independent. Given any
operator with highest monomial sa tb uc , we can obtain a dependent operator containing the
monomial sa+1 tb uc by multiplying by s + t + u. The only operators that cannot be obtained
in this way are those whose highest monomial has a = b. Thus, a complete set is obtained
from the a + 1 monomials sa ta uc such that a ≥ c ≥ 0. Further, the total spin is maximized in
the u-channel, where each s or t can give rise to a factor of cos θ. Thus the operator couples
to maximum spin 2a. In all, there are a + 1 interactions of maximum spin 2a. These have
2k derivatives, for k = 2a, 2a + 1, . . . , 3a. The total number of interactions with spin at most
          P
L is then L/2a=0 (a + 1) = (L + 2)(L + 4)/8.

   These facts are summarized in Fig. 2. The interactions discussed above are built from
the monomials 1, st, and stu and correspond to the 3 gray squares closer to the bottom left
corner of Fig. 2.


4.2    Counting solutions in d = 2

The N 0 correlator is
                                             1              1
                          A0 (z, z) =           ∆
                                                  +                   +1 .                         (4.1)
                                           (zz)     [(1 − z)(1 − z)]∆

By Taylor expanding the conformal partial wave expansion (3.4) around z, z = 0 one finds
that
                                                            Γ2 (∆ + n)Γ(2∆ + n − 1)
               p0 (n, l) = 1 + (−1)l Cn Cn+l ,        Cn =                            .            (4.2)
                                                              n!Γ2 (∆)Γ(2∆ + 2n − 1)

   It is convenient to rewrite the O(1/N 2) condition (3.11) as
                                  ∞ 
                                ∞ X
                                X                                                          
                                                                          ∂
                  A1 (z, z) =              c(n, l) hn,l (z, z) + γ(n, l)     hn,l (z, z)       ,   (4.3)
                                n=0 l=0
                                                                         2∂n
                                    even




                                                     14
              l



             12
             11
             10
             9
             8
             7
             6
             5
             4
             3
             2
             1
             0
                  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18                   k

Figure 2: Quartic interactions of spin l = 2a and with 2k derivatives. There are 1 + a
interactions of even spin l = 2a, with the number of derivatives given by k = 2a, 2a+1, . . . , 3a.
The total number of interactions with spin at most L is (L + 2)(L + 4)/8.

where
                       p0 (n, l)                                                      
          hn,l (z, z) =          (zz)n z l F∆+n+l (z)F∆+n (z) + z l F∆+n (z)F∆+n+l (z) ,
                       1 + δl,0
                       2p1 (n, l) − γ1 (n, l)∂n p0 (n, l)
             c(n, l) =                                    , γ(n, l) = γ1 (n, l) .            (4.4)
                                   2p0 (n, l)

   There is a branch cut ln(zz) at the point z, z = 0 from ∂n acting on (zz)n . At z, z = 1
(which get mapped to the origin on the other side of the crossing relation), there are also
logarithms, from the hypergeometric functions. One way to organize the conditions is to
look near z = 0 and z = 1 (remember, we can analytically continue independently in both
variables), and at each point separate things into one term which is a log times a holomorphic
function, and a second which is holomorphic. The crossing relation A(z, z) = A(1 − z, 1 − z)
thus becomes four holomorphic equations, which appear multiplying ln z ln(1 − z), ln z,
ln(1 − z), and 1.

   We must be careful because the radius of convergence of the sums is 1 in z, z, from the
coincidence of operators, and so additional singularities could arise there from the sums. By
taking z to be small, we regulate both the sums over n and l for the first term in hn,l , but
only the sum over z in the second term. To proceed at this point we introduce at this point

                                                15
the restriction explained in the previous subsection, that l is bounded above by some given
L, in order to exclude additional ln(1 − z) behavior. In Sec. 7 we will see that this is not
actually necessary.

   It will be sufficient to ignore terms holomorphic in 1 − z, keeping only the holomorphic
terms that multiply ln(1 − z) in the crossing relation:
  X∞ X L 
                              ∂
                                 
                                    p0 (n, l) h n+l n                                    i
           c(n, l) + γ(n, l)                   z z F∆+n+l (z)Fe∆+n (1 − z) + (n ↔ n + l)
  n=0 l=0
                             2∂n    1 +  δl,0
      even
                                                                 ∞    L
                                                             1 XX
                                                           =           γ(n, l)hn,l (1 − z, 1 − z) .      (4.5)
                                                             2 n=0 l=0
                                                                     even

On the left-hand side we have used

                       Fβ/2 (z) = ln(1 − z)Feβ/2 (1 − z) + holomorphic at z = 1 ,
                                      Γ(β)
                       Feβ/2 (z) = − 2       F (β/2, β/2, 1, z) .                                        (4.6)
                                    Γ (β/2)
Similarly, the holomorphic terms that multiplies ln z in Eq. (4.5) give
                              p0 (n, l) h n+l n                                    i
         L
       ∞ X
       X
                    γ(n, l)              z z F∆+n+l (z)Fe∆+n (1 − z) + (n ↔ n + l)                       (4.7)
       n=0 l=0
                              1 + δl,0
             even


                      p0 (n, l) h                                                    i
         L
       ∞ X
       X
                                        n+l     ne
    =         γ(n, l)            (1 − z) (1 − z) F∆+n+l (z)F∆+n (1 − z) + (n ↔ n + l) .
      n=0 l=0
                      1 + δl,0
             even



   To simplify further we can project onto a complete set z ∆+n F∆+n (z). These are eigen-
functions,

      D z ∆+n F∆+n (z) = (∆ + n)(∆ + n − 1)z ∆+n F∆+n (z) ,                    D = z 2 ∂z (1 − z)∂z .    (4.8)

It follows that                 I
                            dz m−m′ −1
                              z        F∆+m (z)F1−∆−m′ (z) = δm,m′ ,                 (4.9)
                        C 2πi
where the contour C circles 0 counterclockwise, and the normalization is readily obtained
by a Laurent expansion of the integrand. We define
                                           I
           ′   Cm         ′             ′      dz (1 − z)m e
    J(m, m ) = ′ I(m, m ) , I(m, m ) =               m′ +1
                                                           F∆+m (z)F1−∆−m′ (z) .   (4.10)
               Cm                            C 2πi z

Projecting thus onto m′ = p around z = 0 and onto m′ = q around z = 1, the crossing
condition (4.7) becomes
                      L
                      X                             L
                                                    X
                             γ(p, l)J(p + l, q) +          γ(p − l, l)J(p − l, q) = (p ↔ q) .           (4.11)
                      l=0                           l=2
                      even                          even



                                                            16
Notice that this only involves the anomalous dimension γ(n, l) and not the coefficient c(n, l).
This condition is symmetric in p, q and trivial for p = q.

    As discussed in Sec. 4.1, we want to count solutions where the sum over l is limited to
a finite range ≤ L. As a warmup, consider the case of L = 0, where the relations (4.11)
become
                                γ(p, 0)J(p, q) = γ(q, 0)J(q, p) .                        (4.12)
Letting q = 0, we immediately obtain the solution
                                           J(0, p)             2∆ − 1
                       γ(p, 0) = γ(0, 0)           = γ(0, 0)             ,               (4.13)
                                           J(p, 0)           2∆ + 2p − 1
where J(p, 0) and J(0, p) are obtained in appendix A. Thus there is at most one solution
for γ(n, 0) when L = 0, determined up to the overall normalization γ(0, 0). Indeed, it seems
remarkable that there are any solutions at all, since we must satisfy Eq. (4.12) for all q. The
consistency of the solution requires that
                                    J(p, q)   2∆ + 2p − 1
                                            =                                            (4.14)
                                    J(q, p)   2∆ + 2q − 1
for all p and q. This relation is not at all obvious from the definition. Nevertheless, we
know that there must be at least one solution, corresponding to the bulk interaction φ4 ,
and indeed the consistency condition (4.14) holds in the cases we have checked. Having
determined γ(n, 0), we can immediately determine c(n, 0), because this appears only on the
left-hand side of Eq. (4.5), and the c(n, 0) for different n multiply independent functions.
Thus there is exactly one solution with L = 0.

   This example illustrates the strategy we will use for general L. The crossing relation (4.11)
appears to overdetermine γ(n, l), and gives an upper bound on the number of solutions; for
each solution of (4.11), c(n, l) is uniquely determined by equation (4.5). The counting of
bulk interactions gives a lower bound, and we will show that these bounds are equal, thus
determining the actual number of solutions.

   We can use the (p, q) = (1, 0) condition to solve for γ(1, 0) in terms of all the other
γ(0, l), γ(1, l). We can then use (p, q) = (2, 0), (2, 1) to solve for γ(2, 0), γ(2, 2) in terms
of all the other γ with p ≤ 2. Proceeding in this way, at fixed p we use the conditions at
0 ≤ q ≤ min(p−1, L/2) to solve for γ(p, 0), . . . , γ(p, min(2p−2, L)) in terms of the remaining
γ(p′ , q) at p′ ≤ p. In order for the solution at each step to exist and be unique, we need that
M(p)qr = J(p + 2r, q) for r, q = 0, 1, . . . , k − 1 be a nondegenerate k × k matrix. This is
shown in Appendix B. In the end we have solved for all γ(n, l) with l < 2n, so the solution
is determined by specifying the γ(n, l) for 2n ≤ l ≤ L, as depicted in Fig. 3. The total

                                                 17
                     l/2




                                                                            L/2

                                                                ···


                                                                        n

Figure 3: Open circles are γ(n, l) not determined by the equations while filled circles
correspond to γ(n, l) determined by the equations (4.11) with p = 0, 1, . . . , n and q =
0, 1, . . . , min(p − 1, L/2). We see that up to spin L we have (L/2 + 1)(L/2 + 2)/2 unde-
termined γ(n, l).

                                 P
number of free parameters is L/2          1
                                    p=0 ( 2 L + 1 − p) = (L + 2)(L + 4)/8. For each solution,
the c(n, l) for different n, l multiply independent functions of z, z in Eq. (4.5), and so are
uniquely determined. Thus there are at most (L + 2)(L + 4)/8 solutions to the crossing
condition with maximum spin L.

   This is the same as our count of interactions in Sec. 4.1: our upper and lower bounds
agree. We can conclude that the total number of solutions of the crossing relations is exactly
equal to the number of bulk interactions, and our conjecture is true for interactions restricted
to bounded L. In Sec. 7 we will argue that all solutions can be obtained as convergent sums of
such bounded solutions. We can readily extend the analysis of crossing to include the energy-
momentum tensor in the OPE. However, in this case the solutions necessarily involve all l,
and so we defer this until Sec. 8.


4.3     More on the d = 2 solutions

4.3.1   Large-q equations

The CFT axioms allow us not only to count the solutions, but to construct them, as we have
done above for L = 0. Here we will extract a few results from the crossing equation (4.11)
in the limit q ≫ p, ∆, L. Using Eqs. (A.7, A.8), the leading terms on the two sides of the
crossing equation give
                                                                              
                                                 X L            XL
       (2∆ + 2p + 2L − 1)Bp+L
                               γ(p, L) ≈ q 1−2L      γ(q, l) +     γ(q − l, l) ,  (4.15)
                  Bp                              l=0           l=2
                                                    even         even




                                              18
where Bp is defined in Eq. (A.7). We have divided through by −Bp q 2∆+2p+2L−1 , with the
result that the LHS depends only on p and the RHS only on q. On each side the corrections
are of relative order 1/q and generically depend on p, l, L. If γ(p, L) is nonzero, it follows
that at least for some l ≤ L, γ(q, l) must grow at large q as q 2L−1 or faster. If the leading
terms do not cancel, so the RHS has a nonzero large-q limit K, then γ(q, l) actually saturates
this lower bound on its asymptotic behavior and we obtain an explicit solution
                                                        Bp
                                γ(p, L) = K                          .                   (4.16)
                                              (2∆ + 2p + 2L − 1)Bp+L

It is easy to check that (4.16) indeed behaves as p2L−1 for large p. Furthermore, setting
L = 0 we recover the unique solution (4.13). Eq. (4.16) only gives the anomalous dimensions
for the maximal spin. The γ(p, l) for l < L can be obtained from the subleading terms in
the large q expansion of (4.11), though this is cumbersome.

   As we shall see in section 6, a bulk interaction with 2k derivatives gives rise to anomalous
dimensions γ(p, l) going like p2k−1 at large p. Therefore, the result (4.16) corresponds to bulk
interactions of spin L and with 2L derivatives, i.e. the leftmost box in each row in Fig. 2.
The other boxes in each row require cancelations among the leading terms of the large q
expansion of the RHS of (4.11). Consider the second box in each row, i.e. an interaction
with spin L and 2L + 2 derivatives. Then, the leading behavior of LHS of (4.11) is (4.15), as
before, but the RHS naively grows as q 2∆+2p+2L . Vanishing of the terms of order q 2∆+2p+2L
and q 2∆+2p+2L−1 requires
                                           L
                                           X     γ(q, l)
                                     lim                  2L+1
                                                               =0,                       (4.17)
                                     q→∞
                                         l=0
                                             (1 + δl,0 )q
                                           even

and
                        L
                        X                                   ∞
                                                            X
                               γ(q, l) l          2               γ(q, l)
                    lim                  2L+1
                                              =         lim                    .         (4.18)
                   q→∞
                        l=0
                            (1 + δl,0 )q        2L + 1 q→∞ l=0 (1 + δl,0 )q 2L
                         even                                    even

                       2∆+2p+2L−2
The terms of order q                 then provide an explicit solution for the anomalous dimen-
sions
                                [L(2L + 1) + (2∆ + 2p − 1)(2∆ + 2p + 2L − 1)] Bp
             γ(p, L) = K ′                                                       ,       (4.19)
                                            (2∆ + 2p + 2L − 1)Bp+L
where
                                                  L
                                                  X
                                     ′                 γ(q, l) l2
                                   K = 2 lim                          .                  (4.20)
                                            q→∞
                                                l=0
                                                    (1 + δl,0 )q 2L+1
                                                  even

Notice that this solution only exists for L ≥ 2 in agreement with Fig. 2. Indeed, conditions
(4.17) and (4.18) for L = 0 imply that γ(q, 0) behaves as q −1 for large q and therefore the
bulk interaction can not contain any derivatives.

                                                     19
4.3.2        The coefficients c(n, l)

We shall now consider the computation of the coefficients c(n, l). These are uniquely fixed
by equation (4.5) given the anomalous dimensions γ(n, l). Let us illustrate this statement
with the L = 0 example. In this case, it is enough to keep the terms of order (1 − z)0 in
(4.5),
             ∞ 
             X                           
                                      ∂       Γ(2∆ + 2n) n
         −         2c(n, 0) + γ(n, 0)      Cn2 2        z F∆+n (z) = γ(0, 0)F∆ (1 − z) .              (4.21)
             n=0
                                      ∂n      Γ (∆ + n)

It is convenient to rewrite this equation in the following form
                                ∞
                                X                    Γ(2∆ + 2n) n
                           −2         c′ (n, 0)Cn2              z F∆+n (z) = H(z) ,                   (4.22)
                                n=0
                                                     Γ2 (∆ + n)

where16
                                                            1
                                       c′ (n, 0) = c(n, 0) − ∂n γ(n, 0) ,                             (4.23)
                                                            2
and
                                    X∞                                    
                                         ∂          2 Γ(2∆ + 2n) n
         H(z) = γ(0, 0)F∆ (1 − z) +         γ(n, 0)Cn 2          z F∆+n (z) ,                         (4.24)
                                    n=0
                                        ∂n            Γ  (∆ + n)

which is entirely determined given the anomalous dimensions γ(n, 0). Applying the projector
(4.9) to equation (4.22) one determines the coefficients c′ (n, 0). Surprisingly, these coefficients
are all zero. In fact, using the explicit solution (4.13) for the anomalous dimensions one finds
that the function H(z) vanishes identically (see appendix C). Thus, we conclude that

                                                         1 ∂
                                            c(n, l) =         γ(n, l) .                               (4.25)
                                                         2 ∂n
Notably, this statement holds true in all the examples we have considered, though we have
not been able to find a general derivation and had to rely on ”empirical” data. It has been
previously observed [28] that the unitarity bound on the leading term of the OPE in the
crossed channel implies (4.25) for large n, l. However, it was also shown in Ref. [28] that
the conformal partial wave expansion of a scalar exchange in AdS only respected (4.25)
asymptotically. We suspect that (4.25) only holds for amplitudes corresponding to bulk
contact interactions.
  16
    The solutions γ(n, l) are always rational functions of n, and this defines the extension to non-integer n
as required to take the n-derivative.




                                                          20
4.3.3   Multi-trace interactions

At special values of ∆, multi-trace interactions become marginal. We have excluded these
in our conjecture, but they should still appear as solutions to the crossing relation. The first
                                                                              ↔ ↔
examples in d = 2 are O2 at ∆ = 1, O3 at ∆ = 2/3, O4 at ∆ = 1/2, and O∂ν ∂ ν O at ∆ = 0.
                                      ↔ ↔
The bilinear interactions O2 and O∂ν ∂ ν O just shift ∆ in the disconnected amplitude, which
trivially respects crossing. The interaction O3 is forbidden by Z2 , so the first interesting case
is O4 at ∆ = 1/2.

   This operator couples only to spin 0, for which we have the solution (4.13),

                                    C                               C
                    γ(p, 0) =               ,   c(p, 0) = −                  .             (4.26)
                                2∆ + 2p − 1                   (2∆ + 2p − 1)2

As ∆ → 1/2 at fixed C, γ(0, 0) and c(0, 0) diverge. The double poles cancel in the expression
for the correlator, but a single pole remains. There are two ways that we might think to
obtain a finite limit. We could let C scale as 2∆ − 1, so that the only nonzero term is
n = l = 0; we will call this the first solution. To obtain the second solution, we could hold
C finite but subtract off the pole, which is proportional to the first solution. However, this
second solution is not conformal: the limiting process introduces logs of the separations, just
as in the usual dimensional regularization.

    This has a simple interpretation. When a multi-trace interaction becomes marginal, the
single-trace interaction sources the multi-trace interaction under RG flow [27]. We identify
this flow as the second solution, while the first solution corresponds to keeping only the
quadruple-trace interaction and tuning the single-trace interaction to zero. We can confirm
this by calculating directly the effect of the marginal perturbation O4 in the CFT:
               Z                           h                                      i
                         d2 w
        A1 ∝                         = π 2 F 1 (z)F 1 (1 − z) + F 1 (1 − z)F 1 (z) .  (4.27)
                  |w||1 − w||z − w|          2      2             2          2



This suggests that the conformal partial wave decomposition of the connected four-point
function only contains the l = n = 0 term. Indeed, when ∆ = 1/2, we see that expression
(4.13) gives γ(n, 0) = 0 for all n > 0 and the four point function (4.27) can be written using
a single partial wave,
                         Z
                                    d2 w          π ∂
                                               =−      hn,0 (z, z)      .                  (4.28)
                             |w||1 − w||z − w|    2 ∂n             n=0
                                                                      1
                                                                    ∆→ 2



The marginal behavior of O4 is lifted both by 1/N 2 effects and by second order effects in
the O4 interaction, giving a coupled RG flow for the two interactions [27].


                                                21
4.4          Counting Solutions in d = 4

In d = 4 the different form of the conformal blocks (3.7) leads to slightly more complicated
results, but the procedure for finding solutions is analogous. As in d = 2, we can find the N 0
coefficients in the partial wave expansion from matching to the N 0 correlator (4.1). They
are
                                              2(l + 1)(2∆ + 2n + l − 2) (∆−1) (∆−1)
                        p0 (n, l) = 1 + (−1)l                            Cn    Cn+l+1 ,              (4.29)
                                                         (∆ − 1)2
              (∆−1)
where Cn                is the coefficient from the two-dimensional case with ∆ replaced by ∆ − 1.
Keeping only the terms multiplying log z log(1−z) in the equation A1 (z, z) = A1 (1−z, 1−z),
where A1 (z, z) is written as in (4.3), we find
                                 z h n+l n−1                                       i
        L
      ∞ X
      X
              γ(n, l) p0 (n, l)                   e
                                    z z F∆+n+l (z)F∆+n−1 (1 − z) − (n − 1 ↔ n + l)                       (4.30)
      n=0 l=0
                                1−z
             even


                                        z−1h                                                                  i
        L
      ∞ X
      X
=                   γ(n, l) p0 (n, l)       (1 − z)n+l (1 − z)n−1 Fe∆+n+l (z)F∆+n−1 (1 − z) − (n − 1 ↔ n + l)
      n=0 l=0
                                         z
             even

Again we project twice using (4.9): onto m′ = p − 1 around z = 0 and onto m′ = q − 1 near
z = 1. We define J (∆−1) (p, q) as J(p, q) with the shift ∆ → ∆ − 1. We also define
                                                   2(l + 1)(2∆ + 2n + l − 2)
                                    γ ′ (n, l) =                             γ(n, l) .               (4.31)
                                                            (∆ − 1)2
In terms of these functions, the crossing condition becomes
    XL h                                                                           i
        γ ′ (p − l − 1, l)J (∆−1) (p − l − 1, q) − γ ′ (p, l)J (∆−1) (p + l + 1, q) = (p ↔ q) .      (4.32)
      l=0
      even


    Exactly analogously to the two-dimensional case, we consider the crossing relation at
fixed p for a series of q such that 0 ≤ q ≤ min(p − 1, L/2). We use these relations to solve
for γ(p, 0), ... , γ(p, min(2p − 2, L)) in terms of all of the remaining γ(p′ , l) for p′ < p. In the
four-dimensional case, the existence and uniqueness of solutions requires that M (∆−1) (p)qr =
J (∆−1) (p + 2r + 1, q) for r, q = 0, 1, ... , k − 1 is a non-degenerate k × k matrix. This is shown
in appendix B. As the counting is the same as in two-dimensions, we again have that there
are at most (L + 2)(L + 4)/8 solutions to the crossing relation with maximum spin L.


4.5          More on d = 4 Solutions

Two differences complicate the four-dimensional crossing relation as compared to the two-
dimensional case. First, the two terms on either side have different arguments even when

                                                             22
l = 0. Consequently, it is not possible to obtain a solution for γ(p, 0) in a simple way, even
though J (∆−1) (p, q) has the symmetry (4.14). Second, the relative minus sign between the
two terms on either side of the equation causes the highest powers in p to cancel. We are
then forced to look at subleading terms to find a solution for l = L.

       The first complication can be overcome by brute force. The L = 0 crossing condition is

                 γ ′ (p − 1, 0)J (∆−1) (p − 1, q) − γ ′ (p, 0)J (∆−1) (p + 1, q) = (p ↔ q)       (4.33)

Setting q = 0 the overlap integrals can actually be computed (see appendix A) and lead to
a recursion relation for the γ(p, 0). The relation is solved by17
                                (2∆ + p − 3)(p + 1)(∆ + p − 1)(2∆ − 1)
                    γ(p, 0) =                                          γ(0, 0) .                 (4.34)
                                  (∆ − 1)(2∆ + 2p − 3)(2∆ + 2p − 1)

       That leaves the second complication. For two dimensions a solution for l = L was found
by equating the coefficients of the highest power of p (or q) on both sides of the crossing
condition. As in two-dimensions, using (A.7) we can find the large p limit of the overlap
integral:
                     J (∆−1) (p, q) = −2Bq(∆−1) p2∆+2q−1 + O((1/p)−2∆−2q+2) ..                   (4.35)
However, the sign difference between the two terms in the crossing condition makes the
leading p terms on the left hand side of (4.32) cancel and we have to look at subleading
terms. There are subleading terms of two types; denoting the relative order in 1/p by a
parenthesised superscript,
                                                 (0)  (∆−1)        (1)
                  J (∆−1) (p, q) = J (∆−1) (p, q)     + J      (p, q)      + ... , (4.36)

these are
                  (∆−1)            (0)  (∆−1)        (0)
                  J      (p + x, q)      = J     (p, q)       ,                                  (4.37)
                  (∆−1)            (1)      (∆−1)        (0)                   (1)
                  J      (p + x, q)      = ∂p J      (p, q)      x + J (∆−1) (p, q)      .       (4.38)

Only the subleading terms that come as derivatives of the leading terms are relevant. The
other subleading terms cancel out of the crossing equation and thus we will not need to
expand J to higher order in 1/p to find them.

       We can now use (A.7) on the LHS and (A.8) on the RHS to determine the leading p term
of (4.32). On the RHS we get
                                     (∆−1)
                          γ ′ (q, L)Bq+L+1 (2∆ + 2q + 2L − 1)p2q+2L+2∆−2                         (4.39)
  17
   As in d = 2, the case ∆ = 1 in d = 4 is special because O4 can generate a marginal deformation of the
CFT.

                                                    23
while on the LHS
                              L
                              X                                                       
          2Bq(∆−1) p2∆+2q−4     (l + 1) 2γ ′(0) (p, l)(2∆ + 2q − 3) + p∂p γ ′(0) (p, l) .   (4.40)
                              l=0
                              even


We see that the lower bound on large p growth of γ(p, l) is now p2L+1 (γ ′ (p, l) is now p2L+2 ),
in accordance with what we find in section 6. Assuming the absence of cancelations among
                                                          ′
the leading terms so that the bound is saturated we have γ (0) (q, l) = α(l)q 2L+2 so
                                     L
                                     X                               (∆−1)
4Bq(∆−1) p2∆+2q−4 (2∆+2q+L−2)               (l+1)α(l) = γ ′ (q, L)Bq+L+1(2∆+2q+2L−1)p2q+2L+2∆−2
                                     l=0
                                     even
                                                                                            (4.41)
from which we find the solution for maximal spin
                                                (∆−1)                L
                         K         Bm                           2 X
        γ(m, L) =                   (∆−1)
                                          ,                K=           (l + 1)α(l) .       (4.42)
                  2∆ + 2m + 2L − 1 Bm+L+1                     L + 1 l=0
                                                                         even




    Again as in two dimensions, we find an equation analagous to (4.24) that determines
c(n, l) in terms of a finite subset of γ(m, l). Using a computer algebra program, we are able
to calculate a finite number of c(n, 0) and find in all cases that

                                                    1 ∂
                                        c(n, l) =        γ(n, l) .                          (4.43)
                                                    2 ∂n


5     Bulk calculations

5.1    Small-L examples

We have seen that the number of solutions to the CFT constraints precisely matches the
counting of quartic local bulk interactions. We now wish to illustrate this equivalence more
explicitly. We shall start by computing some simple Witten diagrams, as in Fig. 4, de-
scribing four-point functions of the dual CFT. Four point functions obtained in this way
will automatically satisfy all the CFT constraints. The goal of this section is to relate these
correlators with the solutions found in the previous section.

    Let us consider Euclidean AdSd+1 defined by the hyperboloid

                   X 2 = −R2 = −1 ,                 X0 > 0 ,             X ∈ Md+2 ,          (5.1)



                                                    24
                                            P3                         P4




                                                              X




                                            P1                         P2


Figure 4: Witten diagram for the CFT four-point function associated to a quartic contact
interaction in AdS. The boundary points Pi are connected to the bulk interaction point X
by bulk to boundary propagators. In general, the quartic vertex at X includes derivatives
acting on the bulk to boundary propagators.

embedded in (d + 2)-dimensional Minkowski spacetime. We shall set R = 1 in this and the
following section. It is convenient to think of the conformal boundary of AdS as the space
of null rays 18

                        P2 = 0 ,             P ∼ λP (λ ∈ R) ,                  P ∈ Md+2 .   (5.2)

Then, the correlations functions of the dual CFT are encoded into SO(1, d+1) invariant func-
tions of the external points Pi , transforming homogeneously with weights ∆i . In particular,
the general form of a four-point function of dimension ∆ scalar operators is
                                                                   A(z, z)
                                         A(P1 , P2 , P3 , P4 ) =    ∆ ∆
                                                                           ,                (5.3)
                                                                   P12 P34
where Pij = −2Pi · Pj is positive for future directed P ’s and A only depends on the cross
ratios,
                               P12 P34    1                   P14 P23   (1 − z)(1 − z)
                         u=            =    ,         v=              =                .    (5.4)
                               P13 P24   zz                   P13 P24         zz
   The basic ingredient required to compute Witten diagrams is the bulk to boundary
propagator which in this notation is simply given by

                                                 (−2P · X)−∆ ,                              (5.5)

up to a normalization constant that will not be important for us. We are now ready to
compute the four point function associated with a quartic φ4 interaction in AdS,
                                             Z      4
                                                    Y
                        ∆             ∆ ∆
                    (zz) A1 (z, z) ∝ P13 P24    dX    (−2Pi · X)−∆ .             (5.6)
                                                          AdS       i=1
  18
       See [29] for a brief review of this formalism first proposed by Dirac [30].

                                                         25
This is precisely the definition of the reduced D-function.19 We can then write

                                           (zz)∆ A1 (z, z) ∝ D ∆∆∆∆ (u, v) .                            (5.7)

The conformal partial wave expansion of this correlator can be found using a series repre-
sentation of the D-function [24, 32]. In both d = 2 and d = 4 we recover the unique solution
with L = 0 found in the previous section, Eqs. (4.13) and (4.34) respectively.

       A quartic interaction with only 2 derivatives does not generate a new four-point function.
The vertex φ2 (∇φ)2 can be reduced to φ4 by integrating by parts and using the equations of
motion. The first new contribution comes from an interaction vertex with 4 derivatives,

                                                         (∇φ)2 (∇φ)2 .                                  (5.8)

To compute the contribution of this vertex to the four-point function it is useful to introduce
embedding space derivatives

                                                  ∇N = ∂N + XN X · ∂ .                                  (5.9)

This combination removes the radial derivative in the embedding space. More precisely,

                                     ∇N f (X 2 ) = 2XN (1 + X 2 )f ′ (X 2 ) = 0 ,                      (5.10)

as it should for a constant function in AdS. The four-point function is then given by
       X Z
                  dX ∇N (−2P1 · X)−∆ ∇N (−2P2 · X)−∆ ∇M (−2P3 · X)−∆ ∇M (−2P4 · X)−∆
        perm Pi    AdS
        Z              4
                       Y                        X                                             
                                          −∆                     P1 · P2 P3 · P4
   ∝              dX         (−2Pi · X)                                                + ...       ,   (5.11)
            AdS        i=1                     perm Pi
                                                          P 1 · X P2 · X P3 · X P4 · X

where the dots give rise to the same four-point function as a φ4 interaction. The new
contribution to the reduced amplitude is

                               (zz)∆ A1 (z, z) ∝ (1 + u + v)D∆+1 ∆+1 ∆+1 ∆+1 (u, v) .                  (5.12)

The explicit conformal partial wave expansion (4.3) of this correlator in d = 2 is given in
appendix D. The expansion only contains partial waves with spin 0 and 2. The property
(4.25) is obeyed and the maximal spin L = 2 anomalous dimensions are given by expression
(4.16). In d = 4 the property (4.25) is also verified and the anomalous dimensions of the
maximal spin L = 2 are given by (4.42).
  19
    See [31, 24] for D-function properties and definitions. D-functions in the embedding space notation are
reviewed in appendix B of [10].

                                                               26
    The next new interaction comes from an interaction vertex with 6 derivatives,

                                           (∇φ)2 (∇µ ∇ν φ)2 .                                (5.13)

The four-point function is then given by
    X Z
              dX ∇N (−2P1 · X)−∆ ∇N (−2P2 · X)−∆ ∇M ∇K (−2P3 · X)−∆ ∇M ∇K (−2P4 · X)−∆
    perm Pi   AdS
    Z          4
               Y               X                  P1 · P2 (P3 · P4 )2
                                                                                     
                            −∆
∝           dX   (−2P1 · X)                                                  + ...       .      (5.14)
      AdS      i=1               perm Pi
                                            P1 · X P2 · X(P3 · X)2 (P4 · X)2

The dots correspond to terms that give the same as φ4 or (∇φ)2 (∇φ)2 interactions. The first
term gives something new. Its contribution to the reduced amplitude is

              (zz)∆ A1 (z, z) ∝ D ∆+2 ∆+1 ∆+2 ∆+1 (u, v) + D ∆+1 ∆+2 ∆+1 ∆+2 (u, v)
                             + u2 D ∆+2 ∆+2 ∆+1 ∆+1 (u, v) + uD∆+1 ∆+1 ∆+2 ∆+2 (u, v)        (5.15)
                             + v 2 D ∆+1 ∆+2 ∆+2 ∆+1 (u, v) + vD ∆+2 ∆+1 ∆+1 ∆+2 (u, v) .

We give the conformal partial wave expansion of this correlator in d = 2 in appendix D.
Again, the expansion only contains partial waves with spin 0 and 2 and (4.25) holds. The
spin 2 anomalous dimensions in d = 2 are now given by a linear combination of (4.19) and
(4.16) with L = 2.

    With this examples we have explored the left bottom corner of Fig. 2, which summarizes
the possible bulk interactions. We have found that solutions to the CFT constraints are
in one-to-one correspondence to local bulk interactions, in agreement with our conjecture.
However, the complexity of the explicit computations increases very rapidly as the spin and
the number of derivatives of the interaction grow. In the next subsection we shall consider
an approximation scheme that allows us to determine part of the conformal partial wave
expansion for a family of bulk interactions.


5.2     Regge limit

The papers [33, 28, 34, 35, 36] explored the regime of high energy scattering in AdS and its
consequences for the CFT four-point function. They show that this kinematical regime is
sufficient to determine the highest spin part of the conformal partial wave decomposition of
the CFT four-point function. This limit is the AdS/CFT analogue of the well known Regge
limit in flat space scattering. It will allow us to find some solutions for general L.


                                                   27
                                     P4
                                                            P3

                                                             P2
                                     P1



Figure 5: External points Pi in the boundary of conformally compactified AdS. The Regge
limit corresponds to P3 → −P1 or P2 → −P4 . In this limit the dominant contribution to the
four-point function comes from the AdS region around the future lightcone of P1 and past
lightcone of P4 , in particular, from their intersection at the (d − 1)-dimensional hyperboloid
shown in blue.

   As in flat space, the Regge limit is intrinsically Lorentzian and we must consider physical
AdSd+1 ⊂ R2,d = M2 × Md . A particularly convenient way of taking the Regge limit is to
choose the following external points

                           P1 = (1, 0, 0) ,              P2 = (x2 , 1, x) ,             (5.16)
                         P3 = (−1, −x2 , x) ,            P4 = (0, −1, 0) ,              (5.17)

where P = (P + , P − , P a ) ∈ M2 ×Md with metric dP 2 = −dP + dP − +dP adPa . The conformal
invariant cross ratios are then given by

                            zz = x2 x2 ,          z + z = −2x · x ,                     (5.18)

and the Regge limit corresponds to z, z → 0 with fixed ratio z/z. As depicted in Fig. 5,
this corresponds to the limit of small scattering angle in the bulk. This configuration of the
cross ratios can be obtained as an analytic continuation of the Euclidean amplitude [34].
The Regge regime can be reached starting from the Euclidean four-point function, rotating
z anti-clockwise around the branch points at 0 and 1, keeping z fixed, and then considering
the limit z, z → 0.

   We wish to determine the Regge limit of the four-point function associated to the bulk
interaction

                         φ2 (∇2 )k φ2 = 2k φ2 (∇µ1 . . . ∇µk φ)2 + . . . ,              (5.19)

                                                 28
where the . . . stand for terms with fewer derivatives after using the equations of motion. We
shall restrict to the case of even k corresponding to the left most box in each row in Fig. 2.
The exact computation of the four-point function could be performed using the techniques
of the previous section to reduce the Witten diagrams,
                X Z
              k
            2              dX (−2P2 · X)−∆ (−2P3 · X)−∆                           (5.20)
              perm Pi   AdS

                              ∇M1 . . . ∇Mk (−2P1 · X)−∆ ∇M1 . . . ∇Mk (−2P4 · X)−∆ ,

to a sum of D-functions. However, one can determine the Regge limit of the four-point
function directly. The basic idea is that, in this limit, the integral over the interaction point
in AdS is dominated by the points null related to the external points P1 and P4 . Notice that
these points are also almost null related to P3 and P2 because P3 ∼ −P1 and P2 ∼ −P4 .
More precisely, we can introduce coordinates in AdS via
                                                                        
                                 uv                       uv
             X = u, v 1 −                 , cosh r 1 −             , e sinh r , (5.21)
                              4 cosh2 r                2 cosh2 r

with e ∈ S d−2 . In the region of interest we have uv ≪ cosh2 r and we can simply write

                                          X ≈ (u, v, w)                                   (5.22)

with w ∈ Hd−1 . The u = v = 0 hypersurface is the intersection of the lightcones of P1 and
P4 , as shown in Fig. 5. We can now determine the Regge limit of a given Witten diagram
using the following simple rules
                            Z               Z       Z
                                              du dv
                                 dX . . . ≈               dw . . . ,              (5.23)
                             AdS                2    Hd−1
                              −2X · P1 ≈ v ,                                      (5.24)
                                −2X · P2 ≈ u − 2x · w ,                                   (5.25)
                                −2X · P3 ≈ −v − 2x · w ,                                  (5.26)
                                −2X · P4 ≈ −u .                                           (5.27)

The Regge limit of (5.20) is then given by
 Z        Z
    du dv                         4i(g uv )k 2k                   1               1
                dw                   ∆                  ∆
                                                          ∂uk           ∆
                                                                          ∂vk           , (5.28)
      2    Hd−1    (u − 2x · w + iǫ) (−v − 2x · w + iǫ)       (−u + iǫ)       (v + iǫ)∆

where we have used the fact that the dominant behavior is obtained by taking the maximum
number of u and v derivatives. The factor of 4 comes from the 4 possible permutations of



                                                29
the external Pi that give the same dominant behavior and the factor of i comes from the
Wick rotation. The integrals over u and v can be done to give
                 2             Z
         2 2k+1 Γ (2∆ + k − 1)                               1
      iπ 2           4
                                      dw                2∆+k−1
                                                                                    . (5.29)
                    Γ (∆)        Hd−1    (−2x · w + iǫ)        (−2x · w + iǫ)2∆+k−1

As explained in [35], this convolution integral over Hd−1 can be evaluated using harmonic
analysis on hyperbolic space. This leads to the final expression
                                                                        
                                 Z   π d Γ2 2∆+k+iν−d/2    Γ 2 2∆+k−iν−d/2
                                                 2                  2
         (zz)∆ A1 (z, z) ≈ iσ 1−k dν                 1−2k  4
                                                                             Ωiν (ρ) , (5.30)
                                                   2      Γ (∆)

where z = σeρ , z = σe−ρ and Ωiν are harmonic functions on Hd−1 . In d = 2, the harmonic
functions are simply cosines,
                                                    1
                                       Ωiν (ρ) =      cos(νρ) ,                          (5.31)
                                                   2π
and in d = 4, they are given by
                                                      sin(νρ)
                                       Ωiν (ρ) =                 .                       (5.32)
                                                     4π 2 sinh ρ

   Now that we have determined the Regge limit of the four-point function we can study
its conformal partial wave decomposition. We shall follow closely the methods of [35]. In
particular, our starting point will be the representation
                                               L Z
                                               X
                               ∆
                         (zz) A1 (z, z) =                 dν fl (ν)Giν,l (z, z) ,        (5.33)
                                               l=0

where fl (ν) = fl (−ν) and

                   Giν,l (z, z) = t(ν, l)g d +iν,l (z, z) + t(−ν, l)g d −iν,l (z, z) ,   (5.34)
                                           2                             2


with
                                                               
                                     Γ iν + d2 − 1 Γ4 l+iν
                                                        2
                                                           + d4
                  t(ν, l) = − d                                        .               (5.35)
                             4π 2 Γ(iν)Γ l + iν + d2 Γ l + iν + d2 − 1

As we shall see, the standard conformal partial wave decomposition can be obtained from
this representation by reducing the ν integral to a sum of the residues of the poles along the
ν imaginary axis. This representation is particularly convenient because in the Regge limit
we have

                                   Giν,l (z, z) ≈ 2πi σ 1−l Ωiν (ρ) .                    (5.36)

                                                     30
Therefore, the Regge limit of the full amplitude is determined by the highest spin function
fL (ν),
                                                  Z
                           ∆                  1−L
                       (zz) A1 (z, z) ≈ 2πi σ       dνfL (ν)Ωiν (ρ) .                (5.37)

Comparing with (5.30) we conclude that k = L and
                                                                    
                π d−1 22L−2 2 2∆ + L + iν − d/2    2 2∆ + L − iν − d/2
       fL (ν) =            Γ                     Γ                       .                              (5.38)
                   Γ4 (∆)              2                    2
In order to recover the standard conformal partial wave expansion we use the parity of fl (ν)
to write
                                           L Z
                                           X
                           ∆
                      (zz) A1 (z, z) = 2                dνfl (ν)t(ν, l)g d +iν,l (z, z) .               (5.39)
                                                                          2
                                              l=0

We can now deform the ν integration contour into the lower half plane and pick up the poles
of the integrand. The function t(ν, l) does not have poles in the lower half plane and the
poles of g d +iν,l give rise to partial waves with spin smaller than l. The function fL (ν) has
           2
double poles at d2 + iν = 2∆ + 2n + L for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . . It is convenient to define
                                                              
                                                             d
                                 ν(n) = −i 2∆ + 2n + L −           ,                      (5.40)
                                                             2
and write
                                      π d+1 22L−2 Γ2 (2∆ + L + n − d/2)
                       fL (ν(n)) =                                       .                              (5.41)
                                         Γ4 (∆)     Γ2 (1 + n) sin2 (πn)
Then,
                     ∞
                     X                                                                                
    ∆                  ∂ π d 22L+1 Γ2 (2∆ + L + n − d/2) t (ν(n), L)
(zz) A1 (z, z) = −                                                                     g2∆+2n+L,L(z, z) +. . . ,
                     n=0
                           ∂n                   Γ4 (∆)Γ2 (1 + n)
                                                                                                        (5.42)
where the . . . denote partial waves with spin smaller than L. Comparing with (3.11) we
conclude that
                                               ∂
                                p1 (n, L) =       (p0 (n, L)γ(n, L)) ,                                  (5.43)
                                              2∂n
in agreement with (4.25) and
                                                    d
                                         π 2 22L Γ (2∆ + 2n + L − 1)
                p0 (n, L)γ(n, L) = 4                                                                    (5.44)
                                   Γ (∆)Γ2 (1 + n) Γ (2∆ + 2n + L − d/2)
                                    Γ2 (2∆ + n + L − d/2) Γ4 (∆ + n + L)
                                 ×                                       .
                                   Γ (2∆ + 2n + 2L) Γ (2∆ + 2n + 2L − 1)

                                                        31
Using the explicit expression (4.2) for p0 (n, l) in d = 2, we find
                                                                 
                    πΓ(n + L + 1)Γ (2∆ + n + L − 1) Γ ∆ + n − 21 Γ (∆ + n + L)
          γ(n, L) =                                                           .        (5.45)
                       4Γ (1 + n) Γ (∆ + n) Γ ∆ + n + L + 21 Γ (2∆ + n − 1)

This is precisely the solution (4.16) found in the previous section. In d = 4 we find, using
(4.29),

                π 2 Γ(n + L + 2)Γ(∆ + n − 32 )Γ(∆ + n + L)Γ(2∆ + n + L − 2)
 γ(n, L) =                                                                       (5.46)
           16(1 + L)(∆ − 1)2 Γ(n + 1)Γ(∆ + n − 1)Γ(∆ + n + L + 21 )Γ(n + 2∆ − 3)

in agreement with (4.42).


6     Locality and the CFT singularity

As reviewed in section 2.2 the existence of a local bulk theory implies a peculiar behavior
of the CFT correlators. In [10] the scattering thought experiment described in section 2.2
was used to predict a particular singularity of the CFT four-point function. In the present
notation this prediction reads
                                                   F (σ)
                            (zz)∆ A1 (z, z) ≈            ,     (ρ → 0) ,                  (6.1)
                                                    ρ2β
where we recall the relations z = σeρ and z = σe−ρ . It is crucial that the limit ρ → 0
is taken after analytically continuing the Euclidean correlator to the Lorentzian regime of
the scattering process. More precisely, this analytic continuation corresponds to the Wick
rotation of AdS global time τ → −iτ eiα where α = 0 is the Euclidean regime and α = π2 is
the Lorentzian one. For ρ = 0, this gives the following continuation of the cross ratios [10]

                                 θ − iπeiα                             θ + iπeiα
                   z(α) = cos2             ,             z(α) = cos2             ,        (6.2)
                                     2                                     2
shown in Fig. 6. The strength of the singularity is controlled by

                                        2β = 4∆ + 2k − 3 ,                                (6.3)

where 2k is the number of derivatives in the quartic vertex of our scalar model. More gener-
ally, the strength of the singularity is fixed by the scaling dimension of the bulk interaction
vertices involved in the computation of the correlator. Finally, the residue of the singularity
is directly related to the S-matrix of the bulk theory,
                                                         F (σ)
                                 T (s, t) ∝ sk                       ,                    (6.4)
                                                 σ 1−k (1 − σ)2∆+k−2

                                                    32
                                z                          z

                                           0      1




Figure 6: Complex paths of z and z from the Euclidean regime to the Lorentzian regime.
The path of z is equivalent to going around the branch points at 0 and 1 anticlockwise and
then following the complex conjugate of the z-path. The final Lorentzian values are given
by z, z = e±ρ sin2 2θ ∓ iǫ.

where σ is related to the Mandelstam invariants s and t and the scattering angle θ via
                                                    t      θ
                                               σ = − = sin2 .                                             (6.5)
                                                    s      2
Notice that after the flat space limit, R → ∞, the external particles have zero mass, m2 =
∆(∆ − d)/R2 → 0. Therefore, the three Mandelstam invariants obey s + t + u = 0.

   We now wish to understand the origin of this singularity from the point of view of
the conformal partial wave expansion. In order to recover the usual s-channel partial wave
expansion in flat space we consider the conformal partial wave expansion in the same channel.
The first step is to study the Lorentzian ρ → 0 limit of a single conformal partial wave
gE,l (1/z, 1/z). It is clear from the explicit expressions (3.5) and (3.7) that, in d = 2, the
partial waves are not singular in this limit and that, in d = 4, they have a 1/ρ singularity.
We see that, in general, the conformal partial waves have a weaker singularity than the
full four-point function.20 Therefore, the singularity must emerge from the infinite sum
over conformal dimensions E, and so it is sufficient to consider the large E behavior of
the analytically continued partial waves. This can be easily obtained by a saddle point
  20
    The unitarity bound in d = 4 requires ∆ ≥ 1 and therefore the four-point function is always more
singular than a single partial wave. In d = 2 we restrict ourselves in the present discussion to the case β > 0.

                                                      33
approximation.

   First, we consider the large α behavior of the basic function
                                                      Z                    α
                          −α                    Γ(2α) 1 dt         t(1 − t)
           k(2α, 1/z) = z F (α, α, 2α, 1/z) = 2                                .                (6.6)
                                                Γ (α) 0 t(1 − t)     z−t
There are two saddle points in the complex t-plane,
                                                       √
                                       t± = z ±            z2 − z ,                             (6.7)

and the saddle point approximation gives

                                             22α−1
                               k(2α, 1/z) ≈ p         (2t − 1)α .                               (6.8)
                                             t(1 − t)

For z < 1 and real the two saddle points t± are the complex conjugate of each other, and
the integrand has a branch point at z between 0 and 1. To define the integral we need an iǫ
prescription to move the branch point away from the integration contour. This prescription
is given by the analytic continuation shown in Fig. 6,
                                                            θ
                                      z, z = e±ρ sin2         ∓ iǫ .                            (6.9)
                                                            2
Therefore, for z we pick up the contribution from the saddle point t ≡ t+ (z) with positive
imaginary part and for z we pick up the contribution from the saddle point t ≡ t− (z) with
negative imaginary part. Expanding at small ρ we obtain
                                       θ          θ  i         θ
                          t, t = ±ie∓i 2 sin        + ρe∓iθ tan + O(ρ2 ) .                     (6.10)
                                                  2 2          2
Knowing the asymptotic behavior of the basic function k(2α, z) we are ready to determine
the large E and small ρ behavior of the Lorentzian partial waves.

   We start by the d = 2 case. Using (6.8) it is easy to obtain

                                                 e−iπE 22E−3 −iEρ tan θ (2)
                         gE,l (1/z, 1/z) ≈                  e         2P
                                                                         l (θ) ,               (6.11)
                                                    sin θ
where
                                           (2)         8 cos(lθ)
                                       Pl (θ) =                  .                             (6.12)
                                                        1 + δl,0
                   (d)
We denote with Pl (θ) the harmonic functions on S d−1 with laplacian eigenvalue −l(l+d−2).
A convenient normalization is
                     d−1                                                                
          (d)    2d π 2 (d + 2l − 2)Γ(d + l − 2)                            d−1      2 θ
        Pl (θ) =                                F           −l, d + l − 2,     , sin      ,   (6.13)
                         Γ d−1
                             2
                                 Γ(l + 1)                                    2         2

                                                      34
                      3−d P∞     (d)
such that T (s, t) = s 2   l=0 Pl (θ) corresponds to free propagation [29]. The s-channel
conformal partial wave decomposition of the four-point function is
                                    ∞
                                    XXL
                                             ∂                                      
                (zz)∆ A1 (z, z) =               γ(n, l)p0 (n, l)g2∆+2n+l,l (1/z, 1/z) .                           (6.14)
                                    n=0 l=0
                                            2∂n
                                        even


Using the large n approximation

                                                     π      n4∆−3
                                    p0 (n, l) ≈                      ,                                            (6.15)
                                                  Γ4 (∆) 24∆+4n+2l−5

we conclude that in order to recover the right singularity (6.1) we need

                                           γ(n, l) ≈ µl n2k−1 ,                                                   (6.16)

at large n. Then,
                                         4∆ L              ∞
                            4iπ 2 sin θ2    X         (2)
                                                           X                       θ
             ∆
         (zz) A1 (z, z) ≈ − 4                    µl Pl (θ)     n4∆+2k−4 e−2inρ tan 2 .                            (6.17)
                           Γ (∆) sin θ       l=0           n=0
                                                         even


The small ρ behavior of the sum over n can be determined by approximating the sum by an
integral. This gives the predicted singularity,
                                                                 2−2k              4∆+2k−4   L
                        π 2 Γ(4∆ + 2k − 3) sin θ2                          cos 2θ              X         (2)
            ∆
        (zz) A1 (z, z) ≈ 4                                                                            µl Pl (θ)   (6.18)
                        4Γ (∆)(2i)4∆+2k−6                           ρ4∆+2k−3                   l=0
                                                                                               even


and the standard partial wave expansion of the flat space S-matrix,
                                                         L
                                                         X
                                                     k               (2)
                                      T (s, t) ∝ s               µl Pl (θ) .                                      (6.19)
                                                          l=0
                                                          even


Notice that the condition k ≥ L guarantees that T is always a polynomial of s and t. In
the simplest example of a pure quartic interaction with k = L = 0 we obtain an S-matrix
independent on the Mandelstam invariants, as expected. In case L = 2 we obtain the simple
expression
                                    T (s, t) ∝ sk (µ0 + 2µ2 cos(2θ)) .                                            (6.20)

In appendix D we present the exact conformal partial wave decomposition of two L =
2 examples, one with k = 2 and one with k = 3. The first example is the interaction
(∇φ)2 (∇φ)2 which has k = 2 and µ2 /µ0 = 7/2. This gives T (s, t) ∝ s2 +ts+t2 ∝ s2 +t2 +u2 ,
as expected. The second example is the interaction (∇φ)2 (∇µ ∇ν φ)2 which has k = 3 and
µ2 /µ0 = −1/2. This yields again the expected result, T (s, t) ∝ st(s + t) ∝ s3 + t3 + u3 .

                                                         35
    Similarly, in d = 4 we find that

                                             e−iπE 22E−9 −iEρ tan θ (4)
                    gE,l (1/z, 1/z) ≈ −i                     e    2P
                                                                     l (θ) ,                                  (6.21)
                                           π(1 + l)ρ sin2 2θ

where
                                 (4)              sin(l + 1)θ
                               Pl (θ) = 64π(1 + l)                                                            (6.22)
                                                     sin θ
                           3
are harmonic functions on S . Using the large n limit of (4.29),

                                             π(l + 1)        n4∆−6
                           p0 (n, l) ≈                                                                        (6.23)
                                         Γ2 (∆)Γ2 (∆ − 1) 24∆+4n+2l−7

and requiring the singularity (6.1), we obtain the large n behavior of the anomalous dimen-
sions,
                                         γ(n, l) ≈ µl n2k+1 .                                                 (6.24)

This gives
                                                                2−2k             4∆+2k−4   L
                     π(∆ − 1)2 Γ(4∆ + 2k − 4) sin θ2                     cos θ2              X          (4)
          ∆
    (zz) A1 (z, z) ≈                                                                                µl Pl (θ) (6.25)
                       16Γ4 (∆)(2i)4∆+2k−6                            ρ4∆+2k−3               l=0
                                                                                             even


and we recover the partial wave decomposition of the flat space S-matrix,
                                                     L
                                                     X
                                                 k              (4)
                                  T (s, t) ∝ s              µl Pl (θ) .                                       (6.26)
                                                     l=0
                                                     even




7        Convergence in l

The story thus far fits together nicely, but there is a significant loose end. We introduced
the maximum spin L as a device to allow counting of solutions, but we needed to use this
rather early in the process of solving the constraints, beginning in Eq. (4.5). Thus there is a
concern that we might be missing some nonlocal solutions involving unbounded l. Here we
analyze this issue, and largely exclude it.

    First we need to understand how crossing constrains the large-l behavior of γ(n, l). Write

                              A1 (z, z) = α(z, z) ln zz + β(z, z) ,                                            (7.1)

where α(z, z) and β(z, z), regarded as independent functions of z and z, are holomorphic
around z = 0. From the OPE expansion it follows that their only singularities in z or z are


                                                     36
branch cuts from 1 to ∞. The amplitude grows as ln(1 − z) as z → 1, and we assume that
this is true of the individual functions α(z, z), β(z, z).21

       Then for l > n,
                            I                 I
                               dz                      dz
                 γ(n, l) =        n+1
                                                              F
                                                         n+l+1 1−∆−n
                                                                     (z)F1−∆−n−l (z)α(z, z) ,              (7.2)
                           C 2πiz                 C 2πiz

where both contours circle the origin. For large l we can estimate this by expanding the z
contour, the factor of z −(n+l+1) pushing the contour outward until it wraps the branch cut
at 1, and the dominant contribution comes from the neighborhood of this point. We then
use the singular behavior ln(1 − z) known from crossing to conclude that the integral is no
larger than O(l−1 ln l); the precise bound does not matter because we can readily improve
it. Note as in Eq. (4.8) that

       DF1−∆−n−l (z) = λ∆+n+l F1−∆−n−l (z) ,              λ∆+n+l = (∆ + n + l)(∆ + n + l − 1) .            (7.3)

We can multiply F1−∆−n−l (z) in the contour integral by 1 = D/λ∆+n+l and then integrate
by parts to have D act on α(z, z). Now, D has the convenient property that when acting on
α(z, z), the singularity at z = 1 is still ln(1 − z); to see this consider its action on a general
monomial (1 − z)m ln(1 − z). Thus we improve the bound by a factor of λ−1                     −2
                                                                                  ∆+n+l = O(l ).
By iterating we can conclude that at fixed n, γ(n, l) must fall faster than any power of l,

                                  lm γ(n, l) → 0 as l → ∞ , all m, n .                                     (7.4)

       We can now extend the upper limits on the l sums (4.5, 4.7, 4.11) to infinity. The sum over
l converges sufficiently rapidly that it cannot generate additional singularities of the form
of (1 − z)m ln(1 − z) so these come only from the explicit logarithms in the hypergeometric
functions. In particular, the bound on γ(n, l) together with the asymptotic behavior of the
J(p, q) implies that the sums (4.11) converge when extended to infinity. Thus, for example,
we can immediately use this relation at (p, q) = (1, 0) to obtain
                                     ∞                                ∞
                              1 X                              1 X
                γ(1, 0) = −             γ(1, l)J(1 + l, 0) +             γ(0, l)J(l, 1) .                  (7.5)
                            J(1, 0) l=2                      J(1, 0) l=0
                                       even                                 even


Similarly, at each p we can use the equations with q < p and the invertibility of M(p)qr to
solve for γ(p, 0), . . . , γ(p, 2p − 2). In all, the γ(n, l) with l ≥ 2n are free parameters, and we
solve for γ(n, l) with l ≤ 2n − 2, just as in the earlier discussion where we had the additional
condition that l ≤ L.22
  21
      It would seem impossible for more singular terms to cancel in Eq. (7.1), because one term has a discon-
tinuity and the other not, but we do not have a derivation.
   22
      The redundancy of the constraints noted earlier shows up here as the result, following from the known
bulk solutions, that if the free parameters γ(n, l ≥ 2n) vanish for l > L, then so do the γ(n, l < 2n) for l > L.

                                                          37
    Eq. (7.5), and together with the higher-p equations, give all γ(n, l) as convergent sums of
fixed-L solutions, one for each free parameter. Thus the solutions found earlier are complete.

    There would seem to be a trivial counterexample to our conjecture. Since we have an
infinite number of higher-derivative solutions in the bulk, it would seem that we can make
a nonlocal solution by taking an infinite sum. Of course we expect such nonlocality on the
scale ls , from integrating out the string-scale and higher states. General arguments from
effective field theory restrict the coefficients of higher-derivative operators to be set by the
cutoff scale, in order that that net positive powers of the cutoff not appear in loops. In
effective field theory one works to a given order in the inverse cutoff scale, and then only a
finite number of higher-derivative terms can appear. We would expect this argument to have
a parallel in the CFT: going to higher orders in 1/N 2 we will encounter divergences in the
sum over intermediate states in the low-dimension sector that we are studying. These will
be cut off in the full theory, and existence of the ∆large → ∞ limit should require that their
coefficients scale as inverse powers of ∆large , such that there will be only a finite number of
solutions to any given order.

   It is worth exploring a bit further the possibility of constructing a non-local bulk inter-
action of the form
                                      ∞
                                      X
                                            dk φ2 (a2 ∇2 )k φ2 ,                             (7.6)
                                      k=0

where dk are dimensionless coefficients and a is a characteristic length scale of the interaction.
The partial wave expansion is
                                                ∞
                                                X
                                   γ(n, l) =          dk γ (k) (n, l) ,                      (7.7)
                                                k=0

where the γ (k) (n, l) corresponding to these operators were partly obtained in Sec. 5.2. Based
on the coefficients obtained in Sec. 5.2,

                                     γ (k) (n, k) ∼ (k!)2 k 2n .                             (7.8)

We do not have an explicit solution for partial waves l 6= k, but can estimate γ(n, l) by
keeping only k = l on the right,

                                       γ(n, l) ∼ dl (l!)2 l2n .                              (7.9)


    Consider the example dk = (a/R)2k , which is just what would be obtained from integrat-
ing out a particle of mass a−1 . The estimate (7.9) is inconsistent with the falloff (7.4), so this

                                                  38
does not solve the crossing relation. The reason is clear: the particle that we have integrated
out corresponds to a new single-trace operator with ∆(∆ − d) = R2 /a2 , and this must be
included explicitly in the OPE. Even a gaussian nonlocality, dk ∼ (a/R)2k /k!, fails to satisfy
crossing. We need the much stronger condition that (k!)2 dk falls faster than any power of k.
This condition is reminiscent of the generalized notion of locality in Ref. [37], and suggests
that even with an infinite series of local operators the crossing condition imposes some form
of locality.23


8       Inclusion of Tµν

Let us first consider the effect of dropping the Z2 symmetry. The operator O will generically
appear in the product OO, leading to an extra term

                                                           g∆,0 (z, z)
                                                  c2OOO                                       (8.1)
                                                            (zz)∆

in the partial wave expansion (3.4). At fixed cOOO we can think of this as an inhomogeneous
term in the crossing relation (3.8, 4.11, 4.32). Any two solutions will differ by a solution to
the homogenous equation, as already studied, so the effect is to introduce at most one new
parameter c2OOO into the solution. As before, the bulk picture provides an existence proof
for these solutions, generated by the exchange graph with two φ3 couplings, so the counting
in the bulk and the CFT again matches. We will explore the detailed form of these solutions
in future work. We note that they will necessarily involve all values of l.

   Similarly we can add additional scalar operators of various dimensions into the OPE.
Further we can spin-2 operators of various dimensions, where ∆ = d would be the energy
momentum tensor. Each additional operator introduces one additional parameter into the
crossing solution, and correspondingly one bulk coupling. Thus we can immediately embed
our result into a full-fledged CFT. In fact, at leading order in the planar expansion our
result would apply to the correlator of four identical scalar operators in any CFT. Thus we
can conclude that our conjecture holds, to this order, quite generally.

    The same logic would allow us to introduce operators of spin greater than two, apparently
giving a result even more general than we conjectured. From the bulk point of view, we are
adding a traceless symmetric field φµ1 ...µl . The flat-space propagator for mass M 2 would be
                                                             1
                               hφµ1 ...µl φν1 ...νl i =              SPµ1 ν1 . . . Pµl νl ,   (8.2)
                                                          k2 + M 2
 23
      We thank D. Gross for informing us of Ref. [37], and for discussions.

                                                            39
where
                                                kµ kν
                                            Pµν = ηµν +                               (8.3)
                                                 M2
and S projects onto the symmetric traceless part. In AdS spacetime this is readily made
covariant. The operator Pµν removes ghosts from the timelike components, as is clear in the
rest frame. The inverse power of M 2 implies that loops will contain positive powers of the
cutoff scale; these would be absent only if φµ1 ...µl coupled to a higher-spin conserved current,
which is not available in an interacting theory. Thus such fields cannot be present in the low
energy effective theory.24 As in the previous section, we would expect such bulk arguments
to be reflected in a breakdown of the 1/N 2 expansion in the CFT.


9       Conclusions

We have confirmed our locality conjecture in the case of the correlator of four low-dimension
operators to leading nontrivial order in 1/N 2 . This excludes the possibility that the bulk the-
ory is somehow smeared over the AdS scale, and so closes a potential loophole in AdS/CFT
duality. In particular, a mysterious property of the four-point function is shown to follow
from a simple property of the operator spectrum.

      Our analysis was limited to CFTs in d = 2 and in d = 4. The extension to d = 6 should be
relatively straightforward using the known explicit expressions for conformal partial waves
[24]. On the other hand, the extension to the d = 3 case, relevant for condensed matter
applications, can not be done using the techniques of this paper because the simplest known
form of the conformal partial waves in odd dimension are the integral representations of [21].
We are presently trying to generalize our methods so that they do not rely so heavily on
the knowledge of explicit expressions of the conformal partial waves and can thus be valid
in any dimension.

   One could consider the extension to higher orders in 1/N 2 ; we have noted some potential
obstructions, from effective field theory reasoning. Also of interest is the coupling of stringy
states to the low dimension sector that we have studied. More far-reaching directions would
include scattering of gravitons (that is, correlators of Tµν ) and their relation to black hole
physics.25 Further, there are many examples of gauge/gravity duality without conformal
invariance. Although conformal invariance has played a major role in our work, there should
be a nonconformal extension though it will have many more equations and unknowns.
 24
      Such arguments have recently been explored in Ref. [38].
 25
      J. de Boer and collaborators have been considering these subjects independently.



                                                     40
   The general direction of our work is to give a derivation of the low energy sector of
gauge/gravity duality from the assumptions of a large-N expansion and a gap in the di-
mensions, without an explicit string construction. If we assume a certain spectrum of low-
dimension operators, the bulk dual necessarily follows. This provides a context for extending
the range of AdS/CFT duality, and is likely to be useful in applications to condensed matter
physics and in the study of cosmological spacetimes.26 Of course, there is no guarantee that
a given low-dimension spectrum can be embedded in a full CFT, and all known examples
arise from string backgrounds.


Acknowledgments

We have benefited from discussions with many colleagues, including O. Aharony, T. Banks, J,
de Boer, D. Berenstein, L. Cornalba, M. Costa, M. Douglas, M. Gary, S. Giddings, D. Gross,
S. Hartnoll, G. Horowitz, J. McGreevy, T. Okuda, S. Shenker, E. Silverstein, E. Sokatchev,
M. Strassler, L. Susskind, S. Todadri, and P. Vieira, and with many participants at the KITP
Program on Fundamental Aspects of String Theory. JP1 is funded by the FCT fellowship
SFRH/BPD/34052/2006 and partially funded by the grant CERN/FP/83508/2008. This
work was supported in part by NSF grants PHY05-51164 and PHY07-57035.


A      Some properties of J(p, q)

The integral J(p, q) defined in equation (4.10) can be explicitly performed in terms of a sum
over hypergeometric functions 4 F3 at z = 1,
                             p  
              Cp Γ(2∆ + 2p) X p (−1)l (∆ + p)2q−l
  J(p, q) = −
              Cq Γ2 (∆ + p) l=0 l      Γ2 (q + 1 − l)
          × 4 F3 (−q + l, −q + l, 1 − ∆ − q, 1 − ∆ − q;                                            (A.1)
                                         l − ∆ − q − p + 1, l − ∆ − q − p + 1, 2 − 2∆ − 2q; 1) .

where (a)b = Γ(a+ b)/Γ(a) = a(a+ 1) . . . (a+ b−1). For a few cases this expression simplifies
significantly. When q = 0, the residue in the integral (4.10) is Fe∆+p (0) = 1, and so
                               Cp Γ(2∆ + 2p)    (2∆ + 2p − 1)Γ(2∆ + p − 1)
                 J(p, 0) = −        2
                                             =−                            .                       (A.2)
                               C0 Γ (∆ + p)              p!Γ2 (∆)
  26
    As a curious application, suppose that we have a CFT whose only low-dimension operators are the
energy-momentum and a conserved current. Then at finite charge density, such a system necessarily violates
the third law of thermodynamics. The point is that — assuming that our result for the four-point function
applies to the partition function as well — then the latter is given by the Reissner-Nordstrom black hole
entropy, whose horizon area is finite even at zero temperature.

                                                   41
When p = 0 the sum (A.1) reduces to a single term, which simplifies because some of the
arguments of 4 F3 are equal:
                C0 Γ(2∆)Γ2 (∆ + q)                                (2∆ − 1)Γ(2∆ + q − 1)
  J(0, q) = −             2 4
                                   F (−q, −q, 2 − 2∆ − 2q, 1) = −                       .
                   Cq (q!) Γ (∆)                                         q!Γ2 (∆)
                                                                                      (A.3)

   It may be worth mentioning that J(p, q) can actually be expressed in terms of a single
hypergeometric 4 F3
                              Cp Γ(2∆ + 2p) (−1)q (1 − q − ∆)2q
             J(p, q) =
                              Cq Γ(∆ + p)2 (2 − 2q − 2∆)q Γ(q + 1)
                                    × 4 F3 (−q, 1 − p − ∆, p + ∆, 2∆ − 1 + q; 1, ∆, ∆; 1) .            (A.4)

However, this expression does not yield the special cases above in an obvious way.

   It is also useful to determine the asymptotic expansion of J(p, q) for p ≫ q, ∆. The
integral J(p, q) picks the term of order z q in

               (1 − z)p F (∆ + p, ∆ + p, 1, z)F (1 − ∆ − q, 1 − ∆ − q, 2 − 2∆ − 2q, z)
                  X∞
                            k1 +k2 +k3 (−p)k1 (∆ + p)k2
                                                       2
                                                            (1 − ∆ − q)2k3
             =            z                                                 .                          (A.5)
               k ,k ,k =0
                                         k1 !   (k2 !)2 k3 !(2 − 2∆ − 2q)k3
                1   2   3

This gives
                                   ∞
                 Cp Γ(2∆ + 2p) X (−p)k1 (∆ + p)2k2 (1 − ∆ − q)2k3
     J(p, q) = −                                                          δk1 +k2 +k3 ,q ,             (A.6)
                 Cq Γ2 (∆ + p) k ,k ,k =0 k1 !(k2 !)2 k3 !(2 − 2∆ − 2q)k3
                                         1   2   3


where each term in the sum grows like pk1 +2k2 at large p. Therefore, the leading behavior of
J(p, q) comes from the term with k1 = k3 = 0 and k2 = q. We obtain
                                                                      Γ(2∆ + 2q − 1)
     J(p, q) = −2Bq p2∆+2q−1 + O(p2∆+2q−2 ) ,             Bq =                                     .   (A.7)
                                                                 q!Γ2 (∆ + q)Γ(2∆ + q − 1)
The regime q ≫ p, ∆ can easily be obtained using the relation (4.14),

                            J(p, q) = −(2∆ + 2p − 1)Bp q 2∆+2p−2 + O(q 2∆+2p−3 ) .                     (A.8)

 We now give an outline of how to obtain the L = 0 solution for the crossing equation in
four dimensions. Setting q = 0 in (4.33) we find

      γ ′ (p, 0)J (∆−1) (p + 1, 0) − γ ′ (p − 1, 0)J (∆−1) (p − 1, 0) = γ ′ (0, 0)J (∆−1) (1, p)       (A.9)

J (∆−1) (p ± 1, 0) is obtained from (A.2), furthermore, using (4.14)
                                                                                  Γ(2∆ + p − 3)
  J (∆−1) (1, p) = (∆ − 1)(2∆ − 1)(3 − 5∆ + 2((p − 3)p + 2p∆ + ∆2 ))                             (A.10)
                                                                                  Γ(p + 1)Γ2 (∆)
We can then use a computer algebra program to iteratively solve (A.9) for γ(p, 0) in terms
of γ(0, 0). We conclude that the the general form of γ(p, 0) is given by (4.34).

                                                     42
B      Nondegeneracy of M (p)qr and M (∆−1)(p)qr

In Sec. 4.2 and Sec. 7 we need to invert the k × k matrix

                         M(p)qr = J(p + 2r, q) ,        q, r = 0, . . . , k − 1              (B.1)
                                                       Pk−1
at fixed p. Suppose that for some constants vr ,        r=0 M(p)qr vr = 0 for all 0 ≤ q ≤ k − 1. In
other words,
                        I
                           dz σ(z) F1−∆−q (z)
                                 q+1 (1 − z)∆
                                                 = 0 , 0 ≤q ≤k−1 ,
                         C 2πi z
                               k−1
                               X
                        σ(z) =      vr C∆+p+2r (1 − z)∆+p+2r Fe∆+p+2r (z) .                  (B.2)
                                r=0

An iterative argument starting from q = 0 shows that the contour integral vanishes iff the
first k terms in the Taylor series for σ(z) at the origin vanish.
          e = (1 − z)2 ∂z z∂z , which is related to D from Eq. (4.8) by z → 1 − z. It follows
   Define D
from the hypergeometric equation that

 D(1 − z)∆+p+2r Fe∆+p+2r (z) = (∆ + p + 2r)(∆ + p + 2r − 1)(1 − z)∆+p+2r Fe∆+p+2r (z) , (B.3)
 e

and so                                                     !
                      k−1
                      Y
                          e − (∆ + p + 2r)(∆ + p + 2r − 1)] σ(z) = 0 .
                         [D                                                                  (B.4)
                      r=0

Now, the differential operator in this equation contains a term (∂z z∂z )k , for which

                                                  Γ(m + 1)2
                             (∂z z∂z )k z m =                 z m−k .                        (B.5)
                                                Γ(m − k + 1)2

(Note that this vanishes for m a nonnegative integer less than k.) All other terms in the
differential operator would give higher powers of z. If σ(z) has leading term z m with m ≥ k,
then it follows that there is a nonzero term of order z m−k on the left side of Eq. (B.4), which
is a contradiction. Since we have already seen that there are no terms in σ(z) with m < k,
it follows that σ(z) vanishes identically, and so do the vr . Thus, M(p)qr vr = 0 implies that
vr = 0, QED.

    In d = 4 we need to invert a similarly defined matrix

                 M (∆−1) (p)qr = J (∆−1) (p + 2r + 1, q) ,      q, r = 0, . . . , k − 1      (B.6)



                                                  43
                                                                        Pk−1 (∆−1)
at fixed p. Suppose again that there exist constants vr such that r=0        M     (p)qr vr = 0
for all 0 ≤ q ≤ k − 1. Then
                        I
                            dz σ(z) F2−∆−q (z)
                                  q+1 (1 − z)∆
                                                  = 0 , 0 ≤q ≤k−1 ,
                          C 2πi z
                                k−1
                                X
                        σ(z) =       vr C∆+p+2r (1 − z)∆+p+2r Fe∆+p+2r (z) .              (B.7)
                                r=0

This differs from d = 2 only by the arguments in the second term of the integrand. This
does not alter the previous line of reasoning and the proof holds as above; M (∆−1) (p)qr vr = 0
implies that vr = 0.


C     Vanishing of H(z)

After using the solution (4.13), the expression (4.24) for H(z) which appeared in the calcu-
lation of the c(n, l) becomes
                   "              ∞                                                #
                                 X    ∂         (2∆ − 1)Γ(2∆   + 2n)
   H(z) = γ(0, 0) F∆ (1 − z) +            Cn2                2 (∆ + n)
                                                                       z n F∆+n (z)    . (C.1)
                                 n=0
                                     ∂n       (2∆ + 2n −  1)Γ
The infinite sum can be written as a countour integral
               Z                                                     
                       dn     ∂    2 (2∆ − 1)Γ(2∆ + 2n)      n
                                 Cn                         z F∆+n (z) ,                  (C.2)
                  2i tan(πn) ∂n     (2∆ + 2n − 1)Γ2 (∆ + n)
using the Sommerfeld-Watson transform. Integrating by parts and changing variable, n =
(1 − 2∆ + iµ)/2, we can rewrite the expression as an integral over real values of µ (assuming
∆ > 1/2). This gives
                    Z
          (2∆ − 1)         2      1 − iµ 2        1 + iµ Γ2 ( iµ+1
                                                                2
                                                                   ) iµ+1 −∆
        −     4
                      dµ Γ   (∆ −       )Γ  (∆ −        )           z 2      F iµ+1 (z) . (C.3)
           4πΓ (∆)                   2              2      Γ(iµ)                 2


We have checked numerically that this integral is precisely equal to −F∆ (1 −z) and therefore
H(z) vanishes.


D      Explicit Conformal Partial Wave Expansions in 2d

The conformal partial wave expansion (4.3) of the correlator (5.12) in d = 2 can be found
using a series expansion of the D-function. It reads
                                         P6 (n)
             γ(n, 0) =                                                                    (D.1)
                       (2n + 2∆ − 3)(2n + 2∆ − 1)(2n + 2∆ + 1)
                       (n + 1)(n + 2)(n + ∆)(n + ∆ + 1)(n + 2∆ − 1)(n + 2∆)
             γ(n, 2) =                                                                    (D.2)
                             2(2n + 2∆ − 1)(2n + 2∆ + 1)(2n + 2∆ + 3)

                                              44
where
                                                 
    P6 (n) = 7n6 + 21(2∆ − 1)n5 + 99∆2 − 93∆ + 16 n4                                     (D.3)
             +(2∆(∆(58∆ − 75) + 20) + 3)n3 + (∆(∆(38∆(2∆ − 3) + 31) + 11) − 5)n2
             +2∆3 (2∆(8∆ − 13) + 9)n + 2∆4 (4(∆ − 2)∆ + 3)

and γ(n, l) = 0 for l > 2. The c(n, l) are given by equation (4.25).

   For the correlator (5.15) the conformal partial wave expansion in d = 2 is given by

                                        P8 (n)
            γ(n, 0) =                                                                    (D.4)
                      (2n + 2∆ − 3)(2n + 2∆ − 1)(2n + 2∆ + 1)
                      (n + 1)(n + 2)(n + ∆)(n + ∆ + 1)(n + 2∆ − 1)(n + 2∆)
            γ(n, 2) =                                                                    (D.5)
                            2(2n + 2∆ − 1)(2n + 2∆ + 1)(2n + 2∆ + 3)
                         2
                                                       
                    × 3n + (6∆ + 3)n + ∆(6∆ + 7) + 2

where

   P8 (n) = −3n8 + 12(1 − 2∆)n7 + ((100 − 57∆)∆ − 10)n6                                  (D.6)
            −3(∆(∆(2∆ − 89) + 36) + 4)n5 + (∆(3∆(∆(58∆ + 93) − 99) − 14) + 17)n4
            +∆(∆(4(∆ − 1)∆(72∆ + 89) + 13) + 56)n3
            +(∆(∆(∆(2∆(4∆(26∆ − 7) − 115) + 25) + 58) − 10) − 4)n2
            +2∆3 (2∆(∆(4∆(5∆ − 2) − 23) + 2) + 9)n
                                           
            +2∆4 8∆4 − 4∆3 − 14∆2 + ∆ + 3

and γ(n, l) = 0 for l > 2. The c(n, l) are again given by equation (4.25).


References

 [1] J. M. Maldacena, “The large N limit of superconformal field theories and supergrav-
     ity,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, 231 (1998) [Int. J. Theor. Phys. 38, 1113 (1999)]
    [arXiv:hep-th/9711200].

 [2] S. S. Gubser, I. R. Klebanov and A. M. Polyakov, “Gauge theory correlators from
    non-critical string theory,” Phys. Lett. B 428, 105 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9802109].

 [3] E. Witten, “Anti-de Sitter space and holography,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, 253
    (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9802150].


                                             45
 [4] G. Bertsch, S. J. Brodsky, A. S. Goldhaber and J. F. Gunion, “Diffractive Excitation
     In QCD,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 297 (1981);
    A. H. Mueller, “Color Transparency and Nuclear Shadowing,” CU-TP-412.

 [5] L. Susskind, “Holography in the flat space limit,” arXiv:hep-th/9901079.

 [6] D. E. Berenstein, M. Hanada and S. A. Hartnoll, “Multi-matrix models and emergent
     geometry,” JHEP 0902, 010 (2009) [arXiv:0805.4658 [hep-th]];
     “Small AdS black holes from SYM,” Phys. Lett. B 673, 264 (2009) [arXiv:0809.0712
    [hep-th]].

 [7] T. Eguchi and H. Kawai, “Reduction Of Dynamical Degrees Of Freedom In The Large
    N Gauge Theory,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1063 (1982);
    G. Bhanot, U. M. Heller and H. Neuberger, “The Quenched Eguchi-Kawai Model,”
    Phys. Lett. B 113, 47 (1982).

 [8] J. Polchinski, “S-matrices from AdS spacetime,” arXiv:hep-th/9901076.

 [9] S. B. Giddings, “Flat-space scattering and bulk locality in the AdS/CFT correspon-
     dence,” Phys. Rev. D 61, 106008 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9907129].

[10] M. Gary, S. B. Giddings and J. Penedones, “Local bulk S-matrix elements and CFT
     singularities,” arXiv:0903.4437 [hep-th].

[11] M. Gary and S. B. Giddings, “The flat space S-matrix from the AdS/CFT correspon-
    dence?,” arXiv:0904.3544 [hep-th].

[12] T. Banks, M. R. Douglas, G. T. Horowitz and E. J. Martinec, “AdS dynamics from
    conformal field theory,” arXiv:hep-th/9808016;
    V. Balasubramanian, P. Kraus, A. E. Lawrence and S. P. Trivedi, “Holographic probes
    of anti-de Sitter space-times,” Phys. Rev. D 59, 104021 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9808017];
    I. Bena, “On the construction of local fields in the bulk of AdS(5) and other spaces,”
    Phys. Rev. D 62, 066007 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9905186];
    A. Hamilton, D. N. Kabat, G. Lifschytz and D. A. Lowe, “Holographic representation
    of local bulk operators,” Phys. Rev. D 74, 066009 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0606141].

[13] G. T. Horowitz and V. E. Hubeny, “CFT description of small objects in AdS,” JHEP
     0010, 027 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/0009051];
    V. Hubeny, L. Susskind and N. Toumbas, “Comments concerning the CFT description
    of small objects in AdS,” arXiv:hep-th/0011164.


                                            46
[14] L. F. Alday and J. M. Maldacena, “Gluon scattering amplitudes at strong coupling,”
     JHEP 0706, 064 (2007) [arXiv:0705.0303 [hep-th]].

[15] Z. Bern, L. J. Dixon and V. A. Smirnov, “Iteration of planar amplitudes in maximally
     supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory at three loops and beyond,” Phys. Rev. D 72 (2005)
    085001 [arXiv:hep-th/0505205].

[16] J. M. Drummond, J. Henn, G. P. Korchemsky and E. Sokatchev, “On planar gluon
     amplitudes/Wilson loops duality,” Nucl. Phys. B 795 (2008) 52 [arXiv:0709.2368 [hep-
    th]].

[17] A. Strominger, unpublished;
    S. S. Gubser, I. R. Klebanov and A. W. Peet, “Entropy and Temperature of Black
    3-Branes,” Phys. Rev. D 54, 3915 (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9602135].

[18] O. Aharony, M. Berkooz and E. Silverstein, “Multiple-trace operators and non-local
     string theories,” JHEP 0108, 006 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0105309].

[19] I. R. Klebanov and A.          M.   Polyakov,    Phys.   Lett.   B 550,     213 (2002)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0210114].

[20] X. Bekaert, S. Cnockaert, C. Iazeolla and M. A. Vasiliev, “Nonlinear higher spin theories
     in various dimensions,” arXiv:hep-th/0503128.

[21] S. Ferrara, A. F. Grillo, G. Parisi and R. Gatto, “Covariant Expansion Of The Conformal
    Four-Point Function,” Nucl. Phys. B 49, 77 (1972);
    S. Ferrara, A. F. Grillo, R. Gatto and G. Parisi, “Analyticity properties and asymptotic
    expansions of conformal covariant green’s functions,” Nuovo Cim. A 19, 667 (1974);
    A. M. Polyakov, Non-Hamiltonian approach to conformal quantum field theory, JETP
    39 (1974) 10;
    V. K. Dobrev, V. B. Petkova, S. G. Petrova and I. T. Todorov, “Dynamical Derivation Of
    Vacuum Operator Product Expansion In Euclidean Conformal Quantum Field Theory,”
    Phys. Rev. D 13, 887 (1976).

[22] H. Liu and A. A. Tseytlin, “On four-point functions in the CFT/AdS correspondence,”
    Phys. Rev. D 59, 086002 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9807097];
    D. Z. Freedman, S. D. Mathur, A. Matusis and L. Rastelli, “Comments on 4-
    point functions in the CFT/AdS correspondence,” Phys. Lett. B 452, 61 (1999)
    [arXiv:hep-th/9808006];
    H. Liu, “Scattering in anti-de Sitter space and operator product expansion,” Phys. Rev.

                                             47
    D 60, 106005 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9811152];
    E. D’Hoker and D. Z. Freedman, “General scalar exchange in AdS(d+1),” Nucl. Phys.
    B 550, 261 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9811257];
    L. Hoffmann, A. C. Petkou and W. Ruhl, “A note on the analyticity of AdS
    scalar exchange graphs in the crossed channel,” Phys. Lett. B 478 (2000) 320
    [arXiv:hep-th/0002025];
    L. Hoffmann, A. C. Petkou and W. Ruhl, “Aspects of the conformal operator prod-
    uct expansion in AdS/CFT correspondence,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 4 (2002) 571
    [arXiv:hep-th/0002154].

[23] E. Witten, “Three-Dimensional Gravity Revisited,” arXiv:0706.3359 [hep-th].

[24] F. A. Dolan and H. Osborn, “Conformal four point functions and the operator product
    expansion,” Nucl. Phys. B 599 (2001) 459 [arXiv:hep-th/0011040];
    F. A. Dolan and H. Osborn, “Conformal partial waves and the operator product expan-
    sion,” Nucl. Phys. B 678 (2004) 491 [arXiv:hep-th/0309180].

[25] R. Rattazzi, V. S. Rychkov, E. Tonni and A. Vichi, “Bounding scalar operator dimen-
     sions in 4D CFT,” JHEP 0812 (2008) 031 [arXiv:0807.0004 [hep-th]].

[26] V. S. Rychkov and A. Vichi, “Universal Constraints on Conformal Operator Dimen-
     sions,” arXiv:0905.2211 [hep-th].

[27] A. A. Tseytlin and K. Zarembo, “Effective potential in non-supersymmetric SU(N) x
     SU(N) gauge theory and interactions of type 0 D3-branes,” Phys. Lett. B 457, 77 (1999)
    [arXiv:hep-th/9902095];
    C. Csaki, W. Skiba and J. Terning, “Beta functions of orbifold theories and the hierarchy
    problem,” Phys. Rev. D 61, 025019 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9906057];
    A. Adams and E. Silverstein, “Closed string tachyons, AdS/CFT, and large N QCD,”
    Phys. Rev. D 64, 086001 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0103220].

[28] L. Cornalba, M. S. Costa, J. Penedones and R. Schiappa, “Eikonal approximation in
     AdS/CFT: Conformal partial waves and finite N four-point functions,” Nucl. Phys. B
    767 (2007) 327 [arXiv:hep-th/0611123].

[29] J. Penedones,    “High Energy Scattering in the AdS/CFT Correspondence,”
    arXiv:0712.0802 [hep-th].

[30] P. A. M. Dirac, Annals Math. 37 (1936) 429.



                                             48
[31] E. D’Hoker, D. Z. Freedman, S. D. Mathur, A. Matusis and L. Rastelli, “Graviton
     exchange and complete 4-point functions in the AdS/CFT correspondence,” Nucl. Phys.
    B 562 (1999) 353 [arXiv:hep-th/9903196].

[32] F. A. Dolan and H. Osborn, “Implications of N = 1 superconformal symmetry for chiral
    fields,” Nucl. Phys. B 593 (2001) 599 [arXiv:hep-th/0006098].

[33] L. Cornalba, M. S. Costa, J. Penedones and R. Schiappa, “Eikonal approximation
     in AdS/CFT: From shock waves to four-point functions,” JHEP 0708 (2007) 019
    [arXiv:hep-th/0611122].

[34] L. Cornalba, M. S. Costa and J. Penedones, “Eikonal Approximation in AdS/CFT: Re-
    summing the Gravitational Loop Expansion,” JHEP 0709 (2007) 037 arXiv:0707.0120
    [hep-th].

[35] L. Cornalba, “Eikonal Methods in AdS/CFT: Regge Theory and Multi-Reggeon Ex-
     change,” arXiv:0710.5480 [hep-th].

[36] L. Cornalba, M. S. Costa and J. Penedones, “Eikonal Methods in AdS/CFT: BFKL
     Pomeron at Weak Coupling,” JHEP 0806 (2008) 048 [arXiv:0801.3002 [hep-th]].

[37] A. M. Jaffe, “High-Energy Behavior In Quantum Field Theory. I. Strictly Localizable
     Fields,” Phys. Rev. 158 (1967) 1454.

[38] M. Porrati and R. Rahman, “A Model Independent Ultraviolet Cutoff for Theories with
    Charged Massive Higher Spin Fields,” Nucl. Phys. B 814, 370 (2009) [arXiv:0812.4254
    [hep-th]].




                                           49
