                                                       Analyticity and the Holographic S-Matrix

                                                                       A. Liam Fitzpatrick1 , Jared Kaplan2

                                             1
                                              Stanford Institute for Theoretical Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
                                         2
                                             SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, 2575 Sand Hill, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA.




                                                                                        Abstract




arXiv:1111.6972v3 [hep-th] 11 Jul 2012
                                                     We derive a simple relation between the Mellin amplitude for AdS/CFT correlation
                                                 functions and the bulk S-Matrix in the flat spacetime limit, proving a conjecture of
                                                 Penedones. As a consequence of the Operator Product Expansion, the Mellin amplitude
                                                 for any unitary CFT must be a meromorphic function with simple poles on the real
                                                 axis. This provides a powerful and suggestive handle on the locality vis-a-vis analyticity
                                                 properties of the S-Matrix. We begin to explore analyticity by showing how the familiar
                                                 poles and branch cuts of scattering amplitudes arise from the holographic description.
                                                 For this purpose we compute examples of Mellin amplitudes corresponding to 1-loop and
                                                 2-loop Witten diagrams in AdS. We also examine the flat spacetime limit of conformal
                                                 blocks, implicitly relating the S-Matrix program to the Bootstrap program for CFTs.
                                                 We use this connection to show how the existence of small black holes in AdS leads to a
                                                 universal prediction for the conformal block decomposition of the dual CFT.
1     Introduction and Review
The only exact observables in quantum gravity are associated with the boundary of spacetime,
so a holographic theory of asymptotically flat spacetime will be a theory of the S-Matrix.
Recently, evidence [1, 2, 3] has accumulated supporting a conjecture of Penedones [1] that
the Mellin representation [4, 5, 1] of Conformal Field Theory (CFT) correlation functions
defines a dual bulk S-Matrix via the vanishing-curvature limit of the AdS/CFT correspondence
[6, 7, 8]. Our goal is to investigate the Mellin amplitude as a way of organizing AdS/CFT
into a holographic theory of flat spacetime where the principles of locality and unitarity are
evident. The purpose of this work is to prove Penedones’ conjecture [1, 2] and to explore how
the locality vis-a-vis analyticity of the S-Matrix emerges from the Mellin amplitude of the
CFT; we will discuss unitarity as a consequence of the OPE in a separate work [9].
    The Mellin amplitude for a CFT correlator represents the correlator in terms of a set of
variables that make CFT physics more manifest, much as momentum space naturally represents
scattering amplitudes. In the case of scalar operators, the Mellin representation [4, 5, 1] takes
the form                                     Z                Y
                                                              n
                      hO1 (x1 )...On (xn )i = [dδij ]M (δij )   Γ(δij )(xij )−2δij            (1)
                                                           i<j

where the Mellin Amplitude is the conformally invariant function M (δij ). The ‘Mellin
                                                                                   P      space’ is
the space of variables δij , which are symmetric and subject to the n constraints j6=i δij = ∆i ,
where ∆i are the dimensions of the operators Oi . One can always think of the δij in analogy
with the Mandelstam invariants sij = 2pi · pj of a scattering amplitude; the constraints on the
δij are analogous to the constraints on the sij that follow from momentum conservation and
the on-shell conditions.
    The most significant principle behind the simplicity of the Mellin amplitude is unitarity,
in the guise of the Operator Product Expansion. Using the convergent OPE, it is possible to
express correlation functions involving many operators as a sum over products of correlators
involving fewer operators. The Mellin amplitude displays these OPE decompositions of cor-
relation functions as a sum over poles, with residues given by lower-point Mellin amplitudes.
These poles are analogous to the multi-particle factorization channels of scattering amplitudes,
but in fact they are even more constrained: in unitary CFTs the Mellin amplitude can only
have simple poles in a certain region of the real axis. The existence of these factorization chan-
nels makes it possible to determine the Mellin amplitude recursively, and we [2] and Paulos [3]
gave algebraic diagrammatic rules for its evaluation in the case of scalar theories at tree-level.
We will review these and other properties of Mellin amplitudes more thoroughly in section 1.1.
    The similarity between the Mellin amplitude and the S-Matrix is no coincidence. Penedones
has conjectured [1] a very simple and natural relationship between the Mellin amplitude of
a large N CFT and the S-Matrix of its bulk dual in the flat spacetime limit of AdS. His
conjecture takes the form
                                        !Z                                              
                       1 d+1     X         i∞
                                                                      R2 sij
                                                   α h−∆Σ
        T (sij ) = lim    δ          pi       dα e α      M δij = −          , ∆a = Rma        (2)
                  R→∞ N                   −i∞                           4α
                                   i

where R is the AdS length scale, N is a normalization factor, and T (sij ) is the connected,

                                                1
           AdS                                                        CFT


                                    ∆t

                                                                      �    �
                                                                      ∆t
                                                                  exp
                                                                      R

                   ρ

Figure 1: This figure shows how the AdS cylinder in global coordinates corresponds to the
CFT in radial quantization. The time translation operator in the bulk of AdS is the Dilatation
operator in the CFT, so energies in AdS correspond to dimensions in the CFT.


reduced S-Matrix of massless scalar particles as a function of the Mandelstam invariants.
Penedones checked this conjecture for general scalar theories at tree-level and for φ4 theory at
one-loop. Recently we [2] verified the conjecture for n-pt amplitudes in general scalar theories
at tree-level by showing that our diagrammatic rules for the Mellin amplitude reduce to the
usual Feynman rules in the flat space limit. By setting up the appropriate scattering experi-
ment [10, 11, 12, 13] in AdS and making gratuitous use of the stationary phase approximation,
we will derive Penedones’ conjecture in section 2.
    Why is the Mellin amplitude related to the flat-space S-matrix? A key point is that the
Dilatation operator in the CFT generates global time translations in AdS, as pictured in figure
1. In other words, the energy of particles in AdS is given by the dimension of a CFT operator
(or equivalently a CFT state through the operator-state correspondence). So aside from their
manifest similarity in a large class of examples, one can understand the relationship between
Mellin and scattering amplitudes by thinking about which states in the CFT correspond to
scattering processes in AdS. The CFT states dual to AdS particles with energies parametrically
larger than the AdS curvature scale correspond to operators with very large scaling dimension.
The δij ’s in the Mellin amplitude correspond to relative scaling dimensions, so scattering states
localize the Mellin amplitude on large δij ’s related to the energy and momentum of the physical
scattering process. We will show how to make this argument precise by directly extracting
scattering states from the correlation functions of n single-trace operators, written in the Mellin


                                                2
representation. For scattering momenta pi large compared to the AdS curvature scale, the δij
integration variables in equation (1) are almost completely supported in the region where they
line up with the Mandelstam invariants, so that we have δij ∝ pi · pj . Thus, assuming only
that single-particle states exist in the flat-space limit of the bulk theory, this gives a direct,
non-perturbative proof of Penedones’ conjecture, as stated in equation (2).
    With Penedones’ conjecture proven, we turn to an investigation of locality. From the point
of view of the S-Matrix, one must view locality1 as the statement that the scattering amplitudes
are exponentially bounded analytic functions of the kinematic invariants, except near the real
axis, where the amplitudes can have poles and branch cuts corresponding to resonances and
multi-particle states. Analyticity of the bulk S-matrix is a particularly important property
because, in contrast to most other criteria for locality, it is a sharp statement phrased directly
in terms of holographic observables. The fact that the Mellin amplitude must be a meromorphic
function with simple poles on the real axis [4, 5] seems to us very striking: since the S-Matrix
is just a simple transform of the Mellin amplitude, perhaps bulk locality can be understood as
a natural consequence of a few simple conditions on CFTs.
    We will begin to explore these issues by demonstrating how various familiar physical an-
alyticity properties such as branch cuts and resonances emerge from properties of the Mellin
amplitude at loop-level in AdS. The emergence of simple poles is a straightforward application
of equation (2) to the Mellin amplitude for a single tree-level exchange in AdS. Indeed, the
Mellin amplitude in this case already has an infinite series of poles, corresponding to the pri-
mary CFT operator and its descendants, and all that is necessary is for them to coalesce into a
single pole at the physical bulk mass. However, how branch cuts and resonances emerge is less
obvious, since the only singular behavior of the Mellin amplitude is the presence of poles on
the real axis. The key element in this case is the presence of a tower of poles from multi-trace
operators, each of which contributes a pole to the holographic S-matrix. In the flat-space limit,
these poles appear to be arbitrarily narrowly spaced, and we will see that from a line of such
poles a branch cut emerges. Once branch cuts arise, resonances are virtually guaranteed: the
resummation of one-particle irreducible (1PI) Witten diagrams brings the loop contribution
into the denominator of the propagator. We will show in more detail that the mechanism
for turning real poles in the Mellin amplitude into poles with large imaginary components is
inherently connected to the coalescence of poles from multi-trace operators contributing to 1PI
diagrams. All of these issues are studied in section 3, where we also comment on the significant
recent progress [16, 17, 18, 19] that we have seen in understanding locality in AdS/CFT.
    In section 4 we study the relationship between the conformal block decomposition of the
CFT and the flat space S-Matrix. Conformal blocks are the most elementary possible contri-
butions to CFT 4-pt functions consistent with conformal symmetry; they correspond to the
exchange of a single primary operator in the CFT and are nicely reviewed in [20]. Since a
conformal block has definite dimension and angular momentum, in the flat space limit we find
that it is simply a delta function in the center-of-mass energy times the appropriate angular-
dependence for a spin ` state:
                                     `                   (d)
                                    B∆ (δij )           P` (cos θ)δ(s − M 2 ).                (3)
Recently, progress [21, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26] has been made understanding general properties
  1
      See [14, 15] for nice and relevant discussions.


                                                           3
of CFTs using only the conformal block decomposition, unitarity, and crossing symmetry. Via
the flat spacetime limit, this means that there is a natural relationship between this version of
the Bootstrap program [27] and the S-Matrix program.
    Finally, we discuss what the presence of flat-space black holes in bulk scattering amplitudes
can tell us about CFT correlation functions. The behavior of high-energy scattering amplitudes
directly tells us about the size of contributions from conformal blocks of large dimension. In
theories with gravity, high-energy scattering at trans-Planckian energies results in black hole
formation, which suggests very rapid shutdown of the scattering amplitude for 2-to-2 scattering
                                                           
                                                    1
                                    S(s) ∼ exp − SBH (s)                                      (4)
                                                    2

due to the large entropy of the black hole. This shutdown of the amplitude corresponds to
a rapid shutdown of the conformal block decomposition at large dimensions: we expect that
the conformal block decomposition of CFTs will truncate at some large dimension to more
than exponentially good accuracy, as we discuss in section 4.2. Deriving this property directly
from the CFT would involve understanding the microphysics of Hawking evaporation, and
thus seems to be an extremely important goal for future work.
    Since our primary object of interest will be the flat space S-Matrix, the vast majority of
our discussions of CFTs will be in the context of large N CFTs with an AdS dual that is
well-described by effective field theory. We will always discuss the correspondence in terms of
AdSd+1 /CFTd , and ignore any compactification manifolds, although we expect that they will
be straightforward to include in the future. In the following subsections, we will discuss and
review some basics of CFTs and the Mellin amplitude, and provide a new, simplified derivation
of the vertices for the diagrammatic rules discovered in [2, 3].

1.1     Review
1.1.1   Space of States at Large N
The Mellin representation of CFT correlation functions is best understood by thinking of
CFT correlators in analogy with flat space scattering amplitudes. The basis of this analogy
is the Hilbert space of states at large N . In flat space, one typically quantizes the theory on
flat, space-like surfaces, and chooses the Hamiltonian to be the generator of Poincaré time
translations. One then takes the spectrum of this Hamiltonian to be the basis of the space of
states, which in the limit of weak interactions are the single- and multi-particle states and form
a Fock space. This space has the essential physical property that the energy of a multi-particle
state is simply the sum of the energies of the individual particles. This description remains
valid even in cases where the underlying Lagrangian of the theory is strongly coupled, as long
as the physical particles of the theory are weakly interacting.
    CFTs at large N have a nearly identical structure when one studies the theory in radial
quantization, rather than the quantization in Poincaré time. That is, one takes the “Hamilto-
nian” of the theory to be the dilatation operator D = ixa ∂x∂ a , which generates radial evolution
by rescaling. Rather than having a definite frequency, eigenstates of the “Hamiltonian” now
have a definite scaling dimension. Such eigenstates no longer correspond to particles per se,

                                                4
which anyway do not exist due to the scale-invariance of the theory, but rather to operators,
through the state-operator correspondence of radial quantization. Simply put, the state |Oi
corresponding to an operator O is just that operator acting at the origin on the vacuum:
|Oi = O(0)|vaci. The assumption of large N can be stated purely in terms of the gauge-
invariant operators of the theory as a dynamical property of their correlation functions: at
N → ∞, there is a subsector of operators of the theory whose two-point functions completely
determine all correlation functions. For instance, the four-point function of such operators is
just the sum of disconnected pieces:
                                    N →∞
 hO1 (x1 )O2 (x2 )O3 (x3 )O4 (x4 )i = hO1 (x1 )O2 (x2 )ihO3 (x3 )O4 (x4 )i + (2 ↔ 3) + (2 ↔ 4). (5)

These operators are called the “single-trace” operators, and they create CFT states that are the
analogs of single-particle states in Poincaré QFT, because in the large N limit, the multi-trace
states are just a direct product of single-trace states. It is useful and conventional to group all
operators into irreducible representations of the conformal group, the lowest-dimension states
of which are the “primary” operators. Primary operators are physically similar to flat-space
particle states with zero total momentum, and knowledge of their correlation functions is
sufficient to determine all correlation functions of the theory. The spatial dependence of their
two-point functions is completely constrained by conformal symmetry, and we will work with
the following normalization for single-trace scalar primaries:

                                             C∆                            Γ(∆)
                         hO(x)O(0)i =            ,         C∆ =                                                (6)
                                             x2∆                  2π h Γ(∆ + 1 − h)

where h = d2 . Dimensions of multi-trace states are given by the sum of the individual single-
traces. In other words, given two operators O1 and O2 with dimensions ∆1 and ∆2 , then
at infinite N there exists an operator “O1 O2 ” with dimension ∆1 + ∆2 , and furthermore all
operators can be written as a product of the single-traces. The full space of states is again just
a Fock space, the single-trace operators giving rise to the individual creation and annihilation
operators of the theory. We will next review how it is that Mellin space makes this structure
manifest in the correlation functions.

1.1.2    Factorization on Poles in the Mellin Amplitude
Specific operators appear in the Mellin amplitude in a particularly transparent way: as poles in
the Mellin variables δij . The reason is that operators are “exchanged” in correlation functions
whenever they appear in the operator product expansion (OPE) of the external operators, e.g.
for scalars
                                   O −∆1 −∆2                                          O −∆3 −∆4
        O1 (x1 )O2 (x2 ) ⊃ c12O x∆
                                 12          O(x2 ),       O3 (x3 )O4 (x4 ) ⊃ c34O x∆
                                                                                    34          O(x4 ),        (7)

and this indicates that correlation functions contain a contribution with a particular scaling:
                                                              ∆1 −∆2          ∆3 −∆4       ∆O
                                                         x24               x14                u 2 f (v)
    hO1 (x1 )O2 (x2 )O3 (x3 )O4 (x4 )i ⊃ c12O c34O                                                         ,   (8)
                                                         x14               x13             x∆
                                                                                            12
                                                                                              1 +∆2 ∆3 +∆4
                                                                                                   x34

                                                       5
                                    2 2                   2 2 
                                    x12 x34                 x14 x23
                                u=            ,         v=            ,                                  (9)
                                    x224 x213               x224 x213
                                                                                       F (u,v)
where we have used the fact that the scalar four-point function must take the form ∆1 +∆ 2 x∆3 +∆4
                                                                                   x12
    ∆1 −∆2  ∆3 −∆4                                                                      34

     x24          x14
× x14             x13
                             by conformal invariance. Meanwhile, the contour integration over
δij variables in the Mellin integral causes them to become localized on the poles, which in this
case reproduces the correct power of u when there is a pole in the Mellin amplitude at
                                   δLR ≡ ∆1 + ∆2 − 2δ12 = ∆O .                                          (10)
It is often convenient to introduce associated with each external operator Oi (xi ) a fictitious
                                                                                               2
“momentum”
     P                                     P and “momentum-conservation” condtions pi = ∆i
                pi subject to the “on-shell”
and i pi = 0. Then, the constraints j6=i δij = ∆i are automatically satisfied formally by
the inner products δij ≡ −pi · pj . Furthermore, the poles associated with a given OPE are
in exactly the linear combination of δij ’s corresponding to the fictitious momentum-squared
flowing through the corresponding channel. For instance, note that the δLR variable above is
simply δLR = −(p1 + p2 )2 = −(p3 + p4 )2 . This fact, combined with the Fock space nature of
the states at infinite N , is the reason for the Γ functions in the Mellin integrand in eq. (1).
The point is that these Γ functions contain poles when the δij are negative integers, which
encodes the presence of multi-trace operators in the theory. For instance, the pole in Γ(δ12 ) at
δ12 = −m is a pole in δLR at δLR = ∆1 + ∆2 + 2m, which corresponds to double-trace operators
of the form ∂ r O1 ∂ m−r O2 . In a perturbative description in 1/N , it is natural to factor out these
poles in the integrand from what one calls the “Mellin amplitude” M (δij ), as this separates
out universal purely “kinematic” information.
    One of the most important features of the Mellin amplitude is that it factors on these poles
into the Mellin amplitudes corresponding to lower-point correlation functions. In [2] it was
shown that this factorization takes the following form for the exchange of a scalar field in AdS
dual to an operator of dimension ∆O :
                                                  X Γ(∆ − h + 1)m!
            Res[Mn (δij )]δLR =∆O +2m = −4π h                            Lm (δij )Rm (δij ),
                                                   m
                                                        (∆ − h + 1)m
                                               X                            Y
                                                                            k
                                                                              (δij )nij
                                                         L
                             Lm (δij ) =                Mk+1 (δij + nij )                    ,
                                           P
                                                                            i<j
                                                                                    nij !
                                               nij =m
                                               X                                  Y
                                                                                  n
                                                                                    (δij )nij
                                                         R
                             Rm (δij ) =                Mn−k+1 (δij + nij )                         ,   (11)
                                           P
                                                                              k<i<j
                                                                                            nij !
                                               nij =m

where k and n − k are the number of operators to the left and right, respectively of the scalar
                   L      R
propagator, and Mk+1  , Mn−k+1  are the Mellin amplitudes for the corresponding (k + 1)- and
(n − k + 1)-point correlation functions obtained by cutting that propagator.

1.1.3   Finite Difference Equation
Many properties of the Mellin amplitudes for Witten diagrams in AdS can be understood
most easily by using a finite difference equation that encodes bulk propagation and conformal

                                                   6
blocks. Its existence follows from the fact that propagators are solutions of the bulk Klein-
Gordon equation with a δ-function source, e.g.

                            [∇2AdS − ∆(∆ − d)]G∆ (X, Y ) = −δ(X, Y ),                               (12)

for scalars, where δ(X, Y ) is the δ-function corresponding to the covariant measure in AdS.
Furthermore, one can act with the conformal Casimir on all the external operators inserted to
the left side of the propagator in P
                                   the Witten diagram, and this is equivalent to the Laplacian
acting on the bulk propagator : 2 ( i∈L Ji )2 ∼
                                 1
                                              = −∇2AdS . One then obtains a differential equation
in position space for the correlation function,
                                       !2              
                                   X
                            1        Ji − ∆(d − ∆) A = A0 ,                                (13)
                              2 i∈L

where A is the correlation function itself, and A0 is the correlation function for the same Witten
diagram but with the propagator replaced by a contact interaction. One major advantage of
Mellin space is that the differential equation in position space becomes a finite difference
equation in Mellin space, in much the same way that the Klein-Gordon equation becomes
algebraic in momentum space. For any number of external legs, this takes the form
                                               X                           aj,bi            ab,ij
                                                                                                   
     M0 = (δLR − ∆)(d − ∆ − δLR )M +                   δai δbj M − δaj δbi Mai,bj + δab δij Mai,bj , (14)
                                                ab≤k<ij

                 P        2 P            P            ab,ij
where δLR = −      i∈L pi   = i∈L ∆i − 2 i<j∈L δij , Mai,bj  = M (δab + 1, δij + 1, δai − 1, δbj − 1),
and M0 is the Mellin amplitude for A0 . The reason for the finite differences is that conformal
invariance determines the contribution from any descendant of a primary operator Op in terms
of the contribution of the primary itself, and the dimensions of the descendants differ from
those of their primaries by integers. Since the conformal blocks are just eigenfunctions of the
conformal Casimir, they satisfy this same equation with A0 = M0 = 0, as we discuss in section
4 and derive in appendix D.

1.1.4    A Simplified Derivation of Vertices in the Diagrammatic Rules
It was recently discovered [2, 3] that there are simple diagrammatic rules that rapidly determine
the amplitude for any tree-level Witten diagram in Mellin space. In [3] very simple and
general formulas for these rules were discovered empirically and conjectured to hold more
generally, whereas in [2] equivalent but more cumbersome results were proven. Here, we will
streamline the derivation of the form of the vertex factors in the diagrammatic rules through
a use of the finite difference equation that we reviewed in the previous subsection. Let us
consider the diagram that connects n 3-pt vertices to an off-shell n-pt vertex in the middle, as
depicted in figure 2. We will assume that the diagram therefore only depends on the variables
2δi = ∆ia +∆ib −2δ2i−1 2i −∆i = 2∆ia ib ,i −2δ2i−1 2i and see that this is a consistent assumption.
As reviewed in the previous subsection, by acting with the conformal Casimir on the external
operators at i1 and i2 , one can collapse the internal bulk propagator δ1 to obtain a finite


                                                   7
Figure 2: Internal vertex described in the text. Internal vertices with off-shell δij ’s flowing
through them can be obtained by adding on external three-point vertices.


difference equation, which in this case reads
                                                                             X
                    0 = (δLR − ∆1 )(d − ∆1 − δLR )M + 2δ12                          δij M 12,ij .   (15)
                                                                             ij>2


 Since M depends only on the δi combinations, we can group together δij ’s into the δi linear
combinations in the above equation:
                                                         X
          0 = 2δ1 (d − 2∆1 − 2δ1 )M + 4(∆ia ib ,i − δ1 )  (∆ia ib ,i − δi )M 12;2i−1 2i
                                                                       i≥2
                                                                                !
                                               X
                                               n             X
                                                             n
                  +2(∆1a 1b ,1 − δ1 ) ∆1 +           2δi −         4∆ja jb ,j        M 12 .         (16)
                                               i=1           j=2


Now, starting with the assumption that there exists a set of diagrammatic rules for the Mellin
amplitude in figure 2, we will derive the explicit form that the vertex factors of those rules
have to take. So we take the following ansatz for the Mellin amplitude:
                           X Xm ...m           X                 Y
                                                                 n
                                                                   S(mj )V j (mj )
                                   1   n                                             3
                     M=                    =         Vm1 ...mn                                ,     (17)
                            mi
                                 δi − mi       mi                  j
                                                                             δi − mi

where Vm1 ...mn is an off-shell n-pt vertex, and we have suppressed dependence on the various
dimensions. The function
                                          −2π h Γ2 (∆i − h + 1)mi !
                                 S(mi ) =                                                (18)
                                             Γ(∆i + mi − h + 1)


                                                     8
has been associated with Mellin space propagators by convention [2, 3], although it could also
be absorbed into the definition of the vertices. The reduced vertices V3j (mj ) are vertex factors
associated with two external lines and a single internal line, and take the form
                                                               λia ib j
                                        V3j (mj ) =                           ,                               (19)
                                                          mj !(∆ia ib ,j )−mj
where the coefficient λia ib j is just the Mellin amplitude for the corresponding three-point func-
tion.2 The object X is just the total numerator, defined to simplify notation. Plugging this in
and evaluating on the poles we find
          "
       X                                                         X
0 =         −4m1 (∆1 + m1 − h)Xm1 ...mn + 4(∆1a ,1b ,1 − m1 )        (∆ia ib ,i − mi )Xm1 −1,...mi−1 ,mi −1,mi+1 ...,mn
         mi                                                                  i≥2
                                                                        !          #
                                                   X
                                                   n
        + 2(∆1a 1b ,1 − m1 ) −∆1 − 2m1 +                 [2mi + ∆i ] Xm1 −1,... .                                      (20)
                                                   i=2

Now if we divide by the 3-pt vertices and propagators, the dependence on the external dimen-
sions goes away! This follows because
                                  S(mj − 1)V3j (mj − 1)   ∆j + mj − h
                                             j          =                .                                    (21)
                                     S(mj )V3 (mj )       ∆ja jb ,j − mj
Thus after dividing through, we find a simpler recursion relation for V
                                                                        n          !
               X                                                   ∆1 X          ∆i
m1 Vm1 ...mn =     [(∆i − h + mi )Vm1 −1,...,mi −1,...,mn ] + m1 +   −      mi +       Vm1 −1,m2 ,...,mn ,
               i≥2
                                                                   2   i=2
                                                                                 2

where we assume that m1 > 0. Of course we also get similar equations from each of the n
legs, for a total of n recursion relations. This formula thus provides a constructive derivation
of V , since starting from V0,...,0 , one may recursively increase any of the mi ’s using the formula
above; any V with a negative index is to be understood to vanish. One can check that this
recursion relation is satisfied by the compact expression for the vertex factors conjectured by
Paulos [3], which are
                                                       !
                                 Yn
                                       (1 − h + ∆i )mi
           Vm1 ,...,mn = λn                                                                         (22)
                                 i=1
                                             mi !
                                                                                              
                              (n)                       −m1 , . . . , −mn
                          ×FA         ∆Σ − h,                                      ; 1, . . . , 1 .
                                                  1 + ∆1 − h, . . . , 1 + ∆n − h
The normalization of the vertex factors is chosen here to coincide with [2], and differs slightly
                                                         P             (n)
from [3]. In the above expression, ∆Σ ≡ 12 ni=1 ∆i , and FA is a Lauricella function:
                                                               ∞
                                                                                                  !
               (n)     a 1 , . . . , a n
                                                                  X            Yn
                                                                                   (a   )
                                                                                      i ni ix ni
             FA     g,                     ; x1 , . . . , x n   =      (g)P ni                      . (23)
                       b1 , . . . , b n                           n =0         i=1
                                                                                   (b i )ni
                                                                                            n i !
                                                                    i
                                                           Q
   2                                     h  ∆ia +∆ib +∆j
     For example, this is λia ib j = g π2 Γ      2       − h   i=ia ,ib ,j C∆i for a gφia φib φj interaction, in our
normalization.


                                                          9
    δ12                                                      δ13
                                  Γ(2 − δ12 − δ13 )
                                                                                         Γ(2 − δ12 − δ13 )

                 1
                                                                         1
           1 − δ12 − δ13
                                                                   1 − δ12 − δ13


                               1                                                      1
           Γ(δ12 )                                                  Γ(δ13 )
                            δ12 − 1                                                δ13 − 1




Figure 3: This figure shows the pole prescription for the contour integrals defining the Mellin
representation, as a function of δ12 and δ13 , for the very simple 4-pt example in equation (26).
One can see that the contour of integration lies between the poles of the Γ functions (black)
and the poles of the Mellin amplitude (red) in each variable, including δ14 = ∆φ − δ12 − δ13 .


The coefficient λn is independent of mi , and should be chosen so that V0...0 is the on-shell
n-point Mellin amplitude corresponding to the n-point vertex in figure 2. For gφn ,
                                          πh         Yn
                                 λn    = g Γ(∆Σ − h)     C∆i .                                         (24)
                                          2          i=1

   In summary: to compute any tree-level Witten diagram in a theory of scalars interacting
via contact interactions, one draws all appropriate diagrams, just as in flat space-time. To
each vertex one associates a factor of the coupling times Vm1 ,...,mn , setting mi to zero for the
external lines. To each propagator one associates a factor of
                                                 S∆i (mi )
                                                                                                       (25)
                                                 δi − mi
where δi is the linear combination of δij appropriate to a given propagator. The combination δi
can be most easily computed by associating fictitious momenta pi to each operator, computing
2δI = (Σi pi )2 − ∆I , and setting p2i = ∆i and pi · pj = −δij . Finally, one sums over all mi
associated with internal lines.

1.1.5     A Simple Example - µφ3 Theory at Tree Level
Let us now give the simplest possible example of a non-trivial Mellin amplitude. If we take
d = ∆φ = 2 and compute the Mellin amplitude corresponding to 61 µφ3 theory in AdS3 , we find
                                                                   
                                  R 3 µ2   1         1         1
                      M (δij ) =               +          +                             (26)
                                 2(4π)3 δ12 − 1 δ13 − 1 δ14 − 1

                                                      10
The result is extremely simple because the (often infinite) sums in the definitions of the di-
agrammatic rules terminate for certain special values of the dimensions, as can be seen by
inspection of equation (22). Besides displaying for the reader how simple and natural Mellin
amplitudes can be, this example affords an opportunity to see in figure 3 the precise pole
prescription for the contour integrals defining the CFT correlator in the Mellin representation.


2    The Flat Space Limit
Penedones has conjectured [1] that the connected part of the S-Matrix of the bulk theory dual
to a large N CFT can be obtained from a simple integral transform of the Mellin amplitude
                                      !Z                                            
                      1 d+1 X            i∞
                                                α h−∆Σ             R2 sij
      T (sij ) = lim    δ          pi       dα e α      M δij = −         , ∆a = Rma
                 R→∞ N                  −i∞                          4α
                                i
                        n(1−d)
                  πhR      2
                               +d+1   Yn
                                           C ∆i
         N =                                     ,                                         (27)
                          2           i=1
                                          Γ(∆i )
                                                            P
where we have introduced the short-hand symbol ∆Σ = 12 i ∆i for half the sum of the external
dimensions, and ∆a are the dimensions of internal fields to which we wish to assign a non-zero
mass in the flat space limit. The integration contour in the α plane runs to the right of all
poles of the Mellin amplitude, and the branch cut from αh−∆Σ . Penedones provided many
pieces of evidence for equation (27), showing that it works for tree-level and one-loop 4-pt
amplitudes, and that it accords with earlier observations [12] about a certain singularity in
CFT correlators connected with flat space scattering amplitudes. This evidence was further
bolstered when it was shown in [2, 3] that Mellin amplitudes can be constructed directly from
diagrammatic rules that reduce to the standard Feynman rules in the flat space limit. In effect,
this proved that equation (27) is correct for all tree amplitudes in scalar field theories.
    In what follows we will prove equation (27) exactly for massless external scalar particles
(internal ‘virtual’ particles can be massive or massless) using the constructions of [10, 11,
12, 13]. The flat space S-Matrix can be extracted from AdS/CFT correlation functions in a
straightforward manner; here we will only give a brief summary and refer the readers to [13]
for a thorough discussion. A similar direct quantization of AdS fields was given by [28, 29, 30]
in the early days of AdS/CFT, and has been revisited in detail recently by [31].
    Individual particles are created by single-trace CFT Operators in the large N limit. We
would like to prepare and then measure scattering states that correspond to many particles
with definite energy and momentum in the center of AdS. To create a massless particle in a
plane wave state with energy ω and velocity v̂ that passes through the center of AdS at time
t = 0, we act with the single-trace operator O(t, x̂) on the vacuum as
                                            d−3   Z − πR +τ
                                  2∆ Γ(∆)R 2            2
                     |ω, v̂i =                              dteiωt O(t, −v̂)|0i             (28)
                               (2π)h+1 C∆ (Rω)∆−1 − πR2
                                                         −τ

where τ  R so that the in and out operators have non-overlapping support [32], and ∆ is
the dimension of O. The prefactor in front of the integral normalizes these states so that
                                       hω, v̂|ω 0 , v̂ 0 i = 2ωδτd (~p + p~ 0 )            (29)

                                                         11
          AdS                                                        CFT

                                                                           2τ
                              2τ

             ψout                                                         2τ

                                    πR
                                                                          ψin

                              2τ                                         πR
                                                                          ψout
             ψin

Figure 4: This figure shows how bulk scattering processes are setup in AdS/CFT. Creating
the initial state involves smearing CFT operators over an annulus, which is just S d−1 × [−τ, τ ]
on the cylinder bounding AdS. The integration over space and (dilatation) time in the CFT
is necessary to select the direction and magnitude of the bulk momenta, respectively. The
regulator τ can be taken to infinity in the flat spacetime limit. The final state is measured
after a time πR, so that the particles have the opportunity to scatter exactly once.


where the delta function is regulated by the length scale τ (we have included the derivation
in appendix B.1). Next we send R → ∞ followed by τ → ∞ to take the flat space limit,
keeping the physical energy ω fixed. To prepare a multi-particle in-state one simply acts on
the vacuum with several different single-trace operators. One measures the out-states in an
identical way, except replacing − πR
                                   2
                                     → πR2
                                           , v̂ → −v̂, and taking the Hermitian conjugate. The
overlap between the in-states and the out-states extracts the S-Matrix for plane waves from a
CFT correlation function.
    Now we will apply this procedure to the Mellin representation of the CFT correlator and
derive equation (27). AdS in global coordinates translates into a Lorentzian radial quantization
of the CFT, so the operator corresponding to the ith particle will be located at xi = eiti p̂i
in the d-dimensional spacetime where the CFT lives. This means that up to a normalization




                                               12
factor coming from the single-particle states, the S-Matrix is given by the integral and limit
                     Z          Z τ ± πR                               Y                                            −δij
                                      2
                                                   iωi ti                                ti − tj
 T (sij ) ∝ lim          [dδ]              dti e            M (δij )           cos                     − p̂i · p̂j + i      Γ(δij ) (30)
           R
           τ
             ,τ →∞               −τ ± πR
                                       2                               i<j
                                                                                            R

 where the particles have energies ωi , and the measure of integration [dδ] is given in appendix
 A.1. Our task is to simplify and evaluate these integrals. This will be possible because in the
 flat spacetime limit, it will turn out that the ti dependence is approximately Gaussian and
 that typically δij ∼ R2 , so that the Γ functions can be expanded in the Stirling approximation.
 Then the δij integrations can be performed in the stationary phase approximation, which will
 imply that δij ∝ sij and give a momentum conserving delta function.
     Now let us begin to evaluate the integrals. First note that either |ti − tj |  R, if both
 particles i and j are initial or final, or else |ti − tj − πR|  R, if the ith particle is in the
 final state and the jth is in the initial state. This means that we can approximate the cosine
 by its Taylor expansion. But now the only difference between initial and final states is the
 sign of their momenta, so we can drop the distinction between initial and final states in the
 time integrals. This just reproduces the familiar fact that we can assign all of the particles
 in a scattering amplitude to the in-state via analytic continuation. Furthermore, we must
 anticipate that the flat-space S-matrix will contain a momentum-conserving δ-function. As
 discussed in [13], this is an immediate consequence of the spacetime symmetries – since the
 conformal algebra reduces to the Poincaré algebra in the flat space limit, translations will be a
 good symmetry in that limit, and momentum will be conserved. We will not a priori demand
 that the
        P total momentum vanish; for convenience, then, let the center of mass momentum be
q~ ≡ n1 i p~i , and introduce shifted momenta p~0 i ≡ p~i − q~ that do conserve momentum. Since
q~ will eventually be constrained to vanish in the flat-space limit, we will consider it to be
 parametrically smaller than the pi ’s, which grow ∝ R.
     Expanding the (ti − tj ) dependent factors around the initial and final times ± πR2
                                                                                         simplifies
 the integrand, giving
                          Z          Z τ                               Y                                 −δij
                                               iωi ti                                       sij   t2ij
                              [dδ]         dti e        M (δij )             Γ(δij )             − 2              ,                 (31)
                                      −τ                               i<j
                                                                                           ωi ωj  R
                                                                    P
where we have defined tij = ti − tj . Note that the overall time i ti only appears in the
exponent, so one could immediately integrate over this direction to give an energy conserving
delta function, removing a single time integration variable. Now we will re-parameterize the
δij variables in a way that accords with the structure of the kinematics and the integral. The
momenta pi do not necessarily obey momentum conservation, so we can define

                                                    2n                       2n2
                           s0ij = sij −                q · (pi + pj ) +                q2,                                          (32)
                                                   n−2                  (n − 1)(n − 2)
        P
so that j6=i s0ij = 0. Now the s0ij are appropriate for on-shell states with momentum conser-
vation. Let us take
                                          R2 0         
                                  δij = −     sij + ij + ∆ij ,                          (33)
                                          4α
                                                                       13
where we constrain                      X                       X
                                ∀ i,           ij = 0 and             ∆ij = ∆i ,                        (34)
                                        j6=i                    j6=i

so that the δij satisfy the usual constraints and the α parameter deforms the δij in a direction
orthogonal to the ij . This means that between α and the ij , there are n(n−3)/2 free variables,
as expected for the δij . There is of course a Jacobian factor from this change of integration
                                                 n(n−3)
variables which includes a factor of α− 2 −1 , and also a single factor of s0ij due to the α
direction. We will perform the ij integrations by saddle point, and we will see shortly that
the saddle point is at ij = 0 in the large R limit, so that only the α parameter remains as an
integration variable.
    Next, let us expand the Γ functions and sij exponent at large δij :
        Y                          −δij
                       sij     t2ij
            Γ(δij )         − 2
        i<j
                      ωi ωj    R
                                n(n−1)    2  ∆Σ " Y  0                      #"                     #
                     (4π)(4α)        4       R                 (sij + ij )ωi ωj ∆ij Y 0           − 21
               ≈                                                                         sij + ij
                         R2                  4α         i<j
                                                                        sij          i<j
                                                                      
                            X R2                           0
                                                           sij + ij
               × exp −                s0ij + ij log             t2ij
                                                                                                        (35)
                            i<j
                                  4α                       sij
                                                                −
                                                        ωi ωj     R2

In what follows we will assume that these factors dominate the integrand in the flat space limit.
This assumption could be violated if the Mellin amplitude grows exponentially or faster at large
δij . Such growth would also call into question the convergence of the Mellin representation for
the CFT correlator itself, but we cannot definitely rule it out. Including the Jacobian from
the change of δij variables, the prefactor becomes
         n(n−3)                                       "         #"          #          !
     1 R2      2           n(n−1)    n(n−1)    n(n−1)     Y         Y 0− 1        X
                  (R2 )∆Σ − 4 (4π) 4 (4α) 4 −∆Σ               ∆
                                                             ωi i        sij 2 δτ     ωi     (36)
     α 4α                                                  i         i<j           i

We see that the α−∆Σ factor has appeared as needed to reproduce the identical factor in
equation (27), while the other factors must cancel against the normalizations of the single
particle states in equation (28) and the terms from the integrals below. The argument of the
exponential can be expanded and greatly simplified to give
                              "                                     !#
                                      t2ω   R2            X u2ij
                          exp itω +       −     −(nq)2 +                                (37)
                                     4α 4α                i<j
                                                              2s0ij
                                 P
where we have defined tω =           i ti ωi and

                                              2n                  t2ij ωi ωj
                              uij    = ij −     q · (pi + pj ) +            .                           (38)
                                             n−2                      R2
  We can now see equation (27) beginning to take shape. Since nq is just the sum of the
momenta, at large R the Gaussian factor becomes a momentum conserving delta function

                                                      14
multiplied by αh . Furthermore, performing the Gaussian integral over tω would provide the
crucial eα factor present in equation (27). Finally, to complete the derivation we must in-
tegrate over uij subject to the constraints on ij from equation (34). If we were to ignore
the constraints, this computation would be trivial, but introducing Lagrange multipliers to
incorporate the constraints and fix the range of integration over the time variables ti requires
several more straightforward but lengthy computations, which we have relegated to appendix
B.2. Schematically, starting from (37), the constrained uij integrations cancel −1/2+n(n−3)/4
factors of α and R2 from the prefactor. The subsequent integration over all time coordinates
                                                                                   n 3
produces the energy-momentum conserving delta function and an additional αh− 2 + 2 , canceling
the remaining factors of sij and ωi . This gives the final result
                                             !Z                                   
                             1 d+1 X            i∞
                                                        α h−∆Σ              R2 sij
              T (sij ) = lim   δ          pi       dα e α       M δij = −                   (39)
                        R→∞ N                  −i∞                           4α
                                       i

for the connected part of the S-Matrix, as desired.


3     From Meromorphy to Analyticity
Our goal in this section will be to understand how the familiar analyticity properties of the
S-Matrix follow from the flat space limit of the Mellin amplitude. Specifically, we want to
investigate branch cuts corresponding to the emission of multi-particle states and poles cor-
responding to finite-lifetime resonances. On very general grounds, the Mellin amplitude is
expected [4, 5, 2] to have only simple poles on the real axis, so the more intricate analytic
structure of the S-Matrix must emerge from the coalescence and resummation of the poles of
the Mellin amplitude.

3.1    AdS Exchanges
Let us begin by computing the flat space limit of the Mellin amplitude corresponding to the
exchange of a massive field in the bulk of AdS. This result will be very useful because in the
next section we will express loop amplitudes as sums over bulk exchanges, via a procedure
reminiscent of the Källen-Lehmann representation [33].
   To begin with, we can write the Mellin amplitude for an exchange as a sum
                                            X       Rm
                               M (δij ) =                    ,                             (40)
                                             m
                                               δ − (∆5 + 2m)

where for a 2-to-2 s-channel exchange, δ = ∆1 + ∆2 − 2δ12 and ∆5 is the dimension of the
operator dual to the bulk field being exchanged. The residue was first computed in [1] and
can be easily obtained from the diagrammatic rules [2, 3], it is

                            Γ(∆125, − h)Γ(∆345, − h)    (1 − ∆12,5 )m (1 − ∆34,5 )m
            Rm = −R5−2h            Q 4                ×                             ,      (41)
                           (4π h )3 i=1 Γ(∆i − h + 1)     m!Γ(∆5 − h + 1 + m)


                                               15
where we will often use the notation 2∆a1 ...ak ,b1 ...bl = Σki ∆ai − Σlj ∆bj . In the flat space limit,
the bulk energies dual to CFT dimensions must be taken to be very large compared to the
curvature scale 1/R in AdS, so that in particular as R → ∞ we must have ∆5 ∝ R and
δ ∝ sR2 for a massive exchange. This means that Rm is dominated by large values of m so
that m ∼ ∆25 ∝ R2 , and we find that
                                                                  
                                                                ∆2
                                                                 5
                                                  h−∆1234, − 4m
                               Rm = C m                     e        ,                              (42)

where the proportionality constant C is
                                                         ∆1234 −h−1
                                     R2             ∆25
                                 C=−                                    N.                         (43)
                                     2              4
and N is the normalization factor from equation (27). Now, when we take the flat space limit
of the Mellin amplitude, we can replace the sum over m with an integral, giving
                                Z i∞                           Z ∞                    ∆2
                                                                                       5
                            C         dα h−∆1234 α                       mh−∆1234 e− 4m
                    T (s) =               α     e                    dm R2 s              ,        (44)
                            N     −i∞ 2πi                      0        2α
                                                                             − (∆ 5 + 2m)
where the integration contour in α runs to the right of all the poles and the branch cut (which
arises due to the irrational power in the definition of the flat space limit), and 2∆1234 =
∆1 + ∆2 + ∆3 + ∆4 . To compute these integrals, we can deform the α contour to pick up a
contribution from the poles and a contribution from the discontinuity across the branch cut.
Changing integration variables from m to x = 1/m for convenience, the pole contribution is
              Z                    1+h−∆1234                       1+h−∆1234
            1          s−∆2
                     −x 4 5    sR2                    2          sR2
                dx e         −                 =               −                           (45)
            2                    4                sR2 − ∆25        4
We see that the result has a pole in the correct place, but there is an unusual-looking overall
s-dependent factor. The contribution from the branch cut is
                                     Z ∞        Z ∞              α 1+h−∆1234             x∆2
                                                                                             5
            sin(π(1 + h − ∆1234 ))                                                 2e− 4
                                           dα         dxe−α                                  .     (46)
                      π                0        0                  x             −R2 sx + 4α
It is easy to evaluate these integrals by changing integration variables from x to y = x/α,
which makes the dα integration and subsequent dy integration straightforward, giving
                                        1+h−∆1234  2 1+h−∆1234 !
                       2             sR2                ∆5
                           2
                               −   −               +                                   (47)
                   sR2 + ∆5            4                4

Thus, the branch cut piece combines with the pole piece to cancel off the strange s-dependence,
and incorporating the overall coefficient leaves us with the expected flat space propagator
                                                              1
                                            T (s) =                                                (48)
                                                           s − m25
where m5 ≡ ∆5 /R.

                                                          16
3.2    Computing Loop Diagrams a la Källen-Lehmann
In flat spacetime, the two point functions of local operators can always be decomposed in the
Källen-Lehmann representation [34] as
                                                Z ∞
                                                          ρ(µ2 )
                            hΦ(k)Φ(−k)iflat =        dµ 2                                (49)
                                                 0     k + µ2 + i

where the function ρ(µ) is positive and real. This decomposition follows from unitarity and
Lorentz invariance [34], and it expresses the two point function of general operators as a
sum over the two point functions of free fields with different masses. Now we will compute
some simple loop amplitudes by using the AdS analog of this representation, which was first
discussed in [33] long before the discovery of AdS/CFT.
    Consider computing the standard 1-loop bubble diagram from λφ4 theory in AdS, which
is pictured in figure 5. In position space, this would require us to calculate
             Z
                dd+1 Xdd+1 Y G∆1 (P1 , X)G∆2 (P2 , X)G∆ (X, Y )2 G∆3 (Y, P3 )G∆4 (Y, P4 ) (50)

The only difference between this calculation and the computation of a tree level exchange
in φ2 χ is the replacement of the single propagator G∆χ (X, Y ) with the propagator squared
G∆ (X, Y )2 . But the square of the bulk-to-bulk propagator is just the two point function of
the local bulk field φ2 , so that

                                 G∆ (X, Y )2 = φ2 (X)φ2 (Y )                               (51)

Let us compute this two-point function with a Mellin space Källen-Lehmann representation.
This means that we will write
                                        X
                          G∆ (X, Y )2 =    N2,∆ (n)G2∆+2n (X, Y )                     (52)
                                           n

Using the diagrammatic rules [2, 3] from section 1.1.4 it becomes trivial to compute the loop
diagram once we know N2,∆ . One can compute the function N2,∆ (n) in Mellin-space, but a
direct derivation via an inner product, as was used in [17], is probably the simplest method.
In appendix C we show that for any two scalar propagators
                                   X
        G∆1 (X, Y )G∆2 (X, Y ) =       a∆1 ,∆2 (n)G∆1 +∆2 +2n (X, Y ), where             (53)
                                     n
                                   (h)n (∆1 + ∆2 + 2n)1−h (∆1 + ∆2 + n − 2h + 1)n
                    a∆1 ,∆2 (n) =                                                    .
                                  2π h n! (∆1 + n)1−h (∆2 + n)1−h (∆1 + ∆2 + n − h)n

and recall that the Pochhammer symbol (x)y = Γ(x + y)/Γ(x), and 2h = d, the spacetime
dimension of the CFT. It is useful to note that for ∆  n, as required for the flat space limit,
we have
                                                      2
                           N2,∆ (n) = a∆,∆ (n) ≈      h
                                                            n2(h−1) .                       (54)
                                                  (4π) Γ(h)

                                               17
                   λφ4                            µφ2 χ                             gφ5
Figure 5: This figure shows the 1-loop and 2-loop diagrams that we have computed using
the Mellin space version of the Källen-Lehmann representation. Further generalizations are
straightforward.


This means that in this limit N2,∆ (n) has a simple power law dependence on the parameter n
which determines the energy of the bulk states being exchanged.
   There is no need to stop at 1-loop3 . For example, in gφ5 theory at 2-loops there is a 4-
pt bubble diagram involving three propagators, as pictured in figure 5, which we can easily
compute. We see that                     X
                           G∆ (X, Y )3 =     N3,∆ (n)G3∆+2n (X, Y ),                    (55)
                                                  n

where we have that
                                            X
                                            n
                               N3,∆ (n) =         a∆,∆ (m)a∆,2∆+2m (n − m).                  (56)
                                            m=0

It is a non-trivial task to perform the sum explicitly. However, it is easy to take the flat space
limit of the sum:
                                Z n
                                       4(n2 − m2 )2(h−1)           n4h−3
                  N3,∆ (n) ≈        dm                   =                         .          (57)
                                 0       (4π)2h Γ2 (h)     2(2π)2h (h − 12 )h Γ(h)

This has precisely the correct scaling in n for the Källen-Lehmann representation of the 2-loop
bubble diagram of figure 5 in 2h + 1 dimensions.

3.3       Branch Cuts and Resonances
Now let us see how two familiar non-analytic features of scattering amplitudes, namely branch
cuts from multi-particle intermediate states and finite-width resonances from unstable parti-
cles, arise from the Mellin amplitude.
    These phenomena are both connected with the flat spacetime limit, where the AdS length
R → ∞. However, they do not depend on the intricacies of AdS/CFT, but are instead generic
  3
      We apologize to readers uninterested in juvenile computational showmanship.


                                                      18
                                            E                                     E




Figure 6: This figure shows how poles in the integrand of a contour integral lead to branch
cuts in the result, due to the necessity of deforming the contour as the pole moves.


consequences of defining a theory inside a finite ‘box’ and then taking the size of the box to
infinity. AdS acts as an IR-regulating cavity, and in the flat spacetime limit the cavity’s volume
becomes infinite, so that the discrete spectrum of modes approaches a continuum. Branch cuts
can arise in this limit when a line of poles coalesces, because the separation between poles and
the residues of each pole are both proportional to 1/R. The sum over the discrete spectrum
becomes indistinguishable from an integral, and as shown in figure 6 such integrals develop
branch cuts due to the poles of their integrands. Re-summing propagators with branch cuts,
as is necessary for the central diagram of figure 5 for µφ2 χ theory, leads to finite-width χ
particles. Thus the Mellin amplitude, whose poles all lie on the real axis, can produce poles
off the real axis in the S-Matrix.
                                                          λ 4
    Let us first see how branch cuts arise at 1-loop in 24  φ theory, for the first diagram in figure
5. For this purpose we need to take the flat space limit of equation (52). We saw in section
                                           1
3.1 that an AdS propagator G∆ → s−(∆)         2 in the flat space limit, so we can directly use the
                                                                                         λ 4
function we derived in equation (53) to find the 1-loop scattering amplitude in 24        φ theory.
In the flat spacetime limit the sum over n becomes an integral, and so we can use the large n
approximation in equation (54), giving
                                                     Z ∞
                            1−loop           2λ2                 n2(h−1)
                         M         (s) =                  dn                                     (58)
                                         (4π)h Γ(h) 0        s − (2∆ + 2n)2
Note that this is precisely of the form expected from the Källen-Lehmann representation of
                                                                           λ 4
the bulk theory in flat spacetime, and it agrees with the usual result for 24 φ theory in 2h + 1
                                                5
dimensions. Similarly, the 2-loop result in gφ theory is
                                             Z ∞
                                2−loop                    n4h−3
                             M         (s) ∝      dn                                        (59)
                                              0      s − (3∆ + 2n)2
in the flat space limit, again in the Källen-Lehmann representation. This has the correct
scaling for this theory in 2h + 1 bulk dimensions.

                                                 19
                                                                 ( )
             +                    +                    + ··· =
                                                               (1− )
Figure 7: This figure shows the standard picture of how 1-PI diagrams are resummed to shift
propagator poles. This familiar momentum-space process also works in Mellin space.


    From equations (58) and (59) we can immediately see why the loop amplitudes have branch
cuts. As pictured in figure 6, when a pole of the integrand moves across the contour of
integration, the contour must be deformed around the pole. If the poles makes a complete
circle about an endpoint of the contour, then the contour can return to its original location,
but it must also include a tiny circle about the pole. Thus the residue of the integrand’s pole
becomes the discontinuity across the branch cut of the integral.
    Now let us discuss how we obtain resonances in the flat space limit, beginning with the
Mellin space version of the resummation of 1-PI diagrams, which is pictured in figure 7. If we
compute the resummed diagram corresponding to the one-loop 1-PI diagram in µφ2 χ theory,
we find
                        X V12,∆χ (m1 )S∆χ (m1 )                       
           sum       2                                     1
         M      = µ                              ×                             × V∆χ ,34 (m2 ) (60)
                       m ,m
                              δ −  (∆ χ + 2m 1 )     1 − Π mi ,m j
                                                                   (δ)  m1 ,m2
                          1   2


where we have the infinite dimensional matrix in mi space
                                 "
                             X X                   V∆χ ,2∆φ +2n (m1 , m3 )S2∆φ +2n (m3 )
                                                                                          
                           2
          Πm1 ,m2 (δ) = µ                 N2,∆φ (n)
                              m3    n
                                                          δ − (2∆φ + 2n + 2m3 )
                                                              
                             V2∆φ +2n,∆χ (m3 , m2 )S∆χ (m2 )
                          ×                                                                   (61)
                                   δ − (∆χ + 2m2 )
We have written this result so that the first term is simply the answer for χ-exchange at tree
level. The first line of the expression for Π gives the Källen-Lehmann-type representation for
the 1-loop bubble diagram, and the second line provides the final χ-propagator, with the last
term replacing the final vertex in the tree-level χ-exchange. Since in position space in AdS we
are connecting pairs of propagators, we must use 2-pt vertex functions which follow from the
vertex rule in equation (22).
    We would like to see that Π develops an imaginary piece from the loop in the flat space
                                                 2
limit, where we take ∆χ = mχ R and δ = − R4αs as usual, but we leave ∆φ finite so that the
φ particles become effectively massless. In this limit, the Mellin amplitude is dominated by
terms in the sums with mi ∝ (R∆)2 . Rather than performing the sums in eq. (60,61) directly,
we will again take advantage of the fact that the bubble in the diagram can be written as
a sum over single propagators corresponding to the double-trace operators, as in eq. (53).
Written this way, the bubble diagrams are identical in form to the mixing of χ with an infinite

                                                  20
tower of states of dimensions 2∆φ + 2n for n ≥ 0. The contribution from these states can be
determined by diagonalizing the mass matrix
                                                                                   
                             ∆2χ     R2 λeff (0) R2 λeff (1)    R2 λeff (2) · · ·
                        R2 λeff (0) (2∆φ )2         0              0         ··· 
                                                                                   
                2       R2 λeff (1)     0       (2∆    + 2) 2
                                                                    0         · · · 
              meff =                               φ                               , (62)
                        R2 λeff (2)     0           0         (2∆     + 4) 2
                                                                              · · · 
                                                                  φ                
                              ..         ..           ..             ..       ...
                               .          .            .              .

where                                             r
                                                   N2∆φ (n)
                                     λeff (n) ≡ λ                                           (63)
                                                     R2h−1
is the effective off-diagonal mass-mixing term, and we have approximated mass as dimension
since we are interested in the flat-space limit. The factor of N2∆φ (n) accounts for the phase
space of the 2-particle φ states, so that their contribution to the two point function can be
understood via mixing. One finds that with this coupling, the mixing amplitude also correctly
computes the decay rate of χ → 2φ particles. Note that there is nothing particularly ‘holo-
graphic’ about this method; one would use identical techniques to understand how resonances
arise when one restricts a quantum field theory to a finite sized box with a discrete spectrum.
    We expect that the sum of all 1-PI diagrams must be given by the Mellin amplitude that
would arise from adding a mass mixing term as in eq. (62) above, but let us see how we could
obtain this result directly by using the functional equation. First, note that when we act with
the functional equation on the Mellin amplitude M for the resummation of 1PI diagrams, we
just obtain M back again, plus a constant for the reduction of the single propagator:

   m2ef f M (δLR ) = (−δLR (δLR − d) − ∆(d − ∆)) M (δLR ) − (δLR − 2∆)2 M (δLR − 2) − 1       (64)

We have extended M (δLR ) to a matrix whose first row and column correspond to χ propagation,
so that only the M11 element actually appears in the φ four-point amplitude, while the rest
of the matrix involves mixing with two particle φ states. Now, this clearly takes the form of a
mass-mixing, and the matrix operation on M (δLR ) can be diagonalized. Let the ath eigenvalue
of the mass matrix be ∆a , then we may write the corresponding Mellin amplitude as
                                          X
                                                             T
                               M (δij ) =      S1a Da (δLR )Sa1 ,
                                              a
                                             X      Rm (∆a )
                              Da (δLR ) =                                                     (65)
                                              m
                                                δLR − (∆a + 2m)

where Rm is the formula for the residues from eq. (41) with dimension ∆a , and Sij is the
matrix of eigenvectors of eq. (62). We already established in section 3.1 that the flat space
limit of Da is simply a propagator with mass ∆a , so we can use these equations to compute
the flat space limit of the sum of 1-PI propagators pictured in figure 7.
    To see how the imaginary piece of the pole in the holographic S-matrix emerges, we need
only study the eigen-decomposition of m2ef f in the flat-space limit with s very near the real part
of the pole, so that s = ∆2χ + δs. In this limit the mixing terms are dominated by double-trace

                                                  21
operators with dimension near ∆χ , where ‘nearness’ is determined by the magnitude of λef f .
Replacing the sum on dimensions ∆a with an integral over a parameter η in the flat space
limit, we see that for small δs we can approximate

                                   2           λef f R   1
                                  S1a (η) ∼                        .                            (66)
                                                mχ η 2 + R2 λ2ef f
                                                              m2χ


where we are evaluating λef f at n = Rmχ . This simply means that the number of modes that
mix significantly with χ is proportional to Rλef f /mχ . Considering the entries of mef f near
2∆φ + 2n = ∆χ , one finds that in the continuum limit the eigenvalues can be approximated by
δs+λef f η, so using the results of section 3.1 on the flat space limit of the propagator Dn∗ (δLR ),
we find that the sum of 1-PI diagrams can be approximated by
                                                
               Z ∞
                          λef f R      1                 1                   iπ
                    dη                  2 λ2
                                                                     ≈                          (67)
                 −∞        mχ η 2 +    R    ef f   δs + λef f η + i   δs + iλ2 m2h−3
                                                                                  χ
                                        m2χ


which shows the usual Breit-Wigner structure, with a resonance pole that has moved off of the
real axis. One can obtain a more precise result by diagonalizing the m2ef f matrix numerically.

3.4    A Comment about Meromorphy and Locality
An extremely interesting example of how bulk locality can be rigorously derived from conditions
on a CFT was provided by the analysis of [16, 19]. In that case, it was assumed that the
spectrum of low-dimension operators in the CFT included only a finite number of single-trace
scalar primaries and that N1 corrections affected conformal blocks only up to a maximum spin
L. By imposing crossing symmetry on the CFT correlation functions and then counting the
dimension of the space of possible solutions, the authors of [16] were able to show that all such
CFTs have local AdS dual descriptions. It is interesting to see how this result is reproduced
in terms of analyticity of the holographic S-matrix.
    The point is that, as was explained in [1], such solutions must have Mellin amplitudes that
are polynomials in δij ’s. This is easy to see by noting that the presence of a pole in the Mellin
amplitude will immediately require the inclusion of conformal blocks of arbitrarily large spin.
For example, a pole in δ12 in the Mellin amplitudes for a CFT 4-point correlator implies an
equivalent pole in δ13 , due to crossing symmetry. But the decomposition of the δ13 pole in
the 12-34 channel (the ‘s channel’) will contain arbitrarily high powers of δ13 , implying the
presence of arbitrarily large spins. Thus a Mellin amplitude with only conformal blocks of
bounded spin cannot have any poles, and similarly it cannot included exponential dependence
on the δij , so it must be a polynomial. However, we know that polynomial Mellin amplitudes
turn into S-Matrices that are polynomials in the Mandelstam invariants sij , and that are
therefore obviously analytic and exponentially bounded.




                                                 22
4     Conformal Blocks and Black Holes
The simple unitarity relation that follows from inserting 1 as a sum over states
                                  X
                       A4 (xi ) =   hO1 (x1 )O2 (x2 )|αihα|O3 (x3 )O4 (x4 )i                  (68)
                                   α

provides an interesting method for representing CFT 4-pt functions, via the operator-state
correspondence. This follows because we can express any primary state in the sum as |αp i =
Oα |0i for some local primary operator Oα , and then the properties of all of the descendent
states will be fixed by conformal invariance. The functional form contributed to a 4-pt function
by the exchange of a primary state/operator of dimension ∆ and angular momentum ` along
with all of its descendants is called a conformal block [27, 35, 21, 23]. We can write any CFT
4-pt function or 4-pt Mellin amplitude as a sum over conformal blocks
                                            X
                                M4 (δij ) =    C(∆α , `)B∆α ,` (δij )                       (69)
                                            α

where the coefficients C(∆α , `) are determined by the magnitude of the 3-pt functions of
primary operators. For a very readable discussion of conformal blocks and their applications
in constraining the properties of CFTs, see [20].
    We will make more extensive and essential use of conformal blocks in our forthcoming work
on the unitarity of the S-Matrix [9], but for now we provide these objects as an example of
interesting functions on Mellin space that are not strictly analytic in the flat space limit. Since
conformal blocks correspond to the exchange of an operator with definite angular momentum
and definite dimension, in the flat space limit they must also have definite angular momentum
and definite energy. This suggests that the flat space limit of a conformal block should be

                                 B∆,` (δij ) → P` (cos θ)δ(s − ∆2 )                           (70)

where P` is just the appropriate Legendre or Gegenbauer polynomial. We will derive this fact
in the next section, but note that it gives a direct connection between the Bootstrap program
for solving CFTs and the S-Matrix program for determining scattering amplitudes. It suggests
that the Bootstrap program, even for special theories such as N = 4 SYM, should be at least
as challenging as using analyticity and unitarity to directly construct the full non-perturbative
S-Matrix of superstring theory.
    In the flat space limit, the conformal block decomposition turns into a trivial integral over
CFT dimensions, and we find that the partial wave decomposition of the 2-to-2 scattering
amplitude must simply be                            √
                                        S` (s) = C( s, `)                                    (71)
where we have used the symbol S to emphasize that this is the full scattering amplitude,
including the ‘1’ piece. This means that we can use known properties of bulk scattering
amplitudes to constrain the conformal block decomposition of dual CFTs. In section 4.2
we will use the expected form of the trans-Planckian scattering amplitudes corresponding to
Hawking evaporation to make a general comment about the conformal block decomposition in
CFTs with AdS duals that are well-described by effective field theory.

                                                23
4.1     Flat Space Limit of a Conformal Block
Now we will directly compute the flat space limit of the conformal blocks, which we review
in Mellin space in appendix D. As Mack [4] showed, in Mellin space the conformal blocks of
angular momentum ` and dimension ∆ in the s-channel have only a polynomial dependence on
the δ13 and δ14 variables analogous to the mandelstam invariants t and u. Although these Mack
polynomials appear somewhat complicated, they simply encode the fact that the conformal
blocks have a fixed angular momentum, and in the flat space limit they reduce to Legendre
or Gegenbauer polynomials in cos θ. We show these straightforward but technical facts in
appendix D.
   The Mack polynomials multiply a universal function that encodes a more interesting depen-
dence on δ12 , analgous to the mandelstam invariant s, and ∆, the dimension of the conformal
block. This function takes the form4
                                                                            
                    `       πi(h−∆)    iπ(δ+∆+`−2h)
                                                       Γ ∆−`−δ
                                                            2
                                                                  Γ 2h−∆−`−δ
                                                                        2
                  B∆ (δ) = e         e              −1                                  (73)
                                                        Γ ∆a − 2δ Γ ∆b − 2δ

The factor in parentheses cancels the ‘shadow’ poles associated with the second Γ function
in the numerator, so that we are left with only physical poles associated to a single primary
operator. The normalization factor has been chosen to ensure that the residues of the physical
poles are real. The variables 2∆a ≡ ∆1 + ∆2 and 2∆b ≡ ∆3 + ∆4 are defined for convenience.
    When we take the limit R → ∞, we must take ∆ = M R while fixing the angular momentum
` to be a finite integer, so that the conformal block will have a non-zero bulk energy M in the
flat space limit. Note that in this limit there is no difference between the dimension and twist
                            `
of the block. Plugging B∆     (δ) this into our formula for the flat space limit gives
                                                           2                2             
            Z i∞                                      Γ   R s
                                                                −  ∆        Γ   R s
                                                                                    − ˜ 12,5
                                                                                      ∆
                   dα α h−∆1234 πi(h−∆) πi R s   2           2α       12,5      2α
        lim           e α          e         e 2α − 1           R 2s      R 2s               (74)
       R→∞ −i∞ 2πi                                           Γ 2α Γ 2α − ∆12,34

where 2∆12,5 = ∆1 + ∆2 − ∆ − ` and 2 ˜ ∆12,5 = ∆1 + ∆2 − 2h − ` + ∆. Since we are taking the
AdS scale to infinity, we can expand the Γ functions using Stirling’s approximation, giving
       Z i∞
            dα α h−∆1234 πi(h−∆)  πi R2 s   R2 s ∆1234 −h−`    α∆
                                                                        −∆12,5 
                                                                                   α∆
                                                                                       −∆˜ 34,5
 lim            e α     e         e 2α − 1                        1+ 2           1− 2            (75)
R→∞     −i∞ 2πi                                2α                   R s            R s
   4
     We thank J. Penedones, S. Raju, and B. van Rees for discussions and collaboration on conformal blocks in
the Mellin representation, and in particular for collaboration leading to the discovery of the factor in parentheses
in this equation.
   It should also be noted that we are using a different normalization convention from most of the recent
literature on conformal blocks. For instance, to convert to the normalization used in [16], with ∆1 = ∆2 and
∆3 = ∆4 , one should take eq. (73) and multiply by
                                                     
                    `    iπ2−l−1 csc2 12 π(∆ + 2h) Γ(−h + ∆ + 1)Γ(l + ∆)(−2h + ∆ + 2)−l
                  N∆ =                             2                        2                ,              (72)
                                        Γ 2l + ∆ 2    Γ 12 ∆ − 2 h + 2l − 1
         `  `
and use N∆ B∆ (δ).


                                                        24
In the flat space limit, ∆5 ∝ R, so the last two terms can be approximated by exponentials of
small quantities. Note that for ` = 0, the powers of α clearly cancel. When ` > 0, we must
also include the Mack polynomials, which are homogeneous in the flat space limit, providing
an overall factor of α−` so that again, the power-law dependence on α in the integrand cancels.
We find
                      2 ∆1234 −h−` Z i∞
                       R s                  dα πi(h−∆)  πi R2 s     ∆2 
                                                                     α 1+ 2
                lim                             e       e   2α   −1 e    R s              (76)
               R→∞      2               −i∞ 2πi

But this is just an ordinary fourier transform in iα. The first term in parentheses gives a
vanishing contribution for R → ∞, but the second term gives
                                     ∆1234 −h−`                        
                                 M2                     πi(h−∆)        M2
                                                    e             δ 1−                     (77)
                                 2                                     s

where ∆ = RM . As expected, we see that the flat space limit of a 4-pt scalar conformal block
is simply a delta function that sets the center of mass energy equal to the mass (dimension)
of the conformal block.
    As we show in the appendix, in the case of general spin `, a conformal block is simply a
                                             `
Mack polynomial P`,∆ (δij ) multiplied by B∆   (δ12 ). The purpose of the Mack polynomial is to
encode the angular momentum information, so it is no surprise that in the flat space limit it
simply becomes
                                             d           `
                                          MR           R2 s     (d)
                          P`,∆ (δij ) →             −          P` (cos θ)                  (78)
                                           2           4α
        (d)
where P` (cos θ) are the Legendre or Gegenbauer polynomials appropriate to d-dimensional
spherical harmonics. The dependence on α simply compensates for the α` dependence of B∆`
                                                                                         ,
as noted above. So we find that the flat space limit of a general conformal block is
                       "     ∆             #                      
                          M 2 1234 πi(h−∆)       (d)              M2
                                     e         P` (cos θ)δ 1 −                       (79)
                            2                                      s

as anticipated, up to a convention-dependent normalization factor.

4.2    Implications of Hawking Evaporation for CFTs
Black Hole thermodynamics leads to certain expectations for scattering amplitudes at very
high energy and small impact parameter [15, 36, 37]. In the case of 2-to-2 scattering at trans-
Planckian energies, the enormous entropy of macroscopic black holes combined with the tiny
entropy of a 2-particle state suggests that the scattering amplitude will be
                                                                        
                                    1                    1      D−2
                                                                      D−3
                                                                        1

                     S(s) ∼ exp − SBH (s) = exp − GD s 2                                   (80)
                                    2                    8

for a D dimensional bulk, so that the cross section is exponentially suppressed by the black
hole entropy. We have included the factor of 21 in the exponent because it is the cross section,

                                                    25
not the amplitude, which should be suppressed by the black hole entropy; one should also use
the more general Kerr entropy at large impact parameter. Of course the same result obtains
from the thermal spectrum of Hawking radiation. In principle, the amplitude could be larger
than this.5 However, if two massless particles collide with an impact parameter smaller than
the Schwartzchild radius associated with their center of mass energy, then causality suggests
that the two particles will be inside a trapped surface before they can interact, and so black
hole formation seems unavoidable [37].
    This semiclassical expectation for the high-energy 2-to-2 scattering amplitude leads to a
very general prediction for the behavior of the conformal block decomposition in equation (69)
at large dimensions. In particular, the conformal block coefficients should take the form
                   "            1 #                D−2  D−3
                                                              1
                      1 ∆D−2 D−3                      ∆
    C(∆, `) ∼ exp −           2
                                          for `         2
                                                                   when ∆D−2  N 2        (81)
                      2     N                          N

where D is the full spacetime dimension of the decompactifying bulk (if there are no compact-
ification manifolds whose size grow with the AdS scale R, then D = d + 1). We are defining
a rough version of the central charge via N 2 ≈ 1/GD . This is a prediction for the conformal
block decomposition in any CFT with a bulk dual that can be described by a low-energy
effective field theory with classical gravity.
    Unfortunately, this whole discussion has been the reverse of what we really desire – namely
a derivation of these results directly from the CFT. Obtaining such a derivation, which must
be a robust consequence in any CFT with a weakly coupled gravity dual, may be the most
important problem in quantum gravity.


5       Discussion
Locality is one of the most important ideas in physics, and understanding it [16, 17, 18,
19, 38] has only become more urgent since the discovery that a local spacetime can emerge
holographically from a lower dimensional theory, as in the AdS/CFT correspondence [6, 7, 8].
    However, in the absence of an explicit Lagrangian (and even in its presence [39]) the
definition of locality is often rather murky. Fortunately, one can make the notion precise in
flat spacetime: local theories can be defined as those that give rise to S-Matrices that are
analytic and exponentially bounded functions of the kinematic invariants. In this work we
have argued that one can understand the analyticity properties of the S-Matrix in theories of
quantum gravity by taking the flat spacetime limit of AdS/CFT correlation functions in the
Mellin representation. We have taken some steps in this direction by showing how the familiar
analyticity properties of the S-Matrix in bulk perturbation theory emerge from the meromorphy
of the Mellin amplitude, but there is much more work that could be done analyzing the Mellin
amplitudes from more interesting CFTs.
    When it comes to AdS/CFT, one can discuss bulk locality on scales both larger and smaller
than the AdS scale R. On distance scales larger than R, bulk locality can be analyzed using
    5
    But it cannot be any smaller, because the probability that the two particles tunnel through each other is
of this order.


                                                     26
the holographic RG [18, 40], but from this point of view sub-AdS scale locality remains very
mysterious. In regions much smaller than R the AdS curvature should be irrelevant, and so the
holographic RG approach must break down, since we do not expect there to be an RG picture
when we ‘integrate out’ an approximately flat dimension. Instead, it is much more natural
to analyze sub-AdS scale holography using flat space methods, and chief among these is the
analyticity of the S-Matrix. The Mellin amplitude makes this analysis possible for AdS/CFT.
    Another motivation for investigating locality is to understand to what extent (if any) black
hole evaporation should be viewed as a local process governed by a local theory. It has been
anticipated that new tools are needed to attack this question; in fact, one of the goals of
research into new on-shell methods for describing scattering amplitudes [41, 42] has been to
give a less manifestly local description of the S-Matrix, in the hopes that such a description
would be easier to adapt to the scattering amplitudes of quantum gravity. We believe that
the Mellin amplitude is the appropriate tool for these questions. Gravitational physics in AdS
with D > 3 and a parametric separation between R and `P l generically involves black holes
that are much smaller than the AdS radius. Thus we expect that the dual CFTs and their
Mellin amplitudes will provide an ideal laboratory for investigating Hawking evaporation in
a setting where bulk locality is not manifest. Scattering processes involving black holes will
violate the exponential boundedness requirements associated with locality [14, 15, 36, 37], but
it will be very interesting to investigate exactly how locality breaks down, and to give a precise
criterion for the situations and questions for which effective field theory fails.
    We took the first step towards an analysis of black holes by identifying a robust consequence
of Hawking evaporation for the conformal block decomposition. One expects that 2-to-2 scat-
tering will be exponentially suppressed at energies larger than the Planck scale due to the large
black hole entropy, and this implies a corresponding exponential shutdown in the coefficients
for the conformal block expansion at large dimensions in the dual CFT. This is a sharp and
generic prediction that could be understood through the direct study of CFTs; such a result
would be the first step towards a microscopic derivation of Hawking evaporation.
    We have given a non-perturbative, holographic definition of the S-Matrix using the flat
spacetime limit of AdS/CFT, so it is natural to ask whether all consistent S-Matrices in
quantum gravity can be obtained from the large central charge limit of a CFT. In other words,
is AdS/CFT the path to quantizing gravity in flat spacetime? We simply do not know, but it
would be fascinating if there exists a generic alternative description. The remarkably simple
properties of the scattering amplitudes themselves [43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 41, 42] and the
existence of matrix models [49] might be viewed as evidence for this sort of conjecture. In any
case, our work suggests that there is an intimate connection between the Bootstrap Program
for large N CFTs [27, 21, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 50] and the S-Matrix Program, and that solving
general CFTs via the Bootstrap will be at least as difficult as finding consistent S-Matrices
using the constraints of crossing symmetry, analyticity, and unitarity.
    The investigation of Mellin amplitudes is only its infancy. In a companion paper [9] we
will show how the usual unitarity relations for the S-Matrix arise from the OPE of the CFT.
However, there are many other elementary questions that still need to be addressed, including
the development of diagrammatic rules for loops and for fields with spin. Here we have only
obtained the flat space S-Matrix for external states composed of massless scalar particles, so
some further technical developments [22, 23] will be necessary to treat arbitrary species of

                                               27
particles. Techniques from the analysis of scattering amplitudes, such as the BCFW recursion
relations [43, 44, 47], can likely also be applied in Mellin space. It will interesting to see if the
Mellin space approach can also offer insight into theories without the full conformal group of
symmetries.


Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Nima Arkani-Hamed, Daniel Harlow, Ami Katz, Dhritiman Nan-
dan, Miguel Paulos, Matt Reece, Steve Shenker, David Simmons-Duffin, and especially João
Penedones for discussions, and Suvrat Raju, Balt van Rees, and João Penedones for early col-
laboration. We would also like to thank Edward Witten for inquiries that motivated aspects
of appendix A. ALF was partially supported by ERC grant BSMOXFORD no. 228169. JK
acknowledges support from the US DOE under contract no. DE-AC02-76SF00515.


A      Basic Definitions
A.1     Measure of Integration
Before considering the definition and uniqueness properties of the Mellin amplitude, let us give
a precise definition of the measure of integration, as given by [4, 5, 1] . Given a particular
solution ∆ij to the constraint equations, we can define
                                                     n(n−3)
                                                      X 2

                                      δij = ∆ij +              cij,k sk                         (82)
                                                         k=1

where the coefficients cij,k are symmetric in i, j vanish when i = j, and satisfy
                                          X
                                               cij,k = 0                                        (83)
                                              j

so that δij continue to satisfy the constraint equation for arbitrary sk . Now we can view cij,k
as an square matrix of size n(n−3)
                                 2
                                     if we let the ij take on all of their non-zero values. If we
demand that
                                          | det cij,k | = 1                                  (84)
then the measure of integration will simply be

                                      Z            Z i∞ n(n−3)
                                                         Y 2

                                          [dδ] =                  dsk                           (85)
                                                    −i∞    k=1

Note that there are poles from the Γ(δij ) for all non-positive integer values of the δij , and also
poles (generically, semi-infinite sequences of poles) at positive δij from the Mellin amplitude.
The contour of integration is chosen so that it passes entirely to one side of these semi-
infinite lines of poles. For large values of the dimensions ∆i this sort of contour is obtained

                                                    28
automatically by giving the δij a small real part, but otherwise integrating along a line from
−i∞ to i∞ as indicated. For example, at 4-pt we can write all of the δij directly in terms of
δ12 and δ13 , and if all the external dimensions are equal then we find
                Z +i∞                                                         Y
                         dδ12 dδ13 M (δij )Γ(δ12 )2 Γ(δ13 )2 Γ(∆ − δ12 − δ13 )2 (xij )−2δij (86)
                  −i∞                                                        i<j

One can immediately see that the factors of Γ(δ12 )2 Γ(δ13 )2 give poles at non-positive integer
values of δ12 and δ13 , while the final Γ(∆−δ12 −δ13 )2 factor and the Mellin amplitude itself only
have poles at positive values of δ12 + δ13 . The contour of integration naturally runs between
these lines of poles, as pictured in figure 3. The fact that some are double poles signals the
presence of anomalous dimensions in perturbation theory (the exact Mellin amplitude will only
have single poles).

A.2      Mellin Amplitude: Definition and Non-Uniqueness
Our goal here is to give a precise definition of the Mellin amplitude, so let’s begin with an
n-pt CFT correlator An (uijkl ) that has been stripped of some overall dependence on the xi
coordinates, so that it only depends on cross ratios
                                                            rij rkl
                                    u(xi , xj , xk , xl ) =                              (87)
                                                            rik rjl
where rab = (xa − xb )2 . For now we will imagine a putative CFT in infinite d, so that we can
ignore d-dependent relations among the cross ratios.
    Now let us use conformal invariance to set x1 = 1, x2 = 0, x3 = ∞ for convenience, and we
will freely refer to these as though they are labeled x1 , x0 , x∞ . In this frame we find that
                                         r1i = u(0, ∞, 1, xi )                                         (88)
                                                      1
                                         r0i =                                                         (89)
                                               u(1, 0, ∞, xi )
                                               u(0, ∞, xi , xj )
                                         rij =                                                         (90)
                                                u(1, 0, ∞, xi )
where in all cases i, j > 3. Since we have that r∞i = ∞ and r01 = 1, this means that we
can express all the non-trivial Poincaré invariants rij in terms of u(0, ∞, i, j), u(0, ∞, 1, i),
and u(1, 0, ∞, i) and it is easy to count and find that there are n(n − 3)/2 of them. So the
cross ratios appearing above provide a complete basis of conformal invariants on which An can
depend.
   This accords with a certain basis     Pfor the δab of the Mellin amplitude that we wish to define.
Namely, if we use the constraints j δij = ∆i to eliminate the δ∞a and δ10 then we are left
with exactly n(n − 3)/2 variables (recall that δij = δji and δii = 0). Thus we can define the
Mellin amplitude via the inverse Mellin transform in each variable,
                       Z ∞            Y
                                      n                                                 Y
                                                                                        n
                                               −∆i −δ0i −1                δ1i −1
N (δ1i , δ0i , δij ) =     An (uijkl ) (u0∞1i )            du0∞1i (u10∞i )       du10∞i   (u0∞ij )δij −1 du0∞ij
                    0              i=3                                               3<i<j
                                                                                                       (91)

                                                    29
We also could have just defined this directly in terms of r0i , r1i , and rij for i, j > 3. What we
call the Mellin amplitude (as opposed to the integrand N above) can now be defined as

                                                 N (δ1i , δ0i , δij )
                                       M (δab ) = Q                                                 (92)
                                                    a<b Γ(δab )

so that                                     Z i∞                   Y             −δab
                            An (uijkl ) =          [dδ]Mn (δab )         Γ(δab )rab                 (93)
                                             −i∞                   a<b

as desired.
    Now let us consider the situation when n > d + 2. The Mellin amplitude will no longer
be uniquely defined, so there will be many Mellin-space functions that give rise to vanishing
position-space correlators (these Mellin amplitudes are “pure gauge”). However, it is simple
to generate these “pure gauge” Mellin amplitudes, and to see that they vanish when we take
the flat space limit.
    Let us universalize the notation by taking the indices a, b to run from 1 to d + 2, while
the indices i, j run from d + 3 to n, and finally the indices α, β can take any value from 1
to n. It will be useful to represent the kinematics in d + 2 dimensional embedding space
coordinates PαA [51]. These variables are constrained by Pα2 = 0 and identified projectively
as PαA ∼ λPαA for positive real λ. We can choose an explicit PαA corresponding to xµα by
taking (Pα− , Pα+ , Pαµ ) = (1, x2α , xµα ), so that (xα − xβ )2 = Pα · Pβ and we will use the shorthand
Pα · Pβ = Pαβ .
    Now let us define the d + 3 by d + 3 matrix
                                                                    
                                              αβ           Pab PaJ
                                            A (I, J) =                                               (94)
                                                           PIb PIJ

where the indices I and J are fixed, whereas the a and b indices range from 1 to d + 2 (so Pab
forms a d + 2-by-d + 2 sub-matrix in the upper left corner, etc).
    The point is that det[A(I, J)] = 0 for all I and J between d + 3 and n. This follows
immediately from the fact that the entries of M (I, J) are formed from the matrix product
PαA PAβ , and when we regard the object PαA as a d + 2 by n matrix it has rank at most d + 2.
This means that generically there is an explicit formula relating

                                       PIJ = fIJ (Pab , PaI , PaJ )                                 (95)

by using this determinant condition. This reduces the full space of Pαβ to a

                        (d + 2)(d − 1)                  d(2n − d − 3)
                                       + d(n − d − 2) =               −1                            (96)
                              2                               2
dimensional space (when n ≥ d + 2, otherwise the result is just n(n − 3)/2), because the
unconstrained first d + 2 points give (d + 2)(d − 1)/2 degrees of freedom and then each extra
point beyond d + 2 gives d extra degrees of freedom.
    It is tempting to try to use this reduced set of variables to define the Mellin amplitude, or at
least to show that it exists, by taking the Mellin transform in only this reduced set of variables.

                                                      30
However, this would break the permutation symmetry among the external operators in an ad
hoc way, and it is unclear how it would be related to our known results for Mellin amplitudes
corresponding to tree-level Witten diagrams, which do not require a choice of preferred basis
or “gauge fixing”.
    However, another way of looking at the situation is that while the fact that det[A(I, J)] = 0
is fairly clear in position space, it becomes a non-trivial statement in Mellin space, where the
spacetime dimension makes no explicit appearance. Thus if we take a conformally covariant
function, express it as an integral over Mellin space, multiply by det[A(I, J)], and interpret the
result as a single Mellin space amplitude then we obtain an equality that identifies functions
on Mellin space that integrate to zero. In other words, we have a way of finding functions
in Mellin space that are “pure gauge”. Applying this procedure shows that for any Mellin
integrand function N (δαβ ), meaning any function where the integral
                                                Z                  Y
                                                                   n
                              A(Pα ) =              [dδ]N (δαβ )         (Pαβ )−δαβ           (97)
                                                                   α<β


gives a well-defined result, we have (in d dimensions)
                                                                                         
        Z      Y n               X                                                     
    0 = [dδ]       (Pαβ )−δαβ         sign(σ)N δ1sσ(1) + 1, δ2sσ(2) + 1..., δmsσ(m) + 1     (98)
               α<β             σ(a1 ,...,an )


where we are summing over all permutations σ on m = d + 3 or more indices, and the si are
m arbitrary distinct integer labels ranging from 1 to n. The δαβ that have not been explicitly
written are unchanged. This formula is simply implementing the determinant – the shifts in
the Mellin variables occur because we have soaked up each monomial in the determinant by
a shift of the δαβ variables. There will also be even more general objects that do not use the
labels 1, 2, ..., m but any set of distinct integers, but we have written the above as a simpler
representative example.
   The object in square brackets is “pure gauge” as a Mellin integrand. This object will also
vanish when we take the flat space limit to compute the S-Matrix. The reason is that when
we perform this procedure, the Mellin amplitude (as opposed to the integrand N above) will
inherit an overall factor of                             
                                                 δab δaJ
                                           det                                              (99)
                                                 δIb δIJ
due to the shifts δisσ(i) → δisσ(i) + 1 applied to the Γ(δisσ(i) ) functions. But in the flat space
limit this is just                                            
                                             p a · pb p a · pJ
                                       det                                                    (100)
                                             pb · pI pI · pJ
which vanishes in d + 1 dimensional momentum space for the same reason that det[M (I, J)]
vanished in position space in the CFT. Thus the flat space limit of “pure gauge” Mellin
amplitudes will be zero.



                                                         31
B       Derivation of the Flat Space Limit Formula
B.1       Single Particle Normalizations
In the normalization conventions from [2], the two-point function of O is
                                                                  X eiωn,` (t1 −t2 )
                       hO(t1 , x̂t )O(t2 , x̂2 )i = C∆                     2
                                                                                       Y`J (x̂1 )Y`J∗ (x̂2 ),                        (101)
                                                                  n,`
                                                                          Nn`J

So, taking the smearing of the operators, we have
                   Z τ                                 X eiωn,` (t1 −t2 )
         0 0
 hω, v̂|ω , v̂ i =        dt1 dt2 ei(ω1 t1 −ω2 t2 ) C∆            2
                                                                          Y` (x̂1 )Y` (x̂2 )
                     −τ                                 n,`
                                                                Nn,`,J

                   X                                                              2           2∆−2h
                                                                            2π h           Rωn,`
                 =             2
                         (2π) δτ (ω1 − ωn,` )δτ (ω2 − ωn,` ) C∆                                         Y` (x̂1 )Y`∗ (x̂2 )
                    n,`
                                                                           Γ(∆)                2
                                                           2        2∆−2h
                       2                              2π h        Rω1
                 = 2π Rδτ (ω1 − ω2 ) C∆                                           δ(v̂1 , v̂2 )
                                                     Γ(∆)           2
                                                       "                            #
                                                              2                    h 2
                                                            π              C  ∆ 2π
                 = R2∆−2h+1 [2ωδ(~p1 − p~2 )] 2∆−2h ω ∆−1                                    ,                      (102)
                                                          2                 Γ(∆)
                                                                                                                               2
                            (d)        0            1         0             0              1          2∆−2h              2π h
where we have used δ (~p − p~ ) ∼ pd−1 δ(p̂, p̂ )δ(|p| − |p |) and N 2                            ∼n            C∆       Γ(∆)
                                                                                                                                     . This
                                                                                          n,`,J
provides the normalizations in equation (28).

B.2       Completing the Derivation
Our starting point is the simple formula we left off from at the end of section 2, allowing a
non-zero energy violation component q0 :
                      "               P                                   !#
                             t2ω   nq0 i t2i ωi R2              X u2ij
                  exp itω +      −             −       −(nq)2 +        0
                                                                                        (103)
                             4α       4α         4α             i<j
                                                                    2s ij
                                     P
where we have defined tω =                 i ti ωi and

                                                          2n                  t2ij ωi ωj
                                  uij = ij −                q · (pi + pj ) +            .                                           (104)
                                                         n−2                      R2
Now we need to integrate over the constrained uij and ti variables and multiply by the single-
particle normalizations to obtain our desired result, equation (27). We will implement the
n + 1 constraints on the uij variables
                                            X                2n                  t2ij ωi ωj
                                  0 =               uij +       q · (pi + pj ) −                                                     (105)
                                             j6=i
                                                            n−2                      R2
                                             2n                  t212 ω1 ω2
                                  0 = u12 +     q · (p1 + p2 ) −                                                                     (106)
                                            n−2                      R2

                                                                  32
via Lagrange multipliers. We have made an arbitrary choice to isolate u12 , which is necessary
so that ij do not include the α direction of integration; this means that there will be a factor of
s12 from the change of variables from δij to {α, uij }. Thus we have the exponential integrand
        "                                  P                                       !
                      (Σi ti ωi )2 nq0 i t2i ωi R2                      X u2ij
    exp iΣi ti ωi +               −                 −          −(nq)2 +                                          (107)
                          4α               4α          4α                i<j
                                                                             2s0ij
                                                                 !                                                 #
        X       X               2n                    t2ij ωi ωj                   2n                    t212 ω1 ω2
     +i     λi        uij +          q · (pi + pj ) −              + iλ u12 +           q · (p1 + p2 ) −
         i       j6=i
                              n  − 2                      R 2                   n  −  2                      R2

with Lagrange multipliers λi and λ. Now we can integrate over the uij without any constraints.
This will give an overall factor of
                                                     n(n−1) n q
                                                              Y
                                                4α        4
                                                                 s0ij                                      (108)
                                                R2            i<j

nicely canceling many terms from the prefactorPin equation (36). In the exponent we have
(after simplifying and using the constraint that j6=i s0ij = 0):
                                                               P
                           (Σi ti ωi )2 R2         2      nq0 i t2i ωi 2α
         exp iΣi ti ωi +                +     (nq) −                   + 2 Sab λa λb                      (109)
                              4α           4α                   4α        R
                                                                !                                       #
            X        X 2n                            t2ij ωi ωj           2n                  t212 ω1 ω2
         +i     λi                 q · (pi + pj ) −               + iλ       q · (p1 + p2 ) −
             i        j6=i
                           n−2                           R2              n−2                      R2

where a runs from 0 to n, with λ0 ≡ λ, and Sab is
                                                                               
                                     s012 s012 s012 0  0                   ...
                                   s0           0
                                   12 0 s12 s13 s14
                                                    0  0
                                                                           ... 
                                   s0 s0
                                   12 12 0 s23 s24
                                                    0  0
                                                                           ... 
                            Sab =  0 s0 s0
                                           13   23 0 s034                 ... 
                                                                                  ,                        (110)
                                   0 s0 s0 s0         0                   ... 
                                           14   24 34
                                       ..   ..   .. ..  ..                 ..
                                        .    .    .  .   .                    .

so now we can integrate over the Lagrange multipliers. This produces a prefactor that is
parametrically of the form
                                   2  n+1
                                    R    2
                                               1
                                            p                                      (111)
                                    2α        det[S]
and returns an exponential
                "                                           P 2                                 #
                                                                           2 X
                              (Σi ti ωi )2 R2          nq 0     t  ω i   R
              exp iΣi ti ωi +             +    (nq)2 −        i  i
                                                                       +        Ua Ub [S −1 ]ab
                                 4α         4α              4α           8α a,b
                        t2 ω1 ω2                     X     t2ij ωi ωj
              U0 = v12 − 12 2 ,            Ui =      vij −            ,                                    (112)
                           R                    j6=i
                                                               R2

                                                         33
                                                                           2n
where for notational convenience we have defined the quantity vij = n−2       q · (pi + pj ), and it will
                                P                        2n2
                                                               2
also be useful to define va = j6=i vaj = 2nq · pa + n−2 q ≈ 2nq · pa . Note that here we have
assumed that we have generic momenta with det[S] 6= 0 and d + 3 > n. One can check that in
the case n > d + 2 the same final result obtains.
    Finally, we must integrate over the times ti , ignoring the negligible quartic piece which
is suppressed by additional powers of the AdS length R. We must also include a regulator
associated with the temporal boundaries at ti =h ±τ ; to simplify the integrals we will replace
                                                       P t2
this hard boundary with Gaussian factors exp − i 2τi2 (it is important to maintain non-
overlapping support between the in and out states, as emphasized in [32], but this will not an
issue at this point in the derivation, where we need only evaluate some Gaussian integrals in
the simplest way available). Now we are left with time integrals over the integrand
              "
                R2          R2                   X                  R2 X 2
       ≡ exp       (nq)2 +      v12 (v12 + 4nq ·   pi (S −1 )0i ) +       n (q · pi )(q · pj )(S −1 )ij
                4α          8α                   i
                                                                    2α ij
                                           #
                           1X
              +iΣi ti ωi −       ti tj Aij                                                           (113)
                           2 ij
where Aij takes the form
                                                1    ωi ωj
                                     Aij = −δij    +       + Qij                                    (114)
                                              2τ 2    4α
where Qij is O(q) and higher, so its inverse is
                   A−1
                     ij    ≈ Y (1 − QY + (QY )2 )ij + O(q 3 )
                                                                   
                                  2                2τ 2      4α       1
                    Yij = −2τ δij + ωi ωj P 2 + P 2 2 + O( )                                        (115)
                                                    k ωk   ( k ωk )   τ
                           
Note that Yij ωj = P4αω2 ωi , so 14 ωi A−1
                                        ij ωj simplifies to
                        k k
                                                 2
                  1      −1                 2α
                    ωi Aij ωj = α − P 2 ωi (Q − QY Q)ij ωj + O(q 3 )                                (116)
                  4                          k ωk
The matrix Q has four pieces, from the exponential above:
                   Q = Q(1) + Q(2) + Q(3) + Q(4)
                                                                                          
                                                              1 −1
                           ω1 ω2                  X          −1 1                         
                                       −1               −1                                
                 Q(1)    =       (v12 S00 + 2nq ·   pi S0i )      0                       
                            2α                    i
                                                                                          
                                                                                  ..
                                                                                       .
                                       −1      −1
                                                                        
                   (2)     v12 ωi ωj (S0i
                                     P     + S0j    )           i 6= j
                 Qij     =                        −1       −1
                            α     − k6=i ωi ωk (S0i + S0k ) i = j
                                                                               
                   (3)     1 X −2nωi ωj q · pk (Sik     −1     −1
                                                           + Sjk  )      i 6= j
                 Qij     =             P                    −1      −1
                           α k       2n `6=i ωi ω` q · pk (Sik + S`k   ) i=j
                   (4)          nq0 ωi
                 Qij     = −δij                                                                     (117)
                                 4α
                                                   34
Finally, we want to read off the coefficient of the momentum-conserving δ-function. Several
components of q get large, ∼ τ 2 q 2 contributions in the exponent, from the Q2 term in (116).
We can see already that there will generally be exactly n−1 such q µ components (one time and
n−2 spatial), for the simple reason that q~ always enters in Q dotted into pi directions. Naively,
this lifts n components of q~; however, not all the pi are linearly independent. At leading order,
the pi ’s conserve momentum, which imposes one constraint. Furthermore, the symmetries
of AdS in the flat-space limit become the symmetries of flat space, and boosts remove an
additional independent component of the pi ’s. This is especially obvious in practice, where
one often chooses the particles in the “in” state to be in their rest frame, so there is already
one linear relation among just the incoming momenta. Thus, at most n − 2 q~ components can
get lifted by τ 2 , and for generic external momentum, exactly this many get lifted.
    Focusing on terms ∼ τ 2 q 2 in (116), we see that they have the form
                         2                                  2
                     2α                                    2                j      0
                    P 2 ωi (QY Q)ij ωj = −2τ         2
                                                         P 2 Qiω Πij     ω Qω + O(τ )
                        ω
                      k k                                    ω
                                                           k k
                              1 X                              ωi ωj
                     Qiω ≡ −         Qij ωj ,    Πij
                                                  ω ≡ δij − P        2
                                                                       .                     (118)
                             2α j                               k ωk


   Now,

          Qiω = Q(1)i (2)i (3)i (4)i
                 ω + Qω + Qω + Qω ,
                                                                              !
                                n                       X
                                              −1                −1
       Q(1)i
        ω      = q · −2ω1 ω2 (     (p1 + p2 )S00  + 2n      pi S0i )(ω1 − ω2 ) (δi1 − δi2 )
                               n−2                      i
                                      X
                        4n                                    −1      −1
       Q(2)i
        ω      = q· −       (p1 + p2 )     ωi ωj (ωj − ωi )(S0i   + S0j  ),
                      n−2               j
                                                                  !
                        X
                                                     −1      −1
       Q(3)i
        ω      = q · −2    (−2n)ωi ωj (ωj − ωi )pk (Sik + Sjk   )
                             j,k

                   nq0 ωi2
       Q(4)i
        ω    =                                                                                (119)
                     8
Without loss of generality, we can consider our amplitude to be 2 to n − 2 and we can take
particles 1 and 2 in their rest frame, so that Q(1) = 0 and (p1 + p2 )µ = 2ω1 δ µ0 . Since
the transition amplitude is proportional to an energy-momentum-conserving δ function in
pµtot = nq µ , we want to extract the usual scattering amplitude by integrating over dd+1 ptot .
The time integrations produce a factor of
                                                           1/2
                                  √            n−1     α
                                ∼ det 0 Y ∝ τ        P 2         .                      (120)
                                                       k ωk

Here, det0 indicates that all vanishing eigenvalues are discarded. The ptot integrations produce
a factor of         P 2 n−1                                    − 12 h i d+1−(n−1)
                        k ωk        1      0 ∂   ∂                       α      2
                 ∼                   2
                                       det     µ   ν
                                                     Qω · Πω · Qω          2
                                                                                           (121)
                        τ          n        ∂q ∂q                        R

                                                35
where the first two terms in brackets come from the O(τ 2 q 2 ) pieces in (116). The last term
in brackets comes from the fact that after n − 1 q µ directions get lifted by τ 2 , there are still
                                                                2
d + 1 − (n − 1) q µ directions that are lifted only by the − R2α (nq)2 term in eq. (113). Notice
that this exactly cancels the factors of τ from the time integrations. Putting together eqs.
(28), (36),(108),(111),(120), and (121), as well as an additional factor of s12 that should be
included in the change of variables from δij to α, ij due to our choice of gauge 12 = 0, the
total prefactor for the flat-space formula integrand is then (neglecting constants)
                                                                               !n− 32 
                                                          − 21 Y n     X
                                       ∂ ∂
      N −1 αh−∆Σ s12 (det S)(det 0 µ ν Qω · Πω · Qω )                ωi    ωk2            (122)
                                      ∂q ∂q                       i=1     k


Note that the term in brackets is dimensionless, and so can have dependence only on the
scattering angles. Although it is not manifest from the above expression, we have checked for
n = 4 that the dependence on angles cancels. We can easily prove that such a cancellation
must occur in all cases, as follows. The dependence on the angles is independent of the specific
theory, and is simply a prefactor that depends only on the momenta of the external particles.
Thus, this prefactor is completely fixed by a single example. Since the Mellin amplitude is
just a constant for gφn theory, and the flat-space S-matrix is as well, this shows that the term
in brackets is independent of angles in all cases, thus finishing the derivation of the flat-space
S-matrix formula (2).


C     Källen-Lehmann in AdS
The key to being able to compute a large class of loops is the fact that
                            Y                 X
                               G∆i (X, Y ) =      Nα G∆α (X, Y )                             (123)
                                i                 α

for bulk-to-bulk propagators. One can easily compute Nα for any number of propagators using
this simple relation between products and sums of propagators
                                  X
        G∆1 (X, Y )G∆2 (X, Y ) =      a∆1 ,∆2 (n)G∆1 +∆2 +2n (X, Y ),
                                      n
                                      (h)n (∆1 + ∆2 + 2n)1−h (∆1 + ∆2 + n − 2h + 1)n
                     a∆1 ,∆2 (n) =                                                      .    (124)
                                     2π h n! (∆1 + n)1−h (∆2 + n)1−h (∆1 + ∆2 + n − h)n

which was equation (53) in the text. The bulk-to-bulk propagators have a simple expression
in terms of the geodesic distance σ between X and Y :

                         G∆ (X, Y ) = C∆ z ∆/2 2 F1 (∆, h, ∆ + 1 − h, z),                    (125)




                                                36
where z = e−2σ .6 This formula in the case ∆1 = ∆2 was derived in section 3.2 of [17] using an
inner product on the space of propagators
                                  I
                                    dz (1 − z)2h
                  hG2h−α , Gβ i =                G2h−α (z)Gβ (z) = Cα C2h−α δαβ          (128)
                                    2πi z 1+h

where as usual d = 2h is the dimension of the CFT, δαβ is a kronecker delta, and z = e−2σ(X,Y )
where σ(X, Y ) is the geodesic distance between X and Y in the bulk of AdS. The generalization
that we have used can be derived by computing the inner product

                                    hG∆1 +∆2 +2n , G∆1 G∆2 i = a∆1 ,∆2 (n)                                (129)

which vanishes unless n is a non-negative integer.


D       Conformal Blocks in Mellin Space
Up to one very simple but important detail, the conformal blocks corresponding to the exchange
of operators of arbitrary spin between external scalars were constructed by Mack [4].
    First the results. Let us define the scalar block function
                                                                           
                     `        πi(h−∆)   iπ(δ+∆−2h)
                                                      Γ ∆−`−δ
                                                             2
                                                                 Γ 2h−∆−`−δ
                                                                       2
                   B∆ (δ) = e         e            −1                                  (130)
                                                       Γ ∆a − 2δ Γ ∆b − 2δ

where as in the text we have defined the variables δ = ∆1 + ∆2 − 2δ12 , 2∆a = ∆1 + ∆2 while
2∆b = ∆3 + ∆4 are defined for convenience. In the scalar case (` = 0) this function is the
                                        `
conformal block. The only factor in B∆    (δ) that Mack [4] did not include is the pre-factor in
parentheses, which cancels the ‘shadow’ poles from the second Γ function in the numerator, so
       `
that B∆  (δ) only has physical poles corresponding to a primary operator and its descendants.
                                                  `
   In the case of non-zero ` we must multiply B∆    (δ) with τ = ∆ − ` by a Mack polynomial [4]
                                       [`/2]
                                       X                                 
                                                           0    `      0  `
                       P`,τ (δij ) =           ad` (k)    δ12 −       δ −     Q`−2k (δij )                (131)
                                       k=0
                                                                2 k 34 2 k

where the primed δij ’s are shifted:

                   0             −∆1 − ∆2 + d − ∆                   0            −∆3 − ∆4 + ∆
                  δ12 = δ12 +                     ,                δ34 = δ34 +                ,           (132)
                                        2                                             2
   6
    This normalization of the bulk-to-bulk propagator is chosen to agree with the two-point functions in [1, 2],
and differs from that in [17] by a factor of C∆ . Other useful representations of the bulk-to-bulk propagator are

                                                     y ∆/2        ∆ ∆ 1
                           G∆ (X, Y )     = C∆             2 F1 (  , + , ∆ + 1 − h, y)                     (126)
                                                      2∆          2 2   2
                                                  C∆                  1                4
                                          =          2 F1 (∆, ∆ − h + , 2∆ − 2h + 1, − ),                  (127)
                                                  u∆                  2                u
                             1
where u = (X − Y )2 and y − 2 = cosh R
                                     σ        u
                                       = 1 + 2R 2.




                                                              37
                                                                                                     (d)
and the ad` (k) are the coefficients of the familiar Legendre polynomials P` (cos θ), which in
                                                    (h−1)
general dimension are Gegenbauer polynomials C`           (cos θ), as polynomials in cos θ:

               `!     (h−1)
                                  X                                            (−1)k `!(h + ` − 1)k 2`−2k
                     C`     (t) =   ad`,k t`−2k ,                  adk,` =                                .   (133)
            (h − 1)`              k
                                                                                      k!(` − 2k)!

Mack defines (in our notation)

                           X                         0
                                                     Y
                −m                        k14 +k23     (δij )kij
Qm (δij ) = 2        m!          (−1)                                               (134)
                          P0              kij !
                     kij =m
                                                                    −1
                   ∆ + ∆12 − m                  ∆ − ∆12 − m
              × Γ               + k13 + k14 Γ               + k23 + k24
                          2                          2
                                                                               −1
                   2h − ∆ + ∆34 − m                 2h − ∆ − ∆34 − m
              × Γ                    + k13 + k23 Γ                     + k14 + k24      ,
                            2                               2

where ∆ij = ∆i − ∆j . The notation needs some explanation. The variables k onlyQconnect
1, 2 to 3, 4, so in other words we only have k13 , k14 , k23 , and k24 , and kij = kji . So the 0 terms
are products over the non-vanishing kij .
                                                                `
    In the text we discussed the flat space limit of B∆           (δ). The Mack polynomials simply
reduce to Legendre polynomials in the flat space limit, as should be expected, because their
only purpose is to encode the angular momentum information in the conformal blocks. Let us
see why this follows at a technical level. First, the Γ functions in equation (134) cancel when
∆ → ∞ to give an overall factor of (∆/2)d . Now we can perform the sum over the kij . In the
flat space limit, δ13 , δ24 ∝ t and δ14 , δ23 ∝ u. This means that we can combine terms to find
that
                                             −d X    m
                                      −m      ∆                      m!
                       Qm (δij ) → 2                      (−1)k              tk um−k
                                              2       k=0
                                                                 k!(m −  k)!
                                      −d
                                        ∆
                                 =              (δ12 cos θ)m                                      (135)
                                         2

as desired, where we used the fact that (t − u)/s = cos θ in the center of mass frame. Plugging
this result back into (131) we find that the Mack polynomials reduce
                                                    −d             ` X
                                                                         [`/2]
                                               MR              R2 s
                          P`,τ (δij ) →                      −                   ad` (k) cos`−2k θ            (136)
                                                2              4α        k=0

                                    R2 s
where we have taken δij → − 4αij as is appropriate for the flat spacetime limit, and we have
assumed that ∆ = M R so that this is a conformal block corresponding to a non-zero energy
in the flat space limit.
                     `
    The function B∆    (δ) can be most easily understood as a simple solution to the functional
equation we found (14). Recall that this equation is simply the eigen-equation of the conformal

                                                             38
casimir, so its solutions will be, by definition, the conformal partial waves. The conformal
blocks are simply the conformal partial waves with the correct boundary conditions. Anyway,
in this case the functional equation takes the very simple form

                      (δ − ∆ + `)(2h − ∆ − ` − δ) `
                                                 B∆ (δ) = B∆ (δ − 2).                   (137)
                           (∆a − δ)(∆b − δ)

and it is obvious that the two factors in the numerator and denominator are exactly reproduced
by each of the four Γ functions in equation (130). Note that since this is a finite difference
equation, we are free to multiply by any periodic function with period 2. The function in
parentheses is the choice which eliminates the unphysical shadow poles and gives the correct
boundary conditions for the conformal block in position space.


References
 [1] J. Penedones, “Writing CFT correlation functions as AdS scattering amplitudes,” JHEP
     03 (2011) 025, arXiv:1011.1485 [hep-th].

 [2] A. Fitzpatrick, J. Kaplan, J. Penedones, S. Raju, and B. C. van Rees, “A Natural
     Language for AdS/CFT Correlators,” arXiv:1107.1499 [hep-th].

 [3] M. F. Paulos, “Towards Feynman rules for Mellin amplitudes,” arXiv:1107.1504
     [hep-th].

 [4] G. Mack, “D-independent representation of Conformal Field Theories in D dimensions
     via transformation to auxiliary Dual Resonance Models. Scalar amplitudes,”
     arXiv:0907.2407 [hep-th].

 [5] G. Mack, “D-dimensional Conformal Field Theories with anomalous dimensions as Dual
     Resonance Models,” arXiv:0909.1024 [hep-th].

 [6] J. M. Maldacena, “The large N limit of superconformal field theories and supergravity,”
     Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2 (1998) 231–252, arXiv:hep-th/9711200.

 [7] E. Witten, “Anti-de Sitter space and holography,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2 (1998)
     253–291, arXiv:hep-th/9802150.

 [8] S. S. Gubser, I. R. Klebanov, and A. M. Polyakov, “Gauge theory correlators from
     non-critical string theory,” Phys. Lett. B428 (1998) 105–114, arXiv:hep-th/9802109.

 [9] A. Fitzpatrick and J. Kaplan, “Unitarity and the Holographic S-Matrix,”
     arXiv:1112.XXXX [hep-th].

[10] J. Polchinski, “S-matrices from AdS spacetime,” arXiv:hep-th/9901076.

[11] L. Susskind, “Holography in the flat space limit,” arXiv:hep-th/9901079.



                                             39
[12] M. Gary, S. B. Giddings, and J. Penedones, “Local bulk S-matrix elements and CFT
     singularities,” Phys. Rev. D80 (2009) 085005, arXiv:0903.4437 [hep-th].

[13] A. Fitzpatrick and J. Kaplan, “Scattering States in AdS/CFT,” arXiv:1104.2597
     [hep-th].

[14] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dubovsky, A. Nicolis, E. Trincherini, and G. Villadoro, “A
     Measure of de Sitter entropy and eternal inflation,” JHEP 0705 (2007) 055,
     arXiv:0704.1814 [hep-th].

[15] S. B. Giddings and R. A. Porto, “The gravitational S-matrix,” Phys. Rev. D81 (2010)
     025002, arXiv:0908.0004 [hep-th].

[16] I. Heemskerk, J. Penedones, J. Polchinski, and J. Sully, “Holography from Conformal
     Field Theory,” JHEP 10 (2009) 079, arXiv:0907.0151 [hep-th].

[17] A. L. Fitzpatrick, E. Katz, D. Poland, and D. Simmons-Duffin, “Effective Conformal
     Theory and the Flat-Space Limit of AdS,” arXiv:1007.2412 [hep-th].

[18] I. Heemskerk and J. Polchinski, “Holographic and Wilsonian Renormalization Groups,”
     JHEP 1106 (2011) 031, arXiv:1010.1264 [hep-th].

[19] I. Heemskerk and J. Sully, “More Holography from Conformal Field Theory,” JHEP
     1009 (2010) 099, arXiv:1006.0976 [hep-th].

[20] R. Rattazzi, V. S. Rychkov, E. Tonni, and A. Vichi, “Bounding scalar operator
     dimensions in 4D CFT,” JHEP 12 (2008) 031, arXiv:0807.0004 [hep-th].

[21] F. A. Dolan and H. Osborn, “Conformal partial waves and the operator product
     expansion,” Nucl. Phys. B678 (2004) 491–507, arXiv:hep-th/0309180.

[22] M. S. Costa, J. Penedones, D. Poland, and S. Rychkov, “Spinning Conformal
     Correlators,” arXiv:1107.3554 [hep-th].

[23] M. S. Costa, J. Penedones, D. Poland, and S. Rychkov, “Spinning Conformal Blocks,”
     arXiv:1109.6321 [hep-th].

[24] S. Hellerman, “A Universal Inequality for CFT and Quantum Gravity,” JHEP 1108
     (2011) 130, arXiv:0902.2790 [hep-th].

[25] D. Poland, D. Simmons-Duffin, and A. Vichi, “Carving Out the Space of 4D CFTs,”
     arXiv:1109.5176 [hep-th].

[26] S. Rychkov, “Conformal Bootstrap in Three Dimensions?,” arXiv:1111.2115
     [hep-th]. * Temporary entry *.

[27] A. Belavin, A. M. Polyakov, and A. Zamolodchikov, “Infinite Conformal Symmetry in
     Two-Dimensional Quantum Field Theory,” Nucl.Phys. B241 (1984) 333–380.


                                            40
[28] T. Banks, M. R. Douglas, G. T. Horowitz, and E. J. Martinec, “AdS dynamics from
     conformal field theory,” arXiv:hep-th/9808016 [hep-th].

[29] V. Balasubramanian, P. Kraus, A. E. Lawrence, and S. P. Trivedi, “Holographic probes
     of anti-de Sitter space-times,” Phys.Rev. D59 (1999) 104021, arXiv:hep-th/9808017
     [hep-th].

[30] I. Bena, “On the construction of local fields in the bulk of AdS(5) and other spaces,”
     Phys.Rev. D62 (2000) 066007, arXiv:hep-th/9905186 [hep-th].

[31] D. Harlow and D. Stanford, “Operator Dictionaries and Wave Functions in AdS/CFT
     and dS/CFT,” arXiv:1104.2621 [hep-th].

[32] M. Gary and S. B. Giddings, “The Flat space S-matrix from the AdS/CFT
     correspondence?,” Phys.Rev. D80 (2009) 046008, arXiv:0904.3544 [hep-th].

[33] D. W. Dusedau and D. Z. Freedman, “LEHMANN SPECTRAL REPRESENTATION
     FOR ANTI-DE SITTER QUANTUM FIELD THEORY,” Phys.Rev. D33 (1986) 389.

[34] S. Weinberg, “The Quantum theory of fields. Vol. 1: Foundations,”.

[35] F. A. Dolan and H. Osborn, “Conformal four point functions and the operator product
     expansion,” Nucl. Phys. B599 (2001) 459–496, arXiv:hep-th/0011040.

[36] D. Amati, M. Ciafaloni, and G. Veneziano, “Superstring Collisions at Planckian
     Energies,” Phys.Lett. B197 (1987) 81.

[37] S. B. Giddings, “The gravitational S-matrix: Erice lectures,” arXiv:1105.2036
     [hep-th]. * Temporary entry *.

[38] R. Sundrum, “From Fixed Points to the Fifth Dimension,” arXiv:1106.4501
     [hep-th]. * Temporary entry *.

[39] A. Adams, N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dubovsky, A. Nicolis, and R. Rattazzi, “Causality,
     analyticity and an IR obstruction to UV completion,” JHEP 0610 (2006) 014,
     arXiv:hep-th/0602178 [hep-th].

[40] K. Skenderis, “Lecture notes on holographic renormalization,” Class.Quant.Grav. 19
     (2002) 5849–5876, arXiv:hep-th/0209067 [hep-th].

[41] N. Arkani-Hamed, F. Cachazo, and J. Kaplan, “What is the Simplest Quantum Field
     Theory?,” JHEP 1009 (2010) 016, arXiv:0808.1446 [hep-th].

[42] N. Arkani-Hamed, F. Cachazo, C. Cheung, and J. Kaplan, “A Duality For The S
     Matrix,” JHEP 1003 (2010) 020, arXiv:0907.5418 [hep-th].

[43] R. Britto, F. Cachazo, and B. Feng, “New recursion relations for tree amplitudes of
     gluons,” Nucl.Phys. B715 (2005) 499–522, arXiv:hep-th/0412308 [hep-th].


                                              41
[44] R. Britto, F. Cachazo, B. Feng, and E. Witten, “Direct proof of tree-level recursion
     relation in Yang-Mills theory,” Phys.Rev.Lett. 94 (2005) 181602,
     arXiv:hep-th/0501052 [hep-th].

[45] Z. Bern, L. J. Dixon, and R. Roiban, “Is N = 8 supergravity ultraviolet finite?,”
     Phys.Lett. B644 (2007) 265–271, arXiv:hep-th/0611086 [hep-th].

[46] Z. Bern, J. Carrasco, L. J. Dixon, H. Johansson, and R. Roiban, “The Ultraviolet
     Behavior of N=8 Supergravity at Four Loops,” Phys.Rev.Lett. 103 (2009) 081301,
     arXiv:0905.2326 [hep-th].

[47] N. Arkani-Hamed and J. Kaplan, “On Tree Amplitudes in Gauge Theory and Gravity,”
     JHEP 0804 (2008) 076, arXiv:0801.2385 [hep-th].

[48] J. Drummond, J. Henn, G. Korchemsky, and E. Sokatchev, “Dual superconformal
     symmetry of scattering amplitudes in N=4 super-Yang-Mills theory,” Nucl.Phys. B828
     (2010) 317–374, arXiv:0807.1095 [hep-th].

[49] T. Banks, W. Fischler, S. Shenker, and L. Susskind, “M theory as a matrix model: A
     Conjecture,” Phys.Rev. D55 (1997) 5112–5128, arXiv:hep-th/9610043 [hep-th].

[50] A. L. Fitzpatrick and D. Shih, “Anomalous Dimensions of Non-Chiral Operators from
     AdS/CFT,” JHEP 10 (2011) 113, arXiv:1104.5013 [hep-th].

[51] S. Weinberg, “Six-dimensional Methods for Four-dimensional Conformal Field
     Theories,” Phys.Rev. D82 (2010) 045031, arXiv:1006.3480 [hep-th].




                                             42
