                                           TEMPERED REPRESENTATIONS AND NILPOTENT ORBITS

                                                                              BENJAMIN HARRIS




arXiv:1209.4123v2 [math.RT] 4 May 2015
                                                  Abstract. Given a nilpotent orbit O of a real, reductive algebraic group, a
                                                  necessary condition is given for the existence of a tempered representation π
                                                  such that O occurs in the wave front cycle of π. The coefficients of the wave
                                                  front cycle of a tempered representation are expressed in terms of volumes of
                                                  precompact submanifolds of an affine space.




                                                                              1. Introduction
                                             Let G be a real, reductive algebraic group with Lie algebra g, and let π be an
                                         irreducible, admissible representation of G. The wave front cycle of π, denoted
                                         WF(π), is an integral linear combination of nilpotent coadjoint orbits defined in
                                         [2], [13].
                                         Theorem 1.1. Suppose O is an orbit contained in WF(π) for a tempered repre-
                                         sentation π, let ν ∈ O, and let L be a Levi factor of ZG (ν). Then L/Z(G) is
                                         compact.
                                            This theorem was conjectured by David Vogan. It makes precise the widely held
                                         intuition that orbits occuring in the wave front cycles of tempered representations
                                         are necessarily large.

                                            In [1] Bala and Carter attempted a uniform understanding of nilpotent orbits in
                                         complex semisimple Lie algebras. They observed that for every nilpotent orbit O,
                                         there is an unique (up to conjugacy) maximal complex Levi subalgebra l meeting O.
                                         Moreover, O ∩ l is a single orbit for the adjoint group of l. Bala and Carter defined
                                         a nilpotent orbit to be distinguished if it does not meet a proper Levi subalgebra,
                                         and they observed that to parametrize nilpotent orbits it is enough to parametrize
                                         distinguished nilpotent orbits in every Levi subalgebra.
                                            Motivated by the work of Bala and Carter, we define a nilpotent orbit for a real
                                         reductive algebraic group to be real distinguished if it does not meet a proper Levi
                                         subalgebra. By Levi subalgebra, we mean the Levi factor of a real parabolic subal-
                                         gebra. Using the notion of a real distinguished nilpotent orbit, one could attempt a
                                         Bala-Carter style classification of real nilpotent orbits. Noël gave a different gener-
                                         alization of Bala-Carter theory for real nilpotent orbits using the notion of a noticed
                                         nilpotent orbit which is different from the notion of a real distinguished nilpotent
                                         orbit [8].


                                            Date: August 21, 2011.
                                            2000 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 22E46; Secondary 43A65, 22E45.
                                            Key words and phrases. Tempered Representation, Discrete Series Representation, Wave Front
                                         Cycle, Associated Variety, Reductive Lie Group, Real Reductive Algebraic Group, Nilpotent Orbit,
                                         Distinguished Nilpotent Orbit, Coadjoint Orbit.
                                                                                        1
2                                  BENJAMIN HARRIS


    If Oν is a nilpotent orbit, then one checks that ZG (ν) is compact modulo Z(G)
iff Oν is a real distinguished nilpotent orbit by utilizing the fact that every real
Levi subalgebra can be written as the centralizer of a hyperbolic element. Thus,
we have an alternate way of stating Theorem 1.1.

Corollary 1.2. If O ⊂ g∗ is a nilpotent coadjoint orbit occurring in the wave front
cycle of a tempered representation, then O does not meet m∗ for any proper Levi
subalgebra m ⊂ g.

   Note that this corollary relates a set of nilpotent orbits that arises naturally in
representation theory with a set of nilpotent orbits that arises naturally in structure
theory.
   For p-adic groups, similar results were obtained much earlier. In [6], Moeglin
shows that the p-adic analogue for supercuspidal representations follows from re-
sults of [7]. Similarly, Moeglin proves the result for tempered representations of
classical p-adic groups in [6].

   The purpose of this paper is to show that there is a simple proof of Theorem
1.1, which is in the spirit of the Kostant-Kirillov orbit method.

   In [10] and [11], Rossmann associated to each irreducible, tempered represen-
tation π a finite union of regular coadjoint orbits we call Oπ . If π has regular infin-
itesimal character, then Oπ is a single coadjoint orbit. For each nilpotent coadjoint
orbit, O ⊂ g∗ , fix X ∈ O. Identify g ∼  = g∗ via a G-equivariant isomorphism, and
let {X, H, Y } be an sl2 -triple containing X. Put SX = X + Zg (Y ).

Theorem 1.3. There exists a canonical measure on SX ∩ Oπ such that
                                      X
                    WF(π) =                        vol(Oπ ∩ SX )OX .
                               Oπ ∩SX precompact


The sum is over nilpotent coadjoint orbits OX such that Oπ ∩ SX is precompact.

   If π has regular infinitesimal character, then ‘precompact’ may be replaced by
‘compact’ in the above theorem. In the case where G is compact, the wave front
cycle of π is dim(π) · 0 where 0 denotes the zero orbit. In this case, our formula
reduces to the well known observation of Kirillov that the symplectic volume of the
coadjoint orbit associated to π is the dimension of π (see for instance page 173 of [5]).

   The reader will see in section four that the compactness in Theorem 1.1 is a
consequence of the compactness of the manifold Oπ ∩ SX in the case of regular
infinitesimal character.

   All of these results should be true for an arbitrary reductive Lie group. We only
state them in the case of real, reductive algebraic groups because we use results of
[10], [11], and [12], which are only stated for real, reductive algebraic groups. How-
ever, the author believes that these results should be true for an arbitrary reductive
Lie group.
              TEMPERED REPRESENTATIONS AND NILPOTENT ORBITS                         3


    2. Rao’s Lemma and three Corollaries of Barbasch and Vogan
   Let O ⊂ g∗ be a coadjoint orbit. The Kostant-Kirillov symplectic form ω is
defined on O by the formula
                           ωλ (ad∗X λ, ad∗Y λ) = λ([X, Y ]).
The top dimensional form
                                        ωm
                                      m!(2π)m
on O gives rise to the canonical measure on O. Here m = dim2 O . We will often
abuse notation and write O for the orbit as well as the canonical measure on the
orbit.
   In this section, we recall an unpublished lemma of Rao and three corollaries of
Barbasch and Vogan. All of this material can be found on pages 46, 47, and 48
of [2]. However, unlike the previous treatment, we need to carefully keep track of
certain constants for our applications. Thus, we provide updated statements, and
for the convenience of the reader we provide sketches of updated proofs.
   Identify g ∼
              = g∗ via a G-equivariant isomorphism. Let OX be a nilpotent orbit
     ∗ ∼
in g = g, and let {X, H, Y } be an sl2 -triple with nilpositive element X. Put
SX = X + Zg (Y ). The map
                                  φ : G × SX → g ∗
given by φ : (g, ξ) 7→ g · ξ is a submersion. In particular, every orbit Oν ⊂ G · SX
is transverse to SX , and G · SX ⊂ g∗ is open.
    Fix a Haar measure on G. This choice determines a Lebesgue measure on g ∼  = g∗ .
If ξ ∈ SX , then we have a direct sum decomposition
                       g = [g, X] ⊕ Zg (Y ) ∼
                                            = TX OX ⊕ Tξ SX .
We then obtain a Lebesgue measure on SX as the ‘quotient’ of the Lebesgue measure
on g and the canonical measure on OX ⊂ g∗ . Further, given ν ∈ g∗ , denote by Fν
the fiber over ν under the map φ. If g · ξ = ν, then we have an exact sequence
                                                        ∗
                0 → Tν∗ (G · SX ) → T(g,ξ)
                                     ∗
                                           (G × SX ) → T(g,ξ) Fν → 0.
This exact sequence together with the above remarks and our choice of Haar mea-
sure on G determine a smooth measure on Fν . Moreover, integration against these
measures on the fibers of φ yields a continuous surjective map
                       φ∗ : Cc∞ (G × SX ) −→ Cc∞ (G · SX ).
Dualizing, we get an injective pullback map on distributions
                          φ∗ : D(G · SX ) → D(G × SX ).
Now, we are ready to state Rao’s lemma.
Lemma 2.1 (Rao). If ν ∈ SX , then there exists a smooth measure mν,X on Oν ∩SX
such that
                           φ∗ (Oν ) = mG ⊗ mν,X .
Here mG denotes the fixed choice of Haar measure on G. Although φ∗ depends on
this choice of Haar measure, mν,X does not.
4                                 BENJAMIN HARRIS


    One can write down mν,X by giving a top dimensional form on Oν ∩ SX , well-
defined up to sign. Essentially, we just divide the canonical measure on Oν by
the canonical measure on OX . More precisely, the composition of the inclusion
[g, ν] ֒→ g and the projection defined by the decomposition g = [g, X] ⊕ Zg (Y )
yields a map
                              = [g, ν] → [g, X] ∼
                        Tν Oν ∼                 = TX OX .
This map is a surjection because Oν is transverse to SX . It pulls back to an exact
sequence
                          ∗
                    0 → TX  OX → Tν∗ Oν → Tν∗ (Oν ∩ SX ) → 0.
The canonical measures on Oν and OX determine top dimensional alternating ten-
sors up to sign on Tν∗ Oν and TX∗
                                  OX . Hence, our exact sequence gives a top dimen-
                               ∗
sional, alternating tensor on Tν (Oν ∩ SX ), well-defined up to sign.

   We will need three corollaries of Barbasch and Vogan. Let N ⊂ g∗ be the
nilpotent cone. If ν ∈ g∗ , define
                                 Nν = N ∩ ∪t>0 Otν .
Corollary 2.2 (Barbasch and Vogan). We have four statements.
(a) If OX is a nilpotent orbit, then OX ⊂ Nν if, and only if Oν ∩ SX 6= ∅.
(b) An orbit OX ⊂ Nν is open if, and only if Oν ∩ SX is precompact.
(c) If ν is semisimple, then OX ⊂ Nν is open if, and only if Oν ∩ SX is compact.
(d) Further, OX ∩ SX = {X} for any nilpotent orbit OX .
   We sketch a proof. Note G·SX ⊂ g∗ is an open subset containing OX ; thus, OX ⊂
Nν iff Otν ∩ SX 6= ∅ for sufficiently small t > 0. However, if γt = exp(− 12 (log(t))H),
then
                         Otν ∩ SX = X + tγt (Oν ∩ SX − X).
In particular, Oν ∩ SX 6= ∅ iff Otν ∩ SX 6= ∅ for any t > 0. This verifies part (a).
   For parts (b) and (c), one shows that Oν ∩ SX bounded implies that SX ∩
Nν = {X} and Oν ∩ SX unbounded implies that SX ∩ Nν is unbounded. This
follows from a straightforward calculation utilizing the adH -decomposition of Zg (Y )
into eigenspaces with non-positive eigenvalues and the above relationship between
Oν ∩ SX , Otν ∩ SX , and γt . Using that (G · SX ) ∩ N is the union of nilpotent orbits
containing OX in their closures, parts (b) and (c) follow.
   If we let ν = X in the last paragraph, we arrive at part (d).
Corollary 2.3 (Barbasch and Vogan). Let n = 12 (dim Oν − dim Nν ). Then
                                  X
                lim t−n Otν =             vol(Oν ∩ SX )OX .
                   t→0+
                                       OX ⊂Nν
                                   dim OX =dim Nν

The volumes are computed with respect to the measures defined in Lemma 2.1.
Moreover, the Fourier transform of the right hand side is the first non-zero term in
                                                     cν .
the asymptotic expansion of the generalized function O
   Again, we sketch a proof. Fix X, a nilpotent element with OX ⊂ Nν open, and
let m = 21 (dim Oν − dim OX ). We first show
                           lim t−m Otν = vol(Oν ∩ SX )OX
                          t→0+
               TEMPERED REPRESENTATIONS AND NILPOTENT ORBITS                          5


on the open set G · SX . By Rao’s lemma, φ∗ (Oν ) = mG ⊗ mν,X . Thus, it is enough
to show
                   lim t−m mG ⊗ mtν,X = vol(Oν ∩ SX )mG ⊗ δX
                  t→0+

if OX ⊂ Nν is an open orbit. Note that the support of the measure mtν,X is the
precompact set Otν ∩ SX , and the precompact sets Otν ∩ SX converge uniformly
to δX by the above relationship between Oν ∩ SX , Otν ∩ SX , and γt . Thus, it is
enough to show
                         t−m vol(Otν ∩ SX ) = vol(Oν ∩ SX ).
This follows from a straightforward computation utilizing the above definition of
the measures mtν,X .
                                           cν has an asymptotic expansion at the
   By Theorem 3.2 of [2], the distribution O
origin
                                    d
                                 tr O      l
                                     tν ∼ t Dl + · · ·

where Dl is the leading term and r is the number of positive roots of G. If we
show n = l − r, then our limit will exist everywhere. If n > l − r, then the
limit limt→0+ tn O dtν must be zero everywhere. However, we have seen that the
Fourier transform of this limit is nonzero on OX whenever OX ⊂ Nν is of maximal
dimension.
   The limit limt→0+ t−l+r Otν must exist and be nonzero. However, if n < l − r,
then the homogeneity degree of this invariant distribution and Corollary 3.9 of [2]
imply that such a distribution would have to be supported on orbits of dimension
greater than dim Nν . But, this is impossible since the limit limt→0+ t−l+r Otν , if it
exists, is clearly supported in Nν . Hence, n = l − r and the limit limt→0+ t−n Otν
exists.
   Now, let k = dim Nν , and let Nk be the union of nilpotent orbits of dimension
                                         X limit formula holds on Nk . However, in
at least k. We have shown that our desired
theory the limit could differ from               vol(Oν ∩ SX )OX by a distribution
                                       OX ⊂Nν
                                   dim OX =dim Nν
u supported on orbits of dimension less than Nν . However, we deduce u = 0 from
Corollary 3.9 of [2] after checking the homogeneity degree of the terms in our limit
formula.

Corollary 2.4 (Barbasch and Vogan). Suppose h ⊂ g is a Cartan, and let C ⊂
(h∗ )′ be a connected component of the regular set. If ν, λ ∈ C, then Nν = Nλ .

   Suppose OX ⊂ Nν is an open orbit, let n = 21 (dim Oν − dim OX ), and observe
                          1
limt→0+ t−n Otν = limt→0+ n! ∂(ν)n |tν Otν on G · SX by the proof of Corollary 2.3.
By Lemma 22 of [4],

                         lim ∂(ν)n |tν Otν = lim ∂(ν)n |tλ Otλ
                         t→0+                t→0+

on G·SX if ν, λ ∈ C. Clearly the support of limt→0+ ∂(ν)n |tλ Otλ must be contained
in Nλ . Thus, the explicit formula for the limit on the left on G · SX for open orbits
OX ⊂ Nν in the proof of Corollary 2.3 then implies OX ⊂ Nλ whenever OX ⊂ Nν
is open. Thus, we deduce Nν ⊂ Nλ . By symmetry we have equality.
6                                BENJAMIN HARRIS


                     3. Rossmann’s Character Formula
  Let V be a finite dimensional, real vector space, and let µ be a smooth, rapidly
decreasing measure on V . Then the Fourier transform of µ is defined to be
                                    Z
                            b(l) =
                            µ           eihl,Xi dµ(X).
                                         V
     b is a Schwartz function on V . Given a tempered distribution D on V ∗ , its
Note µ                              ∗
                  b is a tempered, generalized function on V defined by
Fourier transform D
                                 hb
                                  D, µi := hD, µ
                                               bi.
   Let G be a real, reductive algebraic group, and let π be an irreducible, tempered
representation of G with character Θπ . Let θπ be the Lie algebra analogue of the
character of π. Rossmann associated to π a finite union of regular, coadjoint orbits
Oπ ⊂ g∗ . He proved the following theorem [10], [11].
Theorem 3.1 (Rossmann). As generalized functions, we have
                                        cπ = θπ .
                                        O
     cπ denotes the Fourier transform of the canonical measure on Oπ .
Here O
   If Oπ = Oν is a single orbit, then the leading term of the asymptotic expansion
   cπ = O
of O     cν is
                                X
                                                      d
                                         vol(Oπ ∩ SX )O X
                              OX ⊂Nν
                          dim OX =dim Nν
by Corollary 2.3. More generally, suppose Oπ = ∪Oνi , and define AS(π) = ∪Nνi .
Then the leading term of O cπ is a sum over the leading terms of the O
                                                                     dνi of minimal
                                                 d
degree. This is just the sum over vol(Oπ ∩ SX )OX where OX ⊂ AS(π) varies over
orbits of maximal dimension. Hence, we have shown
                                     X
                    WF(π) =                   vol(Oπ ∩ SX )OX .
                                 OX ⊂AS(π)
                             dim OX =dim AS(π)

   Thus, to prove Theorem 1.3, we need only show that OX ⊂ AS(π) is of maximal
dimension iff Oπ ∩ SX is precompact and non-empty. If OX ⊂ AS(π) is of maximal
dimension, then OX ∩ Nνi is open for every i and non-empty for at least one i. And
by Corollary 2.2, Oνi ∩ SX is precompact for every i and non-empty for at least
one i. We conclude Oπ ∩ SX is precompact and non-empty.
   Conversely, suppose Oπ ∩ SX is precompact and non-empty. Then Oνi ∩ SX
is precompact for every i and non-empty for some i. Corollary 2.2 tells us that
OX ⊂ Nνi is open for some i and OX ∩ Nνi is open for every i. Hence, we have
that OX ⊂ AS(π) is open. But, by Theorem D of [12], AS(π) is the closure of
the union of the orbits in AS(π) of maximal dimension. Thus, OX ⊂ AS(π) open
implies that OX ⊂ AS(π) is of maximal dimension.

                           4. Proof of Theorem 1.1
   In this section we prove Theorem 1.1. It is enough to prove the theorem when
π is an irreducible, tempered representation. Let OX ⊂ AS(π) be an open orbit,
and identify g ∼= g∗ via a G-equivariant isomorphism. Let L ⊂ ZG (X) be a Levi
              TEMPERED REPRESENTATIONS AND NILPOTENT ORBITS                         7


factor. Then there exists an sl2 -triple {X, H, Y } such that L = ZG {X, H, Y }. To
prove the theorem, we must show
                       ZG {X, H, Y }/Z(G) is compact. (∗)

   Now, if Oπ = ∪Oνi , then AS(π) = ∪Nνi . Any open orbit in AS(π) must be open
in some Nνi . Hence, it is enough to prove (∗) whenever OX is open in Nν for a
regular element ν ∈ g∗ .
   Next, supplement A and supplement C of [9] imply that every regular orbit Oν
can be written as a limit of regular semisimple orbits in the following sense. Let
ξ ∈ g∗ ∼= g be a semisimple element in the closure of Oν , and let h ⊂ g be a
fundamental Cartan in Zg (ξ). Then there exists a connected component C ⊂ (h∗ )′
such that
                                   lim Oλ = Oν .
                                   λ∈C
                                   λ→ξ
Hence, Nν = Nλ for some regular semisimple element λ, and it is enough to prove
(∗) for OX open in Nλ with λ regular, semisimple.
   Fix X and suppose OX ⊂ Nλ is open for some λ regular semisimple. By Corol-
lary 2.2, Oλ ∩ SX is compact and non-empty. Now, L = ZG {X, H, Y } acts on this
space, and L must have at least one closed orbit (for instance, one can take an orbit
of minimal dimension). Without loss of generality, we make it L · λ ⊂ Oλ ∩ SX .
Choose a Cartan h and a component of the regular set C ⊂ (h∗ )′ such that λ ∈ C.
If ξ ∈ U1 = G · C, then OX ⊂ Nλ = Nξ is open by Corollary 2.4. It then follows
from Corollary 2.2 that Oξ ∩ SX is compact for all ξ in the open set U1 . Define
U = U1 ∩ SX , an open subset of SX .
   Now, L/ZG (λ) ∼  = L · λ ⊂ Oλ ∩ SX is a closed subset of a compact set; hence,
L/ZG (λ) is compact. Note that ZG (λ) ⊂ G is a Cartan since λ is regular, semisim-
ple. Thus, ZL (λ) ⊂ ZG (λ) is abelian and consists of semisimple elements. Hence,
the connected component of the identity ZL (λ)0 must be contained in a Cartan B
of L. We have seen that L/ZL (λ) is compact; hence, L/ZL (λ)0 is compact because
ZL (λ) has finitely many components. This implies L/B is compact and finally
                                      L/Z(L)
is compact since semisimple groups are compact iff they are compact modulo a
Cartan.
   Because the fibers of the projection
                                L/Z(G) → L/Z(L)
are homeomorphic to Z(L)/Z(G), to show that L/Z(G) is compact, it is enough to
show Z(L)/Z(G) is compact.
The following lemma is the key step in proving that Z(L)/Z(G) is compact.
Lemma 4.1. Let Z(l) denote the center of l = Lie(L), and let Z(g) denote the
center of g. Then       \
                           (Z(l) ∩ Zl (ξ)) = Z(g).
                             ξ∈U

Proof. Clearly the right hand side is contained in the left hand side. To show the
other direction, suppose W ∈ (Z(l) ∩ Zl (ξ)) for all ξ ∈ U . We will show W ∈ Z(g).
Since W ∈ l, we know X, H, Y ∈ Zg (W ). Further, Zg (W ) ∩ Zg (Y ) ⊂ Zg (Y ) is a
8                                  BENJAMIN HARRIS


vector subspace containing U − X since W ∈ Zl (ξ) for ξ ∈ U and X ∈ Zg (W ).
Since U − X ⊂ Zg(Y ) is an open subset, we must have
                                   Zg (W ) ⊃ Zg (Y ).
Now, view g as a finite dimensional module for SpanR {X, H, Y } ∼  = sl2 R. Note
Zg(W ) ⊂ g is a subalgebra and a submodule for SpanR {X, H, Y } since X, H, Y ∈
Zg(W ). But, the lowest weight vectors of each irreducible summand of g are in
Zg(W ) since Zg (W ) ⊃ Zg (Y ), and the lowest weight vectors of any finite dimen-
sional sl2 module generate the entire module. Thus, Zg (W ) = g and W ∈ Z(g) as
desired.                                                                        
   Before we get back to showing that Z(L)/Z(G) is compact, we need two general
remarks. First, suppose A is an abelian, real algebraic group, suppose φ : A →
Aut(V ) is a representation of A on a real vector space V , and suppose S ⊂ V is a
compact A-stable subset of V . Then A acts on S with compact orbits. This can
be proved as follows. After complexifying the representation, we may diagonalize
the action of the image φ(A) since it is abelian and consists of semisimple elements.
Now, A must be isomorphic to a product of copies of S 1 , R× , and C× . Using that
every one dimensional character of these groups has either compact or unbounded
image in C, we deduce that every orbit of A on V ⊗ C is either compact or un-
bounded. In particular, A must act on a compact S ⊂ V with compact orbits.

   Second, if A is an abelian, real algebraic group and A1 , A2 are cocompact, alge-
braic, closed subgroups, then A1 ∩ A2 is cocompact in A. This is because the fibers
of the map
                                A/(A1 ∩ A2 ) → A/A1
are homeomorphic to A1 /(A1 ∩ A2 ) ∼   = A1 A2 /A2 , which is compact because it is
a closed subset of A/A2 . More generally, if A1 , . . . , An is a finite collection of
cocompact, algebraic, closed subgroups of a real, abelian algebraic group A, then
                                      A/ ∩ni=1 Ai
is compact.

  Now, back to the proof that Z(L)/Z(G) is compact. By the first remark,
Z(L) acts on Oξ ∩ SX with compact orbits for every ξ ∈ U . In particular,
Z(L)/(Z(L) ∩ ZL (ξ)) is compact for all ξ ∈ U . In the above lemma, we showed
                           \
                              (Z(l) ∩ Zl (ξ)) = Z(g).
                             ξ∈U

However, one can clearly choose ξ1 , . . . , ξk ∈ U such that the identity still holds
when taking the intersection over this finite set. Then, by the second remark,
                                     k
                                     \
                             Z(L)/        (Z(L) ∩ ZL (ξi ))
                                     i=1
                  T
is compact. Since ki=1 (Z(L) ∩ ZL (ξi )) is a real algebraic group, it has a finite
number of connected components and
                                     k
                                     \
                            Z(L)/(       (Z(L) ∩ ZL (ξi )))0
                                    i=1
               TEMPERED REPRESENTATIONS AND NILPOTENT ORBITS                          9

                       Tk
is also compact where ( i=1 (Z(L)∩ZL (ξi )))0 denotes the identity component. But,
       T
since ki=1 (Z(L) ∩ ZL (ξi )) and Z(G) share a Lie algebra, Z(L)/Z(G) is a quotient
of
                                   \k
                             Z(L)/( (Z(L) ∩ ZL (ξi )))0 .
                                    i=1
Thus, Z(L)/Z(G) is compact. This completes the proof of Theorem 1.1.

                                 5. Two Examples
In this section, we give two examples. The author learned these examples from
David Vogan.
Example 5.1. Nilpotent orbits in U(2, 2) can be parametrized by signed Young
diagrams of signature (2, 2) (see page 140 of [3]). A nilpotent orbit of U(2, 2)
is real distinguished iff it corresponds to a signed Young diagram for which any
two rows of equal length begin with the same sign. One can read this off of an
explicit description of the Levi factor of the centralizer of a nilpotent element in the
corresponding nilpotent orbit, which in turn can be easily computed from Remark
5.1.18 on page 74 of [3] and the discussion on pages 139-140 of [3].
On the other hand, which nilpotent orbits of U(2, 2) occur in the wave front cycle
of a discrete series can be read off from Example 2.6.7 on page 363 of [14]. In
Yamamoto’s table, the far left column is filled in by sequences of numbers and
signs. The entry corresponds to a discrete series representation if the sequence
contains only signs. One then observes from Yamamoto’s table that the nilpotent
orbits corresponding to discrete series for U(2, 2) are precisely the real distinguished
nilpotent orbits of U(2, 2).
Of course, Yamamoto is really computing the associated variety of a discrete series
representation. That the associated variety of the representation corresponds to the
wave front cycle of the representation under the Kostant-Sekiguchi correspondence
is a deep result of [13].
Example 5.2. Nilpotent orbits in Sp(4, C) can be parametrized by partitions of
four whose odd parts occur with even multiplicity (see page 70 of [3]). Of these
orbits, the principal orbit (corresponding to the trivial partition 4) and the subreg-
ular orbit (corresponding to the partition 22 ) are the real distinguished ones as can
be read off of page 88 of [3].
However, the wave front cycle of any tempered representations of Sp(4, C) con-
tains only the principal orbit. Therefore, in this case, the set of nilpotent orbits
corresponding to tempered representations is a proper subset of the set of real
distinguished nilpotent orbits.

                              6. Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank his advisor, David Vogan, for suggesting the rela-
tionship between tempered representations and nilpotent orbits that is explored in
this paper. The author would also like to thank David Vogan for many helpful com-
ments and corrections. The author would like to thank Esther Galina for pointing
out a mistake in a remark relating the results of this paper with the results of Noël.
We have fixed this error in this draft.
10                                   BENJAMIN HARRIS


                                        References
 1. P. Bala, R. Carter, Classes of unipotent elements in simple algebraic groups. I, Math Proc.
    Cambridge. Philos. Soc., 79 (1976), 401-425.
 2. D. Barbasch, D. Vogan, The Local Structure of Characters, J. Funct. Anal. 37 (1980), 27-55.
 3. D. Collingwood, W. McGovern, Nilpotent Orbits in Semisimple Lie Algebras, Van Nostrand
    Reinhold, (1993), New York, NY.
 4. Harish-Chandra, Some Results on an Invariant Integral on a Semi-Simple Lie Algebra, Ann.
    of Math. (2), 80 (1964), 551-593.
 5. Kirillov, Lectures on the Orbit Method, Graduate Studies in Mathematics, Volume 64, Amer-
    ican Mathematical Society, (2004), Providence, RI.
 6. C. Moeglin, Front d’Onde des Representations des Groupes Classiques p-adiques, American
    Journal of Mathematics, 118, no. 6 (1996), 1313-1346.
 7. C. Moeglin, J.L. Waldspurger, Modeles de Whittaker Degeneres pour des Groupes p-adiques,
    Math Z, 196 (1987), 427-452.
 8. A. Noël, Nilpotent Orbits and Theta Stable Parabolic Subalgebras, Journal of Representation
    Theory, No. 2, (1998), 1-32.
 9. W. Rossmann, Limit Orbits in Reductive Lie Algebras, Duke Math. J. 49 No. 1 (1982), 215-
    229.
10. W. Rossmann, Limit Characters of Reductive Lie Groups, Invent. Math. 61 (1980), no. 1,
    53-66.
11. W. Rossmann, Tempered Representations and Orbits, Duke Math. J. 49 No. 1 (1982), 231-247.
12. W. Rossmann, Picard-Lefschetz Theory and Characters of a Semisimple Lie Group, Invent.
    Math. 121 (1995), 579-611.
13. W. Schmid, K. Vilonen, Characteristic Cycles and Wave Front Cycles of Representations of
    Reductive Lie Groups, Ann. of Math. (2), 151 (2001), 1071-1118.
14. A. Yamamoto, Orbits in the Flag Variety and Images of the Moment Map for Classical Groups
    I, Journal of Representation Theory, No. 1, (1997), 329-404.

  Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139
  E-mail address: blharris@math.mit.edu
