                                                                   Rank and Duality in Representation Theory∗
                                                                                 Shamgar Gurevich† and Roger Howe‡


                                                 Abstract. There is both theoretical and numerical evidence that the set of irreducible representations




arXiv:2105.11027v1 [math.RT] 23 May 2021
                                           of a reductive group over local or finite fields is naturally partitioned into families according to analytic
                                           properties of representations. Examples of such properties are the rate of decay at infinity of “matrix
                                           coefficients” in the local field setting, and the order of magnitude of “character ratios” in the finite field
                                           situation.
                                                 In these notes we describe known results, new results, and conjectures in the theory of “size” of
                                           representations of classical groups over finite fields (when correctly stated, most of them hold also in
                                           the local field setting), whose ultimate goal is to classify the above mentioned families of representations
                                           and accordingly to estimate the relevant analytic properties of each family.
                                                 Specifically, we treat two main issues: the first is the introduction of a rigorous definition of a notion
                                           of size for representations of classical groups, and the second issue is a method to construct and obtain
                                           information on each family of representation of a given size.
                                                 In particular, we propose several compatible notions of size that we call U -rank, tensor rank and
                                           asymptotic rank, and we develop a method called eta correspondence to construct the families of repre-
                                           sentation of each given rank.
                                                 Rank suggests a new way to organize the representations of classical groups over finite and local
                                           fields - a way in which the building blocks are the ”smallest” representations. This is in contrast to
                                           Harish-Chandra’s philosophy of cusp forms that is the main organizational principle since the 60s, and
                                           in it the building blocks are the cuspidal representations which are, in some sense, the ”largest”. The
                                           philosophy of cusp forms is well adapted to establishing the Plancherel formula for reductive groups
                                           over local fields, and led to Lusztig’s classification of the irreducible representations of such groups over
                                           finite fields. However, the understanding of certain analytic properties, such as those mentioned above,
                                           seems to require a different approach.

                                                 0. Introduction

                                                 In these notes we describe a new approach, initiated in [Gurevich-Howe15], for the study of repre-
                                           sentations of classical groups over finite and local fields, an approach that seems relevant to harmonic
                                             ∗
                                                 These notes grow out of the 19th Takagi lectures [Howe17-2] delivered by the second named author on July 8-9, 2017,
                                           at the the Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences Kyoto University, Japan.
                                              †
                                                S. Gurevich, Department of Mathematics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA. e-mail: sham-
                                           gar@math.wisc.edu.
                                              ‡
                                                Howe R., Wm. Kenan Jr. Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. e-mail:
                                           roger.howe@yale.edu.


                                                                                                       1
Gurevich and Howe                                                                          Rank and Duality


analysis. The goal (see examples in [Gurevich-Howe17], [Gurevich-Howe18]) is to develop an effective
theory of “size” for representations, namely to give a precise definition of that notion and develop a
method to analyze each family of representations having the same size.

   0.1. Motivation.

   The motivation in the finite setting comes from the fact that many problems about finite groups (e.g.,
properties of random walks, word maps, Cayley graphs, etc.) can be approached using harmonic analysis
[Diaconis88], [Diaconis96], [Diaconis-Shahshahani81], [Frobenius1896], [Gluck97], [Guranick-Malle14],
[Hildebrand92], [Larsen-Shalev-Tiep11], [Liebeck17], [Liebeck-O’Brien-Shalev-Tiep10], [Liebeck-Shalev05],
[Malle14], [Saloff-Coste04], [Shalev07], [Shalev09], [Shalev15]. More precisely, what intervenes in such
problems are the character ratios (CRs)

                                               χπ (g)
                                                      , g ∈ G,                                         (0.1.1)
                                              dim(π)

where π is an irreducible representation (irrep) of the relevant group G, and χπ (g) = trace(π(g)), g ∈ G,
is its character.
   In general, it is not feasible to compute the CRs (0.1.1) exactly, but for applications it often suffices to
show that the CRs are small for most representations or that certain sums of them exhibit cancellations.
   Looking on numerical character tables of the finite classical groups, one notices that the CRs of the
irreducible representations (irreps) tend to form a certain hierarchy according to order of magnitude.
Hence, for applications it might be of importance to understand better these natural families of irreps.
   In these notes we introduce several (conjecturally highly compatible) notions of “rank” for repre-
sentations of classical groups. These notions make the concept of size of a representation rigorous, and
they seem, at least in certain cases, to put together representations of similar size of character ratios.




      Figure 1: log1/√13 -scale of CRs at transvection T vs. tensor rank for irreps π of Sp6 (F13 ).


                                                      2
Gurevich and Howe                                                                          Rank and Duality


      Figures 1 and 2 illustrate this numerically. In these figures, the group G is, respectively, Sp6 (F13 )
and GL7 (F3 ), the CRs are evaluated on a transvection T (i.e., T is conjugate to a matrix with 1’s on
the diagonal and only one non-zero off diagonal entry) and rank⊗ (π) denotes the “tensor rank” of π
(to be defined later).
      A significant discovery so far is that, although the dimensions of the irreps of a given rank may
vary by quite a lot (they can differ by a large power of q), the CRs of these irreps (for certain elements
of interest) are in many cases nearly equal. We will not formally show this in these notes, but the
comparison between Figures 2 and 3 illustrates1 this phenomenon (for more details see [Gurevich-
Howe17]).




                                log1/3|χπ(T)/dim(π)|         CRs ≈(1/3)3




                                                                           rank⊗(π)
                                                        low U-rank



          Figure 2: log1/3 -scale of CRs at transvection T vs. tensor rank for irreps π of GL7 (F3 ).




                               [log1/3|χπ(T)/dim(π)|]
                                                                 CRs ≈(1/3)3




                                                                      [log3dim(π)]


         Figure 3: [log1/3 ]-scale of CRs at transvection T vs. [log3 dim(π)] for irreps π of GL7 (F3 ).
  1
      We denote by [x] the nearest integer to x.



                                                                             3
Gurevich and Howe                                                                       Rank and Duality


   0.2. Earlier developments.

   Before we formulate the main results of these notes, we would like to give some remarks on the
theory of size of representations in a way that places our work in some historical context.
   In the study of representations of algebraic groups over local fields, considerable attention has been
devoted to concepts of size of representations [Vogan80], [Vogan16], [Wallach82]. For finite groups, since
all irreducible representations are finite dimensional, the dimension of the space on which a given irre-
ducible representation is realized can serve as a first proxy for size. However, since most representations
of groups over local fields are infinite dimensional, any notion of size has to appeal to other considera-
tions. Since many representations are realized on spaces of functions (or sections of vector bundles) on
manifolds or algebraic varieties (which are often homogeneous spaces for the relevant group) the dimen-
sion of this variety, can provide some measure of size for the representation. For unipotent groups, the
Kirillov orbit method [Kirillov62], [Kirillov04], [Pukanszky67], assigns a coadjoint orbit in the dual of
the Lie algebra to each representation, and the dimension of this orbit (or half of it, since these orbits
are always even dimensional) can provide an appropriate measure. Indeed, one of the conclusions of
the orbit method for nilpotent groups is that the representation attached to a given coadjoint orbit
can be realized on sections of a line bundle over a homogeneous space for the group, of dimension
equal to half the dimension of the orbit. Such ideas extend, in large part, to solvable groups as well
[Auslander-Kostant71], [Bernat-Conze-Duflo-Lévy-Nahas-Rais-Renouard-Vergne72], [Pukanszky78].
   For reductive groups, although the orbit method succeeds in describing a large family of represen-
tations, including the most “typical” ones (for example, the ones that appear in the Plancherel formula
[Knapp86], [Vergne83], [Wallach92]), it does not quite cover all representations, and some of the ones
it misses are arguably some of the most interesting. For real or complex groups G, a representation of
G gives rise to a “derived representation” of the Lie algebra g of G, which then further engenders a
representation of U (g)—the universal enveloping algebra of g [Knapp86], [Wallach82]. In this context,
the notion of Gelfand-Kirillov dimension [Knapp86],, [Vogan80], [Vogan16], [Wallach82] can often be
used to assign a number that can be considered a measure of the size of representations. For representa-
tions of groups over non-Archimedean fields, this concept is not available. Nevertheless, a qualitatively
similar notion of size seems to be relevant for known examples.

   In [Howe82], the notion of rank of a representation was introduced for unitary representations
of symplectic groups, and this was extended to all classical groups in [Li89-1, Li89-2]. The rank of
a representation, in the sense of these papers, is not a very precise measure of size. For example,
representations of a real reductive group can have the same rank in the sense of [Howe82], but different
Gelfand-Kirillov dimensions. However, it weakly compatible with such notions. Thus, the Gelfand-
Kirillov dimensions of representations of a given rank must vary within a limited range, and the lower
and upper limits of this range increase with the rank.
   Unfortunately, the notion of rank discussed in [Howe82] and [Li89-1, Li89-2] applies only to unitary
representations, not to the full class of admissible representations that form the main preoccupation of
the literature of representation theory for reductive groups. Perhaps because of this limitation, the idea
of rank has found relatively little resonance in that literature, despite its relevance, as demonstrated in

                                                    4
Gurevich and Howe                                                                         Rank and Duality


[Howe82], [Li89-1,Li89-2], for understanding the structure of the unitary dual, as well as its relationship
to ideas developed in the classical theory of automorphic forms [Gelbart75], [Li92], [Duke-Howe-Li92].

   Recently [Gurevich17], [Gurevich-Howe15], [Howe17-1], [Howe17-2], we realized that there is a way
of formulating the notion of rank so that it makes sense for admissible representations. A major benefit
of the new point of view is that it is relevant for finite fields as well as local fields. For reasons of ease
of exposition, these notes will discuss the new developments only in the case of finite fields.

   0.3. Rank of a representation.

   An important invariant attached to any finite group G is its representation ring [Zelevinsky81]

                                               R(G) = Z[G],
                                                        b                                              (0.3.1)

i.e., the ring (aka Grothendieck ring) generated from the set G
                                                              b of isomorphism classes of irreducible
representations (irreps) using the operations of addition and multiplication given, respectively, by direct
sum ⊕ and tensor product ⊗.
   The main purpose of these notes is to demonstrate that in the case that G is a finite classical group
the ring R(G) has a natural rank filtration that encodes important properties of the representations.
In particular, moving to the associated graded pieces, each member π of the unitary dual G
                                                                                         b gets a well
defined non-negative integer that will be its rank. This integer seems—as illustrated in Figures 1, 2, and
3, to be intimately related to certain analytic properties of π such as its dimension and size of character
ratios.

   Remark 0.3.2. Another aspect of the new point of view on rank is a connection with the work
of Zelevinsky [Zelevinsky81] on the representations of symmetric groups and general linear groups over
finite fields. Zelevinsky’s basic construction, of forming the direct sum over n of the Grothendieck rings
of GLn (Fq ) for a fixed finite field Fq with q elements, appears naturally [Howe17-1] in connection with
the new notion of rank. Also, we have indications for extending Zelevinsky’s theory beyond GLn .

   In fact, in these notes we give several compatible notions of rank (each probably will have its
advantages and limitations), and hopefully all of them will serve as valuable analytical tools.
   For the sake of introduction, it will be suffice for us to illustrate the main results and idea using the
general linear groups GLn = GLn (F) and the symplectic groups Sp2n (F), where F = Fq is the finite
field with q elements, where q (in the Sp2n case) is a power of an odd prime.

   The U -rank

   The U -rank is a notion related to the usual notion of rank of a matrix in linear algebra.

   The GLn case:

   Consider the subgroup U < GLn of unipotent upper triangular matrices

                                        Ia T
                                                        
                                U=               ; T ∈ Ma,b ,                                          (0.3.3)
                                         0 Ib


                                                      5
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


where a = b = n2 if n is even, a = n−1       n+1
                                    2 and b = 2 for n odd, and Ia (resp. Ib ) denotes the identity
matrix of size a × a (resp. b × b), and Ma,b is the space of matrices of size a × b over F.
      The group U is abelian and can be identified with its group of characters (aka Pontrjagin dual) U
                                                                                                      b,
via the map T 7→ χT , where χT (T 0 ) = χ0 (trace(T t T 0 )), where T t is the matrix transpose of T , and
χ0 is a fixed non-trivial character of F. In particular, every character χ ∈ U  b comes naturally with an
integer2 0 ≤ rank(χ) ≤ n2 , i.e., the rank of the matrix T (0.3.3) associated to it by the identification.
                           

      Now, considering a representation π of GLn , we look at its restriction π|U and define the U -rank of
π to be the integer
                                rankU (π) = max{rank(χ); χ appears in π|U }.                          (0.3.4)

      In terms of the ring (0.3.1), for 0 ≤ k ≤ n2 we define
                                                


                               FUk = FUk (R(GLn )) = {π ∈ R(GLn ); rankU (π) ≤ k}.

Then the FUk form a filtration of R(GLn ) that we call the U -rank filtration, and of course the members
of FUk r FUk−1 are exactly the representations of U -rank k.
   It can be shown (we will come back to more quantitative aspects of this later) that most of the
representations of GLn are of U -rank k = n2 . This motivates us to call the representations of U -rank
                                          

k < n2 , low U -rank representations.
     

      The Sp2n case:

      Here, we consider the subgroup U < Sp2n , called the Siegel unipotent subgroup,
                                               In S
                                                              
                                                               2
                                      U=                ; S ∈ Sn ,                                    (0.3.5)
                                               0 In
where Sn2 denotes the space of n × n symmetric matrices over F.
   The group U ≃ Sn2 is abelian and, exactly as in the GLn case, can be identified with its Pontrjagin
     b . This leads to a well defined notion of rank for every character χ ∈ U
dual U                                                                       b , i.e., the rank of the matrix
S ∈ Sn2 that corresponds to χ, in particular, 0 ≤ rank(χ) ≤ n. Finally, we have a notion of U -rank for
every representation π of Sp2n using the Formula (0.3.4), and again the story of this invariant, as in
the case of GLn , can be told in terms of the U -rank filtrationof the ring R(Sp2n ).
      Again, it can be shown that most of the representations of Sp2n are of maximal U -rank k = n.
Hence, we will call the representations of U -rank k < n, low U -rank representations.

      The ⊗-rank

   We would like to refine the notion of U -rank and filter further the collection of representations
of maximal U -rank, i.e., those of U -rank k = n2 in the GLn case, and k = n in the Sp2n setting.
                                               

The motivation is to account for the significant differences (e.g., in dimensions and character ratios)
between the members of that collection. Figures 1 and 2 illustrate this. In both pictures the low U -rank
representations coincide with these of ⊗-rank (to be defined shortly) k = 0, 1, 2, and a hierarchy in order
of magnitude of CRs is clearly presented well beyond the range of low U -rank irreps.
  2
      We denotes by b c the floor function.


                                                       6
Gurevich and Howe                                                                       Rank and Duality


   The notion of ⊗-rank seems (see Figures 1 and 2 for illustration) to be an appropriate refinement. We
were led to formulate it by examining the structure of our main construction (the “eta correspondence”)
for low U -rank irreps.
   We will introduce this notion using a specific filtration of the representation ring (0.3.1).

   The GLn case:

   We consider the U -rank k = 1 irreps of GLn . They are of smallest possible dimensions (order
of magnitude of q n−1 ) after the one dimensional ones, and can be realized as the non-trivial irreps
that appear in the permutation representation Π of GLn on L2 (Fnq ), and a twist (i.e., tensor) of these
by characters of GLn . Now, we introduce the ⊗-rank filtration by letting F⊗0 = F⊗0 (R(GLn )) be the
characters of GLn , and for 1 ≤ k letting F⊗k = F⊗k (R(GLn )) be the collection of linear combinations of
irreps that appear in `-fold, ` ≤ k, tensor products of U -rank 1 representations.
   It is not difficult to show [Howe73-2] that:
   Claim 0.3.6. The first k such that F⊗k = GL
                                            dn , is k = n.

   Finally, we say that a representation π of GLn is of tensor rank k, and denote rank⊗ (π) = k, if
π ∈ F⊗k r F⊗k−1 .

   The Sp2n case:

   Again, we start with the U -rank k = 1 irreps of Sp2n . These are the irreps of smallest possible
                                                                  n                                n
dimensions 6= 1. There are four of them, with two of dimension q 2−1 , and two of dimension q 2+1 . They
can be realized as the components of the two oscillator (aka Weil) representations of Sp2n [Gérardin77],
[Howe73-1], [Weil64]. Next, we introduce the ⊗-rank filtration F⊗k = F⊗k (R(Sp2n )) by letting F⊗k be the
collection of integer linear combinations of `-fold, ` ≤ k, tensor products of U -rank 1 representations.
   It can be shown [Adams-Moy93], [Howe73-2], that:
   Claim 0.3.7. The first k such that F⊗k = Sp
                                            c 2n is k = 2n.

   Finally, we say that a representation π of Sp2n is of tensor rank k, and denote rank⊗ (π) = k, if
π ∈ F⊗k r F⊗k−1 .

   Comparison

   Tensor rank is defined, in both cases of GLn and Sp2n , using U -rank k = 1 irreps. In particular, a
simple compatibility property between U -rank and tensor product implies that rankU ≤ rank⊗ for all
representations.
   Based on theoretical considerations, and numerical evidences, we conjecture that

   Conjecture 0.3.8 (Agreement of ranks). On the collection of low U -rank representations of
GLn and Sp2n , we have rankU = rank⊗ .

   0.4. Information on representations of a given rank.

   How to get information on the family of representations of a given U -rank or ⊗-rank? For example


                                                    7
Gurevich and Howe                                                                      Rank and Duality


information on the character ratios of irreps that are needed for the harmonic analysis problems that
we mentioned in Subsection 0.1.
   We propose to use the eta correspondence as a method the leads to an answer for the above question.
Indeed, it seems [Gurevich-Howe15], [Gurevich-Howe17],[Gurevich17] that this construction might pro-
vide the required analytic information about the representations of finite classical groups. Moreover, it
does so in a way that for certain purposes complements the information supplied by Harish-Chandra’s
“philosophy of cusp forms” [Harish-Chandra70, Howe-Moy86] or more generally by the classification
given by Lusztig in [Lusztig84] for the irreps of these groups.
   The eta correspondence is a collection of correspondences of representations associated to dual pairs
[Gelbart77], [Howe73-2], [Howe77],in the symplectic groups. It is closely related to, but distinct from,
the widely used theta correspondence for classical groups over local fields [Gan-Takeda16], [Gelbart75],
[Howe77], [Kudla86], [Moeglin-Vigneras-Waldspurger87], [Prasad93].
   For classical groups over finite fields, the theta correspondence does not exist and the eta correspon-
dence provides a substitution. In the past, several authors [Adams-Moy93], [Aubert-Michel-Rouquier96],
[Srinivasan79] and in particular [Howe73-2], studied certain representation theoretic properties associ-
ated with dual pairs in the finite field setting, but no explicit correspondence was exhibited, nor was
the concept of rank introduced in this context.

   The eta correspondence

   We describe the eta correspondence and how it gives a systematic construction of a large collection
(conjecturally all) of the irreps of GLn and Sp2n of a given U -rank or ⊗-rank k.

   The GLn case:

   We start the construction by fixing n and k, with n ≥ k, and consider the vector spaces Fn and
Fk over F = Fq . We then form the 2nk-dimensional vector space (Fn ⊗ Fk ) ⊕ (Fn ⊗ Fk )∗ . This is a
direct sum of a space and its dual, so it is in a natural way a symplectic vector space. We denote the
associated symplectic group by Sp2nk and note that GLn and GLk can be regarded naturally as a pair
of commuting subgroups in Sp2nk . In fact, in this way GLk is the centralizer of GLn in Sp2kn and vice
versa, namely (GLn , GLk ) is a dual pair of subgroups in Sp2nk , in the sense of [Howe73-2].
   The next step of the construction is to take an oscillator representation [Gérardin77], [Howe73-1],
[Weil64] ω2nk of Sp2nk , restrict it to GLn × GLk and look at the decomposition into isotypic components
of irreps of GLk
                                                        X
                                     ω2nk|GLn ×GLk ≃           Ξν ⊗ ν,                             (0.4.1)
                                                        ν∈GL
                                                          dk

where the space Ξν is a representation of GLn .
   We want to say something about the spaces Ξν in (0.4.1). Some of them might be zero and some,
but “not too many”, are reducible. Indeed, as was shown in [Howe73-2] the group algebras

                          AGLn = C[ω2nk (GLn )] and AGLk = C[ω2nk (GLk )],                         (0.4.2)

are “approximately” each other’s commutant in End(ω2nk ) in the following sense. Denote by GL
                                                                                           dn (ω2nk )

                                                    8
Gurevich and Howe                                                                          Rank and Duality


              dn of irreps that appear in ω2nk . It is not difficult to show that for every 1 ≤ k ≤ n, we
the subset of GL
have a proper containment
                                        GLn (ω2n(k−1) ) ( d
                                        d                 GLn (ω2nk ),                                (0.4.3)

and that the sequence stabilizes exactly at the k = n step, i.e., d
                                                                  GLn (ω2n2 ) = d
                                                                                GLn . We call the difference
between these two sets, i.e.,
                                         GL
                                         dn (ω2nk ) r GL
                                                      dn (ω2n(k−1) )

                                           dn )new,k . Finally, we denote by (ω2nk )new ⊂ ω2nk the
the new k-spectrum of GLn , and denote it (GL                                       GLn
subspace spanned by all isotypic components of members from (GLn )new,k .
                                                              d
   The algebras AGLn and AGLk act on (ω2nk )new
                                            GLn and now we can remove the above “approximately”
phrase, i.e., we have [Howe73-2]:

   Theorem 0.4.4 (The η-correspondence for GLn - non explicit form). The algebras AGLn
and AGLk are each other’s commutant acting on (ω2nk )new
                                                     GLn . In particular (by the double commutant
theorem [Weyl46]), we have a bijection

                                              ν 7−→ η(ν) < Ξν ,                                       (0.4.5)

from a subset of GL
                 dk onto (GL
                          dn )new,k .

   We call (0.4.5) the eta correspondence.

   It is a good news that, the bijection (0.4.5), and in particular its domain of definition and image,
can be made explicit and in a way that leads to various explicit formulas for the U -rank and ⊗-rank k
irreps of GLn .
                                n
   We start with the case k <     2   . Here all irreps of GLk participate in the domain of (0.4.5) while the
image of the correspondence consists only of irreps of U -rank k. To state this precisely, let us introduce
some notations.
   Denote by (d  GLn )U,k the U -rank k-spectrum of GLn consisting of all U -rank k irreps, and by
        U,k
(ω2nk )
      GLn   ⊂ ω2nk the subspace spanned by all isotypic components of members from (GL
                                                                                    dn )U,k .
   We have,
                                                                               n
   Theorem 0.4.6 (Construction of U -rank k irreps). Assume k <                 2    . Then,

                                                                                           U,k
  1. The new k-spectrum and U -rank k-spectrum of ω2nk coincide, i.e., (ω2nk )new
                                                                              GLn = (ω2nk )GLn .

                                     dk . In particular, for every ν ∈ GL
  2. The domain of (0.4.5) is all of GL                                dk there is a unique U -rank k
      irrep η(ν) in Ξν , it appears with multiplicity one, and the other components are of lower U -rank.

                  n
   So, for k <     2    the eta correspondence (0.4.5) is an injection from GL
                                                                            dk to (GL
                                                                                   dn )U,k . We have
reasons, supported by theoretical and numerical evidences, to believe that,

    Conjecture 0.4.7 (Exhaustion). Assume k < n2 . Then, every irrep of GLn of U -rank k appears,
                                                    

maybe after twisting by a character of GLn , in the image of the eta correspondence (0.4.5).

                                                       9
Gurevich and Howe                                                                       Rank and Duality

                                                           n
   In summary, Theorem 0.4.6 tells us that the for k <       2   the new k-spectrum can be described using
the U -rank k-spectrum, and (using Conjecture 0.4.7) vice versa. Moreover, it tels us that, in this range,
both spectrums can be described by the eta correspondence, and vice versa.
   What about (0.4.5) and the various k-spectrums in the range n2 ≤ k?
                                                                

   Of course, in the above domain the notion of U -rank does not seems to be directly effective anymore.
But, it follows from the definitions that, the tensor rank of an irrep ρ of GLn is the minimal k such
that χ ⊗ ρ belongs to the new k-spectrum (GLdn )new,k , for some character of GLn . So what we want to
have, is a good formula for the irreps in the new k-spectrum, and an understanding of what irreps of
GLk participate in (0.4.5).
   In these notes we obtain (see [Gurevich-Howe17] for more details) the required formulas using Harish-
Chandra’s “philosophy of cusp forms” (P-of-CF for short) [Harish-Chandra70, Howe-Moy86] that was
put forward by him in the 60s. Moreover, we obtain the following extension of Theorem 0.4.6. Denote by
 dk )new,≥2k−n of all irreps of GLk that appears in the oscillator representation ω2nl for some l ≥ 2k −n
(GL
and not before.

   Theorem 0.4.8 (The η-correspondence for GLn - explicit form). Fix 0 ≤ k ≤ n. Then, the
domain of the eta correspondence (0.4.5) is (GL
                                             dk )new,≥2k−n . In particular, for every ν in (GL
                                                                                            dk )new,≥2k−n
there is a unique irrep η(ν) in Ξν (0.4.1) which belongs to (d
                                                             GLn )new,k , it appears with multiplicity one,
and the other components belong to the lower new spectrum.

   In conclusion, we give in these notes a more or less explicit formula for the η correspondence (0.4.5),
and how it give an explicit identification of the individual members of the set (GL
                                                                                 dn )⊗,k of irreps of GLn
of tensor rank k.

   The Sp2n case:

   There are some similarities and some differences between the η-correspondence construction in the
Sp2n and GLn cases.
   Also in the Sp2n case we start by introducing the dual pairs involved. For the sake of introduction
it is enough for us to know [Lam73] that for every k 6= 0, up to isometry there are only two non-
degenerate symmetric bilinear forms on Fkq . For now, for simplicity, let us denote either of the two
associated orthogonal groups by Ok and formulate statements that, unless stated otherwise, work for
both of them.
   There is a natural construction so that (Sp2n , Ok ) becomes a dual pair in a symplectic group Sp2nk .
In particular, we can consider the restriction of an oscillator representation ω2nk of Sp2nk to Sp2n × Ok
and look at the isotypic decomposition with respect to irreps of Ok
                                                     X
                                     ω2nk|Sp2n ×Ok ≃      Ωτ ⊗ τ.                                   (0.4.9)
                                                         τ ∈O
                                                            bk

We proceed to use (0.4.9) in order to describe the collection (Sp
                                                               c 2n )U,k of low U -rank k irreps of Sp2n .
   Consider the commuting subalgebras,

                                        ASp2n , AOk ⊂ End(ω2nk ),

                                                    10
Gurevich and Howe                                                                      Rank and Duality


defined in the same way as those in (0.4.2). Denote by (ω2nk )U,k
                                                              Sp2n ⊂ ω2nk the U -rank k-spectrum, i.e.,
the sum of all isotypic components in ω2nk of members from (Sp2n )U,k . In [Gurevich-Howe15] we proved,
                                                            c

   Theorem 0.4.10 (Construction of low U -rank irreps). Suppose k < n. The following hold,

   1. For every τ ∈ O
                    bk the representation Ωτ (0.4.9) is of U -rank k.

   2. The centralizer of ASp2n acting on (ω2nk )U,k
                                                Sp2n is AOk and vice versa.

   3. For each τ in O
                    bk , there is a unique U -rank k Sp2n irrep η(τ ) in Ωτ , it appears with multiplicity
      one, and all other Sp2n constituents of Ωτ are of U -rank less than k. The correspondence

                                                   τ 7−→ η(τ )                                    (0.4.11)

      is an injection from O
                           bk into (Sp
                                    c 2n )U,k .

   We believe, with theoretical and numerical supports, that the construction of low U -rank irreps an-
nounced in Theorem 0.4.10 is exhaustive in the following sense. Denote by Ok+ and Ok− the orthogonal
groups of the two possible inner product structures on Fkq [Lam73]. It can be shown [Gurevich-Howe15]
that the images η(Obk+ ) and η(Obk− ) under the mapping (0.4.11) are disjoint, for any k, 1 ≤ k ≤ n.
   We formulate the following conjecture:

   Conjecture 0.4.12 (Exhaustion). For 0 6= k < n, using both orthogonal groups we obtain all
low U -rank irreps, i.e.,
                                        bk+ ) t η(O
                                      η(O                  Sp2n )U,k .
                                                  bk− ) = ( c

                                                           c 2n )⊗,k of irreps of ⊗-rank k of Sp2n . In
   Next, we would like to describe the members of the set (Sp
the domain of low ⊗-rank irreps, i.e., ⊗-rank k < n, we have a good description. Namely, it follows
from the definition of ( c
                        Sp2n )⊗,k and the η-correspondence (0.4.11) that,

   Theorem 0.4.13 (Construction of low ⊗-rank irreps). For 0 6= k < n, using both orthogonal
groups, the η-correspondences (0.4.11) produce all irreps of ⊗-rank k, i.e.,

                                        bk+ ) t η(O
                                      η(O         bk− ) = (Sp
                                                           c 2n )⊗,k .


   We are left to describe the irreps of ⊗-rank k for k ≥ n. Here our knowledge is still not complete
and further research is required to have the full story as we have for GLn . Let us explain what we do
have and what we still lack.
   We do have the extension of the η-correspondence to construct all the irreps of a given tensor rank
also for k ≥ n. Indeed, recall that by a theorem of Witt [Lam05] the collection of orthogonal group over
a finite field is naturally organized in four Witt towers:

   • Om,m , m ≥ 0, - the isometry groups of the direct sums of m copies of the hyperbolic plane P .
      This collection is known as the split Witt tower.


                                                    11
Gurevich and Howe                                                                      Rank and Duality


   • Om+2,m , m ≥ 0, - the isometry groups of the direct sums of the anisotropic plane and m copies
     of P .

   • Om+1,m , m ≥ 0, - the isometry groups of the direct sums of a line equipped with quadratic form
     of discriminant 1 and m copies of P .

   • Om,m+1 , m ≥ 0, - the isometry groups of the direct sum of a line equipped with quadratic form
     of discriminant −1 and m copies of P .

   Now we can describe the eta correspondence in each tower using the notion of new spectrum as we
did in the case of GLn (where we had just one Witt tower, namely GLk , k ≥ 0). Let us tell how this is
done by examining one tower, that of Om,m ; the eta correspondence for other towers can be dealt with
in a similar manner.
   Consider the dual pair (Sp2n , Om,m ) in Sp4nm and an oscillator representation ω4nm of this group.
Denote by Sp
          c 2n (ω4nm ) the subset of Sp
                                     c 2n of irreps that appear in ω4nm . It is not difficult to show that
c 2n (ω4n(m−1) ) ⊂ Sp
Sp                 c 2n (ω4nm ). We call the set Sp
                                                 c 2n (ω4nm ) r Sp
                                                                c 2n (ω4n(m−1) ) the 2m-new spectrum and
           Sp2n )new,2m . Finally, we denote by (ω4nm )new ⊂ ω4nm the subspace spanned by all isotypic
denote it ( c                                            Sp2n
                            c 2n )new,2m . The algebras ASp and AOm,m act on (ω4nm )new and we
components of members from (Sp                             2n                       Sp2n
have [Howe73-2]:

   Theorem 0.4.14 (The η-correspondence in the split Witt tower).
   The algebras ASp2n and AOm,m are each other’s commutant acting on (ω4nm )new
                                                                            Sp2n . In particular, we
have a bijection,
                                             τ 7−→ η(τ ) < Ωτ ,                                   (0.4.15)

from a subset of O          c 2n )new,2m . The representation, η(τ ) is the unique member of the 2m-new
                 bm,m onto (Sp
spectrum in Ωτ , and it appeara there with multiplicity one.

   We call (0.4.15) the eta correspondence for the tower Om,m . It coincides with (0.4.11) in case
k = 2m < n.

   Finally, we can use the eta correspondences in the four Witt towers to realize the irreps of a given
tensor rank.
   It can be shown [Howe73-2] that every irrep of Sp2n appears in the image of each of the eta corre-
spondences at some step. The first time it appears in a given tower will be called 1st occurrence.

   Proposition 0.4.16. A representation π ∈ Sp
                                            c 2n is of tensor rank k iff its minimal 1st occurrence
among all four Witt towers is k.

   In summary, Theorem 0.4.14 tells us that we have a construction of all irreps of low tensor rank. On
the other hand, looking on Theorem 0.4.14 and Proposition 0.4.16 we learn that we don’t know what
irreps of the relevant orthogonal groups contribute for the associated tensor rank k-spectrum in case
k > n. The missing information is a subject for future research.

   0.5. The body of these notes.

                                                    12
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


   The body of these notes is organized as follows.
   In Section 1 we recall parts of the theory of the classical (i.e., general linear, symplectic, orthogonal,
and unitary) groups and their Witt groups.
   Section 2 discusses vector spaces of matrices and their Pontrjagin duals. In particular we recall some
basic properties of symmetric, skew-symmetric and Hermitian matrices.
   In Section 3 we look at matrix subgroups (i.e., vector spaces of matrices) in the specific cases of
classical groups.
   Section 4 uses the language and notions of linear algebra and harmonic analysis introduced in
Sections 2 and 3, to define the notion of U -rank for representations of the classical groups. Some basic
properties of U -rank are discussed as well.
   Section 5 is devoted to the construction of the representations of low U -rank of the classical groups.
This section is important for the development of the theory for all classical groups. The construction
is an outcome of the theories of the Heisenberg and oscillator representations, which we introduce in
Subsection 5.1. After we have these representations at hand, we move in Subsection 5.2 to discuss the
notion of dual pair in the symplectic group Sp2n , and give the important representative examples: The
Sp2n -Ok and GLn -GLk dual pairs. We don’t discuss the Un -Uk dual pair in these notes, because their
theory is very similar to the that of the pair Sp2n -Ok . Finally, in Subsection 5.3 we use the restriction
of the oscillator representation to dual pairs to obtain (see Theorem 5.3.1) the eta correspondence that,
in particular, describes irreps of low U -rank of classical groups. We conjecture (see Conjecture 5.3.3)
that our construction his exhaustive.
   In Section 6, we give two extensions of the notion of U -rank. The first one, discussed in Subsection
6.2, comes from considering restrictions of representations of large classical groups to smaller “block
subgroups” of the same type. We will call this asymptotic rank. The second one, presented in Subsection
6.4, is the notion of tensor rank discussed also earlier in the introduction. In addition, in Subsection 6.3
we discuss how all these notions of rank are related to filtrations of the associated Grothendieck rings
of representations. Finally, in Subsection 6.5 we present a comparison between these three notions of
rank, and we formulate the “agreement conjecture” (see Conjecture 6.5.2, which is in fact implied by
the Exhaustion conjecture 5.3.3) that for low U -rank representations, all these notions of rank agree.
   Section 7 gives an explicit construction of the oscillator semigroup [Howe73-2]. This structure
(motivated by the desire to understand the failures of dual pairs to generate each other’s commutant
in the oscillator representation) is a natural extension of the symplectic group Sp2n to a semigroup
(that, in an algebro-geometric sense, is a “compactification” of Sp2n ). It helps in the analysis of the
“new spectrum” discussed earlier in the introduction, namely the extension of the eta correspondence
in order to describe higher tensor rank irreps.
   In Section 8 the above applications of the oscillator semigroup are given. In particular, Theorem
8.1.1 describe the commuting algebra of one member in a dual pair, and Theorem 8.2.1 gives the
application for the eta correspondence (we state this for the symplectic-orthogonal dual pair, but this
works in general [Howe73-2]).
   Section 9 is devoted to an explicit description (see Theorem 9.2.3) of the eta correspondence for



                                                    13
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


GLn , and in particular how it gives for this group the explicit description of all irreps of a given tensor
rank.
   In Section 10 we sketch a proof of Theorem 9.2.3 (complete details appear in [Gurevich-Howe17]).
Our argument uses a fairly precise descriptions (in Section 10.2 and 10.3) of the tensor rank of represen-
tations, and (in Section 10.4) of the η correspondence. For this we invoke Harish-Chandra’s “philosophy
of cusp forms” (that we recall in Section 10.1). The corresponding formulas (in Sections 10.2-10.4) are
of independent interest.
   Section 11 discusses the conjectural agreement, in the case of GLn , between all notions of rank,
namely, for low U -rank representations we have U -rank = asymptotic rank = tensor rank. We managed
to verify the second and third equalities, and in a more restrictive way also the first one.

   Acknowledgment. We thank the organizers of 19th Takagi lectures (RIMS - Kyoto University,
Japan, July 8-9, 2017), in particular T. Kobayashi, for the invitation to present this work at the event.
   We thank J. Bernstein for sharing some of his thoughts concerning the organization of representations
by small ones.
   We thank J. Cannon of the University of Sydney and S. Goldstein of the University of Wisconsin at
Madison for help with the numerical computations using the computer system Magma.
   Parts of these notes were written while we were participating in the program “Representation Theory
of Reductive Groups Over Local Fields and Applications to Automorphic forms”, May 3 - June 30, 2017,
and visitors at the Weizmann Institute - Israel, and we thank the organizers, especially D. Gourevitch
and the math department chair O. Sarig, for the invitation.

   1. Classical groups and their Witt semigroups

   We start with some background on classical groups.

   1.1. Classical groups over algebraically closed fields.

   The term “classical groups” refers to a family of algebraic groups. In particular, there is a family
of classical groups attached to each field F. (Here we are going to exclude fields of characteristic 2
from the discussion). If F is algebraically closed, then its family of classical groups has three series
of members: the general linear groups GLn = GLn (F), the orthogonal groups On = On (F), and the
symplectic groups Sp2n = Sp2n (F).
   The group GLn (F) is the full group of invertible n×n matrices with coefficients in F. It is isomorphic
to the group of linear automorphisms of any vector space over F of dimension n.
   The group On (F) is the subgroup of GLn (F) consisting of matrices R such that Rt R = In , where
Rt denotes the transpose of the matrix R, and In is the n × n identity matrix. Equivalently, it is the
subgroup of GLn (F) that preserves the quadratic polynomial
                                           r2 = nj=1 x2j ,
                                                P

which, if the base field were R, the real numbers, we would call the “standard Euclidean distance
squared”. It is a standard fact of linear algebra [Lam73], that if V is any vector space over F of


                                                    14
Gurevich and Howe                                                                         Rank and Duality


dimension n, and B( , ) = B is a non-degenerate, symmetric bilinear form (aka inner product) on V ,
then the isometry group OB of B, that is, the group of linear automorphisms R of V such that

                                         B(R(~v ), R(~v 0 ) = B(~v , ~v 0 )),

for any pair of vectors ~v and ~v 0 in V , then OB is isomorphic to On . The group Sp2n (F) is the subgroup
of GL2n (F) that preserves the standard skew symmetric, non-degenerate bilinear form (aka symplectic
form)
                                                        n
                                                        X
                                        < ~  ~ 0 >=
                                          w, w                xj yj0 − yj x0j ,
                                                        j=1

where                                                         x 
                                                                   1
                                                       x2 
                                                       
                                                       x2 
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       . 
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       . 
                                                       
                                                   . 
                                                       
                                                 ~x    
                                             w
                                             ~=      =
                                                       xn  ,
                                                           
                                                  ~y
                                                       y1 
                                                       
                                                       
                                                      y 
                                                       2
                                                       
                                                       . 
                                                       
                                                       . 
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       . 
                                                                 yn
is the 2n-dimensional vector whose first n coordinates are given by a vector ~x in Fn , and whose last n
                                                              ~ 0 is defined similarly. The group Sp2n (F)
coordinates are given by another vector ~y in Fn . The vector w
consists of elements S in GL2n (F) such that

                                       < S( ~    ~ 0 ) >=< ~
                                           w), S(w            ~0 > .
                                                           w, w

It is another standard fact of linear algebra, that the isometry group of any symplectic form on a 2n
dimensional vector space over F is isomorphic to Sp2n (F).

   1.2. Rationality issues; split forms and Witt semigroups.

   If the base field F is not algebraically closed, then a classical group over F is an algebraic matrix
group G acting on a vector space V over F such that there is a field extension F̃ such that the extension
of scalars of G acting on V ⊗ F̃ is one of the three types of groups GLn (F̃), On (F̃), or Sp2n (F̃) described
above. The detailed list of classical groups over F depends on the arithmetic of F. For F = R, the real
numbers, the list of classical groups is given in [Weyl46], among other places. For p-adic fields, the list
is similar, except the possible collection of inner products is somewhat more complicated.
Orthogonal groups


                                                         15
Gurevich and Howe                                                                                    Rank and Duality


    When the base field is not algebraically closed, it is still the case that there is only one isomorphism
class of symplectic form, but there can be many isomorphism classes of inner products. The isometry
group of any one of these will still qualify as an orthogonal group, but the isometry groups of non-
equivalent inner products may or may not be isomorphic.
    We will review the structure of the collection of inner products up to isomorphism. In this discussion,
each inner product is implicitly defined on some vector space, but the role of the vector space is fairly
passive. Its main salient feature is its dimension, which we will refer to as the rank of the inner product
under consideration. Somewhat more generally, if we are given a symmetric bilinear form B on a vector
space V over F, then we consider the radical RB of B, which is the subspace of vectors ~u in V that are
B-orthogonal to all vectors in V , meaning that B(~u, ~v ) = 0 for all vectors ~v in V . Then it is easy to
show that B factors to an inner product on the quotient space V /RB , and the rank of B is the dimension
of V /RB .
    There is a natural notion of (orthogonal) direct sum of two inner products. Given inner products
B1 and B2 , defined on vector spaces V1 and V2 over F, one defines an inner product B1 ⊕ B2 on V1 ⊕ V2
by the rule                                          0 
                                               ~v1    ~v1
                                          
                             (B1 ⊕ B2 )             , 0     = B1 (~v1 , ~v10 ) + B2 (~v2 , ~v20 ),
                                               ~v2    ~v2
with ~vj and ~vj0 in Vj . It is clear from this definition that, if B10 and B20 are isomorphic to B1 and B2
respectively, then B10 ⊕ B20 will be isomorphic to B1 ⊕ B2 . It follows that the collection of isomorphism
classes of inner products is a semigroup (the Witt semigroup) under direct sum. Witt’s Theorem [Lam73]
implies that it is a semigroup with cancellation. That is, if B1 ⊕ B2 ≃ B1 ⊕ B20 , then in fact B2 ≃ B20 .
Also, the Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization process [Strang76] shows that every inner product can be
realized as a direct sum of rank one inner products. Moreover, it is not difficult to see [Lam73] that the
collection of rank one inner products is naturally parametrized by the group F× /F×2 , the multiplicative
group of F , modulo perfect squares.
    Among the inner products of dimension 2, there is a distinguished one B1,1 known as the hyperbolic
plane. It has a basis {~e1 , ~e2 } such that

                             B1,1 (~e1 , ~e1 ) = 0 = B1,1 (~e2 , ~e2 ) and B1,1 (~e1 , ~e2 ) = 1.

Thus, the vectors ej are isotropic, meaning that they have self inner product equal to zero. It is well
known [Lam73] and not hard to show that a two-dimensional inner product which has isotropic vectors
is isomorphic to a hyperbolic plane.
    A slightly more refined, but also fairly easy, fact [Lam73] is that if an inner product B on a vector
space V allows an isotropic vector, then in fact there is a hyperbolic plane P ⊂ V . Then by orthogo-
nalization we can write V ≃ P ⊕ V1 , where V1 is the orthogonal complement of P in V , so in particular,
dim V1 = dim V − 2. If V1 also contains an isotropic vector, we can split off another hyperbolic plane
from it. We can continue this process until we arrive at a decomposition
                                                           m
                                                           X
                                                     V ≃         Pj ⊕ V m ,
                                                           j=1



                                                             16
Gurevich and Howe                                                                            Rank and Duality


where dim Vm = dim V − 2m, and more importantly, Vm is anisotropic, meaning that Vm contains no
non-zero isotropic vectors.
   The collection of inner products of the form Bo ⊕ (B1,1 )k , where Bo is a fixed an isotropic form will
be called a Witt tower of forms. If the anisotropic component of B reduces to {0}, so that B ≃ (B1,1 )m
for some m, we call B split. In other words, the split forms constitute the Witt tower of {0}. The
isometry group of the split inner product of rank 2m is denoted Om,m .
   Finally, we note that F× acts on inner products, simply by multiplying values of an inner product
B by a scalar s in F× :
                                          (sB)(~v1 , ~v2 ) = s(B(~v1 , ~v2 )).

This action is clearly compatible with isomorphism, and with forming direct sums, so it defines an
action of F× on the Witt semigroup. It is clear that, since

                               (s2 B)(~v1 , ~v2 ) = s2 (B((~v1 , ~v2 )) = B(s~v1 , s~v2 ),

the subgroup F×2 acts trivially on the Witt semigroup. It is also clear from the definition that the
isometry groups of B and of sB are isomorphic:

                                                     OB ≃ OsB .

Clearly, the action of F× /F×2 on the Witt semigroup is transitive on the generating set of rank one
inner products.
   If an inner product is given by a diagonal matrix, then up to multiples, we can arrange that the (1, 1)
entry of the matrix is 1. Then if b is the (2, 2) entry, the inner product on the plane spanned by the
first two basis vectors is x1 x01 + bx2 x02 . This will allow an isotropic vector if and only if −b is a perfect
square in F. Otherwise, the equation x2 = −b defines a quadratic field extension Fb of F, generated by
            √                                                                      √
the element −b. In this case, it is easy to check that if Fb is given the basis (1, −b), then this inner
product is exactly the bilinearization of the norm map [Lam73] from Fb to F. Thus, every non-split
2-dimensional inner product is a scalar multiple of the norm form of a quadratic extension of F.

   Consider now the case when F = Fq is a finite field, which is the main case of interest in these notes.
Then Fq has a unique (up to isomorphism) quadratic extension Fq2 , and the norm map from Fq2 to
Fq is surjective. It follows that Fq2 with its norm map represents the unique non-split rank 2 inner
product. Further, any rank 3 inner product must contain an isotropic vector: since any 2 dimensional
subspace that is not split will be equivalent to Fq2 and so will contain a vector whose self inner product
is the negative of any vector orthogonal to the 2D subspace.
   Thus, for Fq , the possible anisotropic inner products of positive rank are the two rank one inner
products parametrized by F×    × 2
                          q /(Fq ) which is a cyclic group of order two, and the rank two inner
product given by the norm map on Fq2 . Thus, there are four Witt towers of inner products. Two of
them consist of even rank inner products, one the split Witt tower, and the other one generated by the
norm form on Fq2 . In odd dimensions, there are two Witt towers, generated by the two rank one inner
products. These have the form B1 ⊕ (B1,1 )m , where B1 is one of the two rank one inner products. Since
the two rank one inner products are multiples of each other, and any multiple of a split form is split,

                                                          17
Gurevich and Howe                                                                             Rank and Duality


the inner products of a given odd rank are multiples of each other, and so will have isomorphic isometry
groups. The isometry group of the non-split form of rank 2m is not isomorphic to Om,m .
Unitary groups
   There is a class of groups that become isomorphic to GLn after appropriate field extension, but that
also share some of the attributes of orthogonal groups.
    As above, suppose that b is an element of F such that −b is a non-square in F× , and let Fb denote
                                          √
the quadratic extension of F generated by −b. For example, the complex numbers C can be described
                                                                        √        √
as R1 . Denote the Galois automorphism of Fb over F by z 7→ z; thus −b = − −b. For the finite
fields Fq , it is well known [Lam73] that we may take b = 1 when q is congruent to 3 modulo 4, but not
when q is congruent to 1 modulo 4.
   Let V now denote a vector space over Fb . A function H(~v1 , ~v2 ) of two vectors in V is a Hermitian
form (or more specifically, when necessary, an Fb Hermitian form), if it is

     a) linear in the first variable, and in addition

     b) H(~v2 , ~v1 ) = H(~v1 , ~v2 ).

     c) H is non-degenerate, i.e., given 0 6= ~v1 in V , there is ~v2 in V such that H(~v1 , ~v2 ) 6= 0.

   Note that, if V is considered as a vector space over F, the “real” part of H, namely H(~v1~v2 )+H(~
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                     v2 ,~v1 )
                                                                                                               ,
is an inner product. Also, the “imaginary” part (H(~v1~v22)−H(~
                                                          √
                                                            −b
                                                               v2 ,~v1 ))
                                                                          is a symplectic form.
   The group of linear transformations of V that preserve the Hermitian form H is called the unitary
group of H, and is denoted UH .
   There is a Witt semigroup of Fb Hermitian forms, just as there is of inner products. There is an
analog of Witt’s Theorem, so this semigroup has the cancellation property. Also, every Fb Hermitian
form is equivalent to one given by a diagonal matrix, or equivalently, every form is a direct sum of
rank one forms. Also, if N (F×      ×                 ×
                             b ) ⊂ F is the image of Fb under the norm map from Fb to F, the Witt
semigroup supports a natural action of F× /N (F×
                                               b ), and the rank one forms are parametrized by the
elements of this group (which is a quotient group of F× /F×2 . There is also a notion of hyperbolic plane
for Fb -Hermitian forms, and any isotropic vector (meaning, a vector with self pairing equal to zero) is
contained in a hyperbolic plane.
   For a finite field, Fq , we already know that there is only one quadratic extension, Fq2 , which is also
(Fq )b for any b such that −b is not a square in Fq . Since the norm map from Fq2 to Fq is surjective,
there is only one Hermitian form of rank one, given by the formula

                                               H1 (z1 , z2 ) = z1 z2 ,

for two elements zj of Fq2 . It follows that there is a unique isomorphism class of Hermitian forms in
each dimension. These are organized into two Witt towers, consisting of the even dimensional, or split,
forms, and the odd dimensional forms. In the first case we denote the associated isometry groups by
Um,m , while in the second case we denote them by Um+1,m .
Summary of classical groups over finite fields

                                                         18
Gurevich and Howe                                                                       Rank and Duality


   The isomorphism classes of classical groups over a finite field Fq are as follows.

   a) General linear groups GLn , n ≥ 0.

   b) Unitary groups, the isometry groups of non-degenerate Hermitian forms. These are organized
into two Witt towers.

           i) One tower consists of the even rank forms, which are split, that is, a direct sum of
hyperbolic planes. The isometry group of these 2m-dimensional forms (over Fq2 ) is Um,m .

           ii) The other Witt tower consists of the odd rank forms. These are the sum of one line and
an even dimensional form. The isometry group of this forms in 2m + 1 dimensions is Um+1,m .

   c) Orthogonal groups, the isometry groups of non-degenerate symmetric bilinear forms, aka, inner
products. These are organized into four Witt towers.

           i) The isometry group of the split form of rank 2m is Om,m .

           ii) The isometry group of the non-split form of rank 2m + 2 is Om+2,m , with the special case
of m = 0, the anisotropic form, being O2 . The group O2 is consists of the norm units in Fq2 , extended
by the Galois automorphism of Fq2 over Fq . The group O1,1 is isomorphic to F×
                                                                             q , extended by the
automorphism x → x−1 .

           iii) The isometry groups of forms of odd rank. Since, as we have noted, the odd rank inner
products are multiples of each other, they have isomorphic isometry groups that we denoted by Om+1,m .

   d) Symplectic groups, the isometry group of symplectic forms. There is one of these in each even
dimension, forming a single Witt tower. They are all split groups. The isometries of the 2n dimensional
symplectic form is denoted Sp2n .

   2. Vector spaces of matrices

   We want to introduce several special vector spaces of matrices and their Pontrjagin duals.

   2.1. Rectangular matrices.
   Consider the space Ma,b (F) = Ma,b of a×b matrices over a field F of coefficients. This can be thought
of as the vector space of linear transformations Hom(Fb , Fa ) from the vector space Fb of column vectors
of length b with entries in F, to the space Fa .
   Matrix multiplication defines mappings Ma,b × Mb,c → Ma,c by the standard formulas [Mostow-
Sampson69], [Strang76]. In particular, the spaces Ma,a of square matrices are associative algebras. The
invertible elements of Ma,a form the group GLa of invertible a × a matrices.
   The product group GLa × GLb acts on Ma,b by multiplication on the left and right

                                            α(g, h)(T ) = gT h−1 ,                                (2.1.1)

for g in GLa , h in GLb , and T in Ma,b .



                                                     19
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


   On Ma,a , there is an interesting linear functional, the trace map [Lang02], [Strang76]. If T = {tjk } :
1 ≤ j, k ≤ a indicates the entries of the a × a matrix T , then
                                                           a
                                                           X
                                             trace(T ) =         tjj ,
                                                           j=1

is the sum of the diagonal entries. The trace functional is well-known, and can be easily checked, to
have the following properties.
                                          trace(T S) = trace(ST ),                                    (2.1.2a)

for any two a × a matrices T and S, and

                                          trace(gT g −1 ) = trace(T ).                                (2.1.2b)

for any a × a matrix T and any element g of GLa . The equation (2.1.2b) follows from (2.1.2a). Either
of these equations characterize the trace functional up to linear multiples.
   The vector space dual of Ma,b can be realized as Mb,a , by means of matrix multiplication and the
trace map. For T in Ma,b and S in Mb,a , we define

                                 λS (T ) = λT (S) = trace(ST ) = trace(T S).

Here the trace of ST is taken in Mb,b , while the trace of T S is taken in Ma,a . The resulting value is
independent of order of multiplication.
   This pairing is compatible with the actions of GLa × GLb on these spaces: for T and S as above
and g in GLa and h in GLb , we check that

         trace((α(h, g)(S))(α(g, h)(T ))) = trace((hSg −1 )(gT h−1 )) = trace((hS)(g −1 g)(T h−1 ))

                                     = trace(h(ST )h−1 ) = trace(ST ).

A fundamental result of linear algebra [Lang02], [Mostow-Sampson69], [Strang76] is that the orbits of
GLa × GLb acting on Ma,b are classified by the rank of elements in an orbit. The rank of a matrix
T in Ma,b is defined as the dimension of the linear span of the columns of T , or the dimension of the
linear span of the rows of T . Equivalently, it is the maximal number of linearly independent rows, or
maximal number of linearly independent columns, of T . More geometrically, it may be described as the
dimension of the image space T (Fb ) as a subspace of Fa . The rank of T in Ma,b is a whole number
between 0 and min(a, b).
          ∗ ≃ M , and since this isomorphism is compatible with the actions of GL × GL on these
   Since Ma,b  b,a                                                               a    b
spaces, it makes sense to talk about the rank of a linear functional on Ma,b , and the rank also classifies
                         ∗ .
the GLa × GLb orbits on Ma,b

   We recall that rank satisfies some simple properties under multiplication and addition of matrices,
and also some monotonicity properties with respect to decomposition [Lang02], [Strang76]. If T is in
Ma,b and S is in Mb,c , then
                                   rank(T S) ≤ min(rank (T ), rank (S)).

                                                      20
Gurevich and Howe                                                                               Rank and Duality


If T and T 0 are two a × b matrices, then

                                    rank (T + T 0 ) ≤ rank (T ) + rank(T 0 ).

If b = b1 + b2 , there is an obvious isomorphism

                                            Ma,b ≃ Ma,b1 ⊕ Ma,b2 ,

in which Ma,b1 is identified to a × b matrices for which the final b2 columns vanish identically, and
similarly, Ma,b2 is identified to a × b matrices for which the initial b1 columns vanish identically. If T is
in Ma,b , we let T1 and T2 stand for its components in Ma,b1 and in Ma,b2 respectively, giving us a block
decomposition of T :
                                                T = [ T1     T2 ] ,                                       (2.1.3)

In this situation, we know that the rank of T dominates the rank of either T` [Lang02], [Strang76]:

                                      rank(T ) ≥ rank(T` )     for ` = 1, 2.                              (2.1.4)

Also, for T` in Ma,b` , the rank of T` is the same, whether T` is considered as an element of Ma,b` , or
as the element of Ma,b produced by extending T` by adding to it the zero matrix of size Ma,b−b` in the
appropriate block:

                       rank (T1 ) = rank ([ T1 0 ] ,   and     rank (T2 ) = rank [ 0 T2 ] .

We can also break the matrices Ma,b into blocks by rows rather than columns, and indeed, we can break
them up by both at the same time. Thus, if we break up a = a1 + a2 and b = b1 + b2 into sums, we
have the straightforward direct sum decomposition

                                 Ma,b ≃ Ma1 ,b1 ⊕ Ma1 ,b2 ⊕ Ma2 ,b1 ⊕ Ma2 ,b2 ,

corresponding to the block decomposition of a matrix T into pieces T`m :

                                                T11 T12
                                                       
                                         T =              ,
                                                T21 T22

where each T`m is a matrix of the appropriate size.
   In this context, rank satisfies the monotonicity property

                                       T11 T12                0           0
                                                                         
                 rank (T ) = rank                  ≥ rank                           = rank (T22 ).
                                       T21 T22                0         T22

A similar relation holds for each sub-block T`m of T . These relations can also be extended in a straight-
forward way to allow for decompositions of Mab into more blocks, horizontally or vertically or both.

   2.2. Symmetric and skew-symmetric matrices.

   In this section, we assume for convenience that the characteristic of the base field F is not 2.



                                                       21
Gurevich and Howe                                                                                  Rank and Duality


   Consider next the space Sn2 (F) = Sn2 of symmetric n × n matrices with coefficients in a field F. We
can regard a matrix S in Sn2 as defining symmetric bilinear form BS ( , ) on Fn by the well-known recipe
                                                                   n
                                                                   X
                                       BS (~x, ~y ) = ~y t S~x =           sjk xj yk .                       (2.2.1)
                                                                   j,k=1

Here ~x and ~y are the column vectors

                                                  x1                           y1
                                                                                 
                                              x2                   y2 
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                              .                    . 
                                        ~x = 
                                              . 
                                                  
                                                                     . ,
                                                           and ~y =     
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                              .                    . 
                                                  xn                           yn

and the sjk = skj are the entries of the matrix S.
   There is a natural action β of GLn on Sn2 , derived from its action on Fn . This action comes in two
mutually dual forms; since they have the same orbits, which is the main point of interest here, we will
be somewhat cavalier about distinguishing between the two. The actions are converted into each other
by means of the automorphism g ↔ (g −1 )t of GLn , where g −1 indicates the inverse of the invertible
n × n matrix g, and g t denotes the transpose of g. The action β is defined by the condition

                          Bβ(g)(S) (~x, ~y ) = BS (g −1 ~x, g −1 ~y ) = B(g−1 )t Sg−1 (~x, ~y ),

or more succinctly,
                                             β(g)(S) = (g −1 )t Sg −1 .                                      (2.2.3)

In analogy with arbitrary rectangular matrices, the dual vector space Sn2 can be regarded as its own
dual, by means of the pairing
                                               λT (S) = trace (T S).

The dual action of GLn on Sn2 when it is considered as its own dual will be denoted by β ∗ . We can
compute that

        (β ∗ (g)(λT ))(S) = λT (β(g −1 (S)) = trace (T (g t Sg)) = trace (gT g t S) = λβ(gt T g) (S).

In other words
                                                  β ∗ (g)(T ) = g t T g.                                     (2.2.4)

   The orbits of the action of GLn on Sn2 are the isomorphism, or isometry, classes of symmetric bilinear
forms BS on Fn . These have been discussed in §1 above. The first invariant of the form BS is its rank,
which in fact coincides with the rank of S as a matrix. There are several isomorphism classes of a given
rank, depending on the base field F. The isomorphism classes are organized into the Witt semigroup,
which is graded by rank, and the elements of the Witt semigroup of a given rank parametrize the orbits
of symmetric matrices under the actions (2.2.3) or (2.2.4).

                                                           22
Gurevich and Howe                                                                     Rank and Duality


   The notion of orthogonal direct sum of symmetric bilinear forms, as discussed in §1, corresponds to
forming block diagonal sums of matrices. If S1 is a symmetric n1 × n1 matrix, and S2 is a symmetric
n2 × n2 matrix, then the direct sum BS1 ⊕ BS2 is the symmetric bilinear form on Fn1 +n2 defined by the
matrix
                                                               S1    0
                                                                        
                                         S1 ⊕ S2 =                           .                    (2.2.5)
                                                               0    S2
It is easy to see that
                             rank (BS1 ⊕ BS2 ) = rank (BS1 ) + rank (BS2 ).                      (2.2.5a)

This includes the special case
                                                 0   0
                                                         
                                      rank                    = rank (S2 ).                      (2.2.5b)
                                                 0   S2
Also, a symmetric bilinear form whose defining matrix is diagonal is effectively expressed as the direct
sum of one-dimensional forms.
   In the orthogonal direct sum BS1 ⊕ BS2 , the two subspaces Fn1 and Fn2 are orthogonal to each
other; that is, the pairing of any vector ~v1 from Fn1 with any vector ~v2 from Fn2 is zero. Somewhat
more generally, we may consider the situation in which we have a direct sum decomposition Fn1 +n2 ≃
Fn1 ⊕ Fn2 , but there may be vectors in the two summands whose pairing is non-zero. In this case, we
can decompose the representing matrix S into components

                                                S11 S12
                                                       
                                         S=      t
                                                                                                  (2.2.6)
                                                S12 S22

In this situation, we have the dominance relation between ranks, that is,

                                          rank (S) ≥ rank Sij .                                   (2.2.7)

   The hyperbolic plane is the (isomorphism class represented by) the form with matrix

                                        1   0            0 1
                                                          
                                                  or           .
                                        0 −1             1 0

   A discussion similar to the above can be carried out for skew-symmetric bilinear forms. In general,
if we use an arbitrary n × n matrix T to define a bilinear form BT on Fn via the formula (2.2.1), then

                                         BT (~y , ~x) = BT t (~x, ~y ).                           (2.2.8)

The symmetry of the bilinear forms discussed above resulted directly from the symmetry of the matrices
S under discussion. We may replace the symmetry condition with a condition of skew-symmetry,
creating a situation that is similar in many ways to the symmetric case, but overall is somewhat simpler.
   Consider the space Λn (F) = Λ2n of n × n skew symmetric matrices L: Lt = −L. If we use a skew-
symmetric matrix L to define a bilinear form BL by means of the formula (2.2.1), then BL will be
skew-symmetric in the sense that
                                         BL (~x, ~y ) = −BL (~y , ~x).


                                                          23
Gurevich and Howe                                                                          Rank and Duality


This results directly from formula (2.2.8) and the skew-symmetry of L. We have natural actions of
GLn on Λ2n , given by the same formulas (2.2.3) and (2.2.4) as for the symmetric case. Again the
main invariant of these actions is the rank of the matrix L, which again has more or less the same
interpretation in terms of the bilinear form BL as for the symmetric case. The remarks about forming
direct sum decompositions, and the inequalities of ranks described by formulas (2.2.5) through (2.2.7)
also remain valid in the skew-symmetric case.
   The main differences from the symmetric case are two [Lang02]. First, whereas the arithmetic of the
coefficient field F affects the GLn orbit structure in Sn2 , in the skew-symmetric case, there is only one
possible orbit of a given rank. That is, all skew-symmetric bilinear forms of a given rank are isometric to
each other. Second, skew-symmetric forms can only have even rank: a non-degenerate skew-symmetric
bilinear form, which is commonly called a symplectic form, can only exist on an even-dimensional vector
space. Thus, every skew-symmetric bilinear form is isomorphic to the orthogonal direct sum of a certain
number of copies of the 2-dimensional form represented by

                                               0 −1
                                                    
                                                       ,
                                               1   0

together with copies of the one-dimensional form that is identically zero.

   2.3. Hermitian matrices.

   We also consider Hermitian matrices. These are square matrices T , with entries tj` in the quadratic
field extension Fb , as described in §1. To be Hermitian, the matrix T should satisfy

                                                     Tt = T,

where T t denotes the transposed matrix to T , and T denotes the matrix gotten by applying the Galois
automorphism t → t of Fb over F to the entries of T . Stated in terms of entries, the condition of
Hermitianness is
                                                    t`j = tj` .

We define the Hermitian conjugate matrix to T by the equation

                                                T ∗ = T t = (T )t .

We let Hn (Fq2 ) denote the space of n × n Hermitian matrices with coefficients in Fq2 . The group
GLn (Fq2 ) acts on the Hermitian matrices, in direct analogy with the actions (2.2.3) and (2.2.4). The
formulas for these analogs are

                           β(g)(T ) = (g ∗ )−1 T g −1 ,    and    β ∗ (g)(T ) = g ∗ T g.             (2.3.1)

Since there is only one isomorphism class of Hermitian form in each dimension, there is just one GL(Fq2 )
orbit in Hn (Fq2 ) for matrices of a given rank.

   2.4. Pontrjagin duals of matrix groups.


                                                          24
Gurevich and Howe                                                                       Rank and Duality


   In the context of the preceding two subsections, if the field F of coefficients is locally compact,
so either R or C, or a p-adic field, or finite [Weil74], then the additive groups of the various spaces
of matrices discussed above, or indeed, of any finite-dimensional vector space over F, is also locally
compact. Hence, we can consider its unitary representations, and in particular, its Pontrjagin dual
group of unitary characters [Curtis-Reiner62], [Isaacs76].
   It is well-known [Weil74], that for a finite-dimensional vector space V over F, the Pontrjagin dual
group Vb can be identified with the dual vector space V ∗ . Precisely, one should fix a “basic character”
χo of the additive group of F. Given this choice, the mapping

                                                γ : V ∗ −→ Vb ,                                     (2.4.1)

defined by
                                           γ(λ)(~v ) = χo (λ(~v )),

is an isomorphism of groups. To be a little more explicit in one of the main cases of interest, namely
additive groups of matrices, for each T in Mb,a , we can define a character γT on Ma,b by the formula

                                γT (S) = χo (trace(T S))       for    S ∈ Ma,b .                    (2.4.2)

The same formula works also for symmetric matrices and for skew-symmetric matrices, and also for
Hermitian matrices.
   The map (2.4.1) is functorial, in the sense that it is compatible with the maps induced by linear
transformations T : V → U of vector spaces over F. In particular, if V = Ma,b is the space of a × b
               ca,b allows an action of GLa × GLb . This is the transfer via γ of the dual action α∗ on
matrices, then M
Mb.a of formula (2.1.1). We will denote this action by αb. Similarly, we have actions βb and βb∗ of GLn
on Sb2 and on Λ
    n
              b 2 . The orbits for these actions will be the images under the maps γ of the orbits in
                   n
the various vector spaces, as described in §2.1 and §2.2. In particular, it makes sense to talk about the
rank of a unitary character of one of these spaces of matrices, and to write that rank(γT ) = rank (T ),
for T as in formula (2.4.2). The rank of a character of Ma.b will completely determine its GLa × GLb
         ca,b . Similarly, the rank of a character of Λ2 will determine its GLn orbit in Λ
orbit in M                                                                               b 2 . In Sb2 , the
                                                           n                                 n      n
rank of a character determines its orbit up to a finite number of choices, independent of n and the rank.
For a character of Sn2 of rank k, we will call the isomorphism class of the symmetric bilinear form that
corresponds to it, the type of the character.

   3. Matrix subgroups of classical groups

   This work may be regarded as part of the tradition of understanding representations of a reductive
group by examining their restrictions to unipotent subgroups. A notable example of this approach is
the theory of Whittaker functions and Whittaker vectors [Knapp86], [Wallach92], [Casselman-Hecht-
Milicic98] which has been used to understand “typical” or “generic” representations. This was shown to
be particularly effective for GLn by S. I. Gelfand [Gelfand70], who showed that cuspidal representations
of GLn over finite fields were generic, and in fact, were of the minimal dimension possible for generic
representations.

                                                      25
Gurevich and Howe                                                                                                Rank and Duality


   Whittaker functions look at the occurrence of characters of the maximal unipotent subgroup. Since
the maximal unipotent subgroup is, typically, non-abelian, characters form only a very limited subset
of their representations. The approach of the theory of rank is to look at non-maximal unipotent
subgroups that are abelian. The restriction of a representation of the full reductive group to such a
subgroup will then decompose entirely into characters, appearing with various multiplicities, and one
can look at the possibilities for such a decomposition. There are many subgroups of classical groups that
are in a straightforward way isomorphic to additive groups of matrices. We will describe some of them.
These notes are mainly concerned with characters of unipotent radicals of maximal parabolic subgroups.
Note that these subgroups are abelian, so all their irreducible representations are one-dimensional. In
§10.4, we consider an analog of Whittaker vectors for unipotent radicals of certain parabolic subgroups,
not the Borel subgroup, and not a maximal parabolic subgroup, and show that these can be useful for
describing some classes of representations.

   3.1. The GLn case.

   Consider the parabolic subgroup Pa,b ⊂ GLa+b consisting of block upper triangular matrices of the
form
                                                                   A       T
                                                                             
                                                   Pa,b =                               ,
                                                                   0       B
where A is in GLa , B is in GLb , and T is in Ma,b .
   The group Pa,b has a semidirect product decomposition, (aka Levi decomposition)

                                            Pa,b ≃ ML (a, b) · Ua,b = ML · U,

where the Levi component ML consists of block diagonal matrices:

                                                 A 0
                                                     
                                       ML =               ,
                                                 0 B

and U consists of unipotent upper triangular matrices:

                                                 Ia T
                                                     
                                         U=               .
                                                 0 Ib

Here Ia and Ib are the identity matrices of sizes a × a and b × b respectively.
                                                                                                                            Ia   T
                                                                                                                                    
   The group U is isomorphic to the space Ma,b of a × b matrices, via the mapping T 7→                                                .
                                                                                                0 Ib
Indeed, it is easy to check via matrix multiplication that matrix multiplication in Ua.b corresponds to
addition in Ma,b :
                                        Ia    T         Ia   T0                Ia       T + T0
                                                                                            
                                                                       =                             .
                                        0     Ib        0    Ib                     0 Ib
Also, the action by conjugation of ML on U is identified in a straightforward way to the action α of
formula (2.1.1):
                                                                       −1
                                A   0        Ia    T         A    0                     Ia   AT B −1
                                                                                                   
                                                                               =                             .
                                0 B           0    Ib        0    B                     0        Ib



                                                                  26
Gurevich and Howe                                                                     Rank and Duality


More generally, we may consider inside GLn a general parabolic subgroup of block upper triangular
matrices:
                                      A1 T12 T13 . . . T1k 
                                                                      
                                  
                                                                         
                                  
                                  
                                    0 A2 T23 T24 . . T2k              
                                                                          
                                  
                                                                       
                                                                          
                                   
                                   0                                   
                                            0 A3        . . . T3k 
                             P =                                                               (3.1.1)
                                  
                                  
                                             . . . . . .              
                                                                        
                                                                      
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                              .  .   .  .  .  .        
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                         
                                        0    0 . . . . 0 Ak
If the matrices Aj in the j-th diagonal block are of size aj × aj , then the matrices Tjk define a group
isomorphic to the aj × ak matrices. Moreover, it is not hard to argue that all such copies of the a × b
matrices, for given a and b such that a + b ≤ n, are conjugate to each other. We will call such subgroups
of GLn , standard matrix subgroups. In this context, unipotent radicals of the parabolic subgroups
with only two diagonal blocks, introduced above, produce maximal examples of such standard matrix
subgroups of GLn . The unipotent radicals Ua,b are the unique examples of a standard matrix subgroup
Ua,b for pairs (a, b) with a + b = n. We note that, in fact, each standard subgroup is the unipotent
radical of a maximal parabolic subgroup of a subgroup isomorphic to GLaj +ak in GLn .
    Terminology: we will say that a standard subgroup of GLn that is isomorphic to the matrices Ma,b
has size (a, b).

    3.2. The Sp2n case.

    The group Sp2n is the isometry group of a symplectic form on a F2n . As noted in §2.2, all such
forms are isomorphic, so this description does specify Sp2n uniquely.
    Here is a more explicit description of Sp2n . On W = F2n ≃ Fn ⊕ Fn , we use coordinates
                                                     x1
                                                    
                                                   x 
                                                    2
                                                    
                                                    . 
                                                    
                                                    . 
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    . 
                                                    
                                                    . 
                                                    
                                                    
                                                   x 
                                                    n
                                              w~ =  .                                           (3.2.1)
                                                    y1 
                                                    
                                                   y 
                                                    2
                                                    
                                                    . 
                                                    
                                                    . 
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    . 
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    . 
                                                      yn
We define the skew symmetric bilinear pairing < , > on W by the recipe
                                                    n
                                                    X
                                      < ~  ~ 0 >=
                                        w, w              xj yj0 − yj x0j .                       (3.2.2)
                                                    j=1


                                                    27
Gurevich and Howe                                                                                          Rank and Duality


Then Sp2n (F) = Sp2n is realized as the group of linear transformations of W that preserve the form
< , >.
   It is easy from the above description of Sp2n to check that it contains the subgroup

                                                  P = Pn ≃ Mn · Un ,                                                (3.2.3a)

Here Mn is the group consisting of block diagonal matrices
                                              A    0
                                                       
                                                          ,                                                         (3.2.3b)
                                              0 (A−1 )t

where A is an invertible n × n matrix, and At indicates the transpose of A. The group Un indicates the
group of unipotent block upper triangular matrices
                                                I S
                                                   
                                                                                                                    (3.2.3c)
                                                            0     I
where S indicates a symmetric n × n matrix. Again, the action of An on Un is the appropriate action
(the action β of formula (2.2)), of GLn on symmetric matrices:
                                                                          −1
                             A    0           I    S        A         0                   I ASAt
                                                                                             
                                                                                =                      .
                             0 (A−1 )t        0    I        0 (A−1 )t                     0   I

Thus, the group Un is naturally identifiable with the symmetric matrices S 2 (Fn ), and its conjugacy
classes under M correspond to isomorphism classes of symmetric bilinear forms. Again, the most
important invariant of such a form is its rank. As we have noted in §2.2, rank is not the sole determinant
of a symmetric bilinear form. For our fields of interest - local fields and finite fields - there are a finite
number of isomorphism classes of each rank.

   3.3. The On,n case.

   A discussion similar to that just given for Sp2n applies to split orthogonal groups. On F2n , we again
define coordinates as in formula (3.2.1), and consider the symmetric bilinear form (aka inner product)
                                                            n
                                                            X
                                          (~  ~ 0) =
                                           w, w                   xj yj0 + yj x0j .                                  (3.3.1)
                                                            j=1

We denote the isometry group of this inner product as On,n (F) = On,n . Then On,n has the subgroup

                                                  P 0 = Pn0 ≃ Mn · Un0 ,

where Mn is, just as in the case of the symplectic group, equal to group of block diagonal matrices of
formula (3.2.3b), and Un0 consists of block upper triangular unipotent matrices

                                                    I L
                                                       
                                             0
                                           Un =              ,                                                       (3.3.2)
                                                     0 I

where the matrix L is n × n and skew-symmetric. Again the action by conjugation of M on U 0 is the
standard GLn action β of formula (2.2.4) on skew-symmetric matrices. Again, the conjugacy classes

                                                                28
Gurevich and Howe                                                                         Rank and Duality


will be separated by rank, and there is only one non-degenerate symplectic form of a given rank, and
this rank must be even.

   3.4. The Un,n case.

   The even dimensional unitary groups are quite parallel to Sp2n and On,n . On (Fq2 )2n , we again use
coordinates as in formula (3.2.1), except now the entries can be in Fq2 ). We use the Hermitian analog
of the pairings (3.2.2) and (3.3.1):
                                                      n
                                                      X
                                         (~  ~ 0) =
                                          w, w              xj yj0 + yj x0j ,
                                                      j=1

The isometry group of this form is Un,n . (We use boldface for this U in order to distinguish it from the
U s used to indicate unipotent subgroups).
   The subgroup of Un,n that stabilizes the subspace defined by setting all the yj equal to 0 is

                                            P 00 = Pn00 ≃ Mn00 · Un00 ,

where M 00 ≃ GLn (Fq2 ) consists of block diagonal matrices of the form (3.2.3b), except that now the
matrix A belongs to GLn (Fq2 ) rather than to GLn (Fq ). The group Un00 consists of block upper triangular
matrices analogous to those of (3.2.3c) or (3.3.2):

                                                  I         T
                                                               
                                                                    ,
                                                      0     I

except now the matrix T is Hermitian rather than symmetric or skew symmetric. The action by
conjugation of M 00 on U 00 is the natural action of GLn (Fq2 ) on the Hermitian matrices, as described in
formula (2.3.1).

   4. The U -rank of representations of classical groups

   We want to use the discussion of the preceding sections to help understand the representations of
classical groups. The case of finite fields is of interest in its own right, and involves fewer technicalities
than for local fields. It will be the focus of this exposition.

   4.1. Rank of representations of matrix groups.

   With the understanding that the coefficient field F is finite, any matrix group such as Ma,b (or Sn2
or Λ2n ) will also be a finite group. Then a finite dimensional representation π of Ma,b will be a sum of
characters, appearing with various multiplicities. We will say that a character χ of the group appears
in π if its multiplicity is at least 1, that is, if there is an eigenvector for Ma,b in the space of π whose
associated eigenvalue under π(Ma,b ) is χ.
   As discussed in §2.4, each character of Ma,b has an associated rank. We will say that the rank of the
representation π is the maximum of the ranks of the characters that appear in π. Mutatis mutandem,
this definition applies also to the groups Sn2 and Λ2n .

   4.2.The U -rank of representations of classical groups.


                                                          29
Gurevich and Howe                                                                       Rank and Duality


   Case of GLn :
   Consider a representation π of the group GLn (F) = GLn . Look at the restriction to one of the
standard matrix subgroups U , as described in formula (3.1.1). Then

                                                  U ≃ Ma,b ,

for some pair of whole numbers (a, b) with a + b ≤ n. Moreover, the normalizer of U acts on U by
means of the standard action α (formula (2.1.1)) of the full group GLa × GLb . Since the restriction π|U
of π to U can be thought of as obtained by first restricting π to the normalizer of U in GLn , and then
                                                              b belonging to the same GLa × GLb orbit
restricting this to U , it follows that any two characters in U
will appear with the same multiplicity in π|U .
   For a given standard matrix group U and a representation π of GLn , we denote by rankU (π), the
largest rank of characters of U appearing in π|U , and call it the rank of π with respect to U . This
number is automatically no larger than min(a, b). If rankU (π) is strictly less than min(a, b), we will say
that rankU (π) is small, or that π has low rank for U .

   Definition 4.2.1. We define the U -rank of π to be the largest of the numbers rankU (π), as U varies
over all standard matrix subgroups U of GLn . We also will say that π has low (or small) U -rank if it
has low (or small) rank for some U .
                                                                   n
   Note that the U -rank of π is bounded by n−1
                                             2 if n is odd, and by 2 if n is even. Moreover, the U -rank
k is smaller than the above upper bounds (i.e., k < n−1
                                                     2 ) if and only if π is of low U -rank. Finally,
it is satisfying to observe that although the above definition may seem to give rise to a collection of
competing candidates for the rank of a representation π, in fact, all possible values for low rank will
agree.

   Proposition 4.2.2. Suppose that for standard subgroups U ≃ Ma,b and U 0 ≃ Mc,d , the represen-
tation π of GLn has low rank. Then rankU (π) = rankU 0 (π).

   Proof. We proceed in several steps.

   Step 1. First consider the situation when U is expressed as a sum of two standard subgroups, U1
and U2 , obtained by decomposing one of the blocks defining U into two pieces. Namely, the parabolic
that defines U is the one on the right below, instead of the one that appears on the left,
                                                                 
                                                     A X1 X2
                                      A X
                                           
                                               7−→  0 B1 0  .
                                                                 
                                       0 B
                                                      0 0 B2
Here we have broken up the block of B into two sub-blocks, with corresponding decomposition of X
into X ≃ X1 ⊕ X2 . Note that, by breaking up the A block rather than the B block, we could subdivide
U vertically rather than horizontally.
   Now consider a representation π of GLn that has low rank for U , and set rankU (π) = k. Then the
characters of U that appear in π|U all have rank at most k, and some of them do have rank k. Also, we
know that all rank k characters of U will appear in π|U .

                                                     30
Gurevich and Howe                                                                          Rank and Duality


   If U has size (a, b), then Uj will have size (a, bj ), for two numbers b1 and b2 such that b1 + b2 = b.
Note that π|Uj = (π|U )|Uj . According to formulas (2.1.3) and (2.1.4), together with the discussion of
§2.4, this implies that any character of Uj that appears in π|Uj will have rank at most k. Since the
assumption that rankU (π) is low implies that k < a, the considerations of formulas (2.1.3), (2.1.4) and
§2.4 also tell us that if k ≤ bj , then characters of rank k will indeed appear in π|Uj . If k < bj , then π|Uj
will have rank k, and will be of low Uj -rank.
   In other words, the property of π being of low rank, as well as the value of this rank, transfers from
any standard subgroup U to either of its components Uj for which this transfer is allowed by the size
of the matrices belonging to Uj .

   Step 2. Using this argument twice, once for decomposing U horizontally, as just above, and once
for decomposing it vertically, we arrive at the following conclusion: if π|U has low U -rank equal to k,
then we can find a standard subgroup U 00 ⊂ U such that U 00 has size (k + 1, k + 1) and π|U 00 has rank
k, which is a fortiori low rank for U 00 .

   Step 3. Now we use the observation that all standard subgroups U , of size (a, b), are conjugate to
each other inside GLn . Thus all these subgroups will give the same measure of U -rank, and will all
agree whether this rank is low or not. In particular, if one standard subgroup of size (k + 1, k + 1) says
that a representation π of GLn has rank k, then all such groups will agree with this. But we have just
seen that, if a given standard subgroup U of size (a, b) with min(a, b) > k says that the representation
π of GLn has rank k, then also there is a standard subgroup U 00 of U , of size (k + 1, k + 1), that agrees
with this conclusion; and vice versa. Combining these two observations, we conclude that all sufficiently
large standard subgroups are in consensus about whether a representation π of GLn has low rank, and
what this rank is.
                                                                                                             

   Cases of Sp2n and On,n :
   If G = Sp2n , then as described in §3.2, it contains a parabolic subgroup Pn (aka, the Siegel parabolic)
whose unipotent radical Un is isomorphic to the symmetric matrices Sn2 . Since for Sp2n there are no
rival parabolic subgroups with abelian unipotent radicals, we will simply use U = Un for purposes of
defining rank. If we have a representation π of Sp2n , then its restriction to Un will decompose as a sum
of characters. As described in §2.4, each character of Un is naturally assigned a rank. We can then
define the Un -rank (sometime we will just say U -rank) of π to be the largest of the ranks of characters
that appear in π|Un . If this rank is strictly less than n, we will say that π is of low Un -rank.
   For a finite field of coefficients, there are two isomorphism classes of symmetric bilinear forms of a
given rank. If it happens that, for a representation π of Sp2n of Un -rank k, that only one of the two
types of rank k characters appear in π|Un , then we will say that π is of the type of the rank k characters
that appear.
   If G = On,n , the split orthogonal group in even dimensions, then we also have a parabolic subgroup
whose Levi component is GLn , with unipotent radical U = Un0 isomorphic to Λ2n , the skew-symmetric
n × n matrices. We can again look at the rank of characters, and their conjugacy classes under the


                                                      31
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


action of the Levi component will consist of all characters of a given rank. We note that this rank will
always be even. We define the Un0 rank (we might just call it U -rank) of a representation π of On,n to
be the largest rank of the Un0 characters that appear in π|Un0 . If this rank is less than n − 1, then we say
that π is of low U -rank.

   Case of Un,n :
   This goes almost word for word as for Sp2n and On,n . We omit the details.

   Cases of non-split groups:
   We know that, among orthogonal groups over finite fields, there are isometry groups of forms that
are not sums of hyperbolic planes: the odd dimensional orthogonal groups On+1,n , the non-split even
dimensional groups On+2,n , as described at the end of §1. Similarly, the unitary groups Un+1,n in odd
dimensions are not split in this sense.
   However, each of these groups contains a maximal split subgroup, unique up to conjugacy. The
orthogonal groups On+1,n and On+2,n contain copies of On,n . The unitary groups Un+1,n contain copies
of Un,n . We will define U -rank and low U -rank for these groups by looking at restrictions to split
subgroups. A representation π of On+1,n or of On+2,n will be said to have U -rank k, or to be of low
U -rank, if the restriction π|On,n has U -rank k, or has low U -rank. We make the parallel definition for
representations of Un+1,n .

   5. Constructing representations of small U -rank

   Although the concept of representations of a given U -rank was defined in §4, no evidence was pre-
sented that such representations actually exist. Indeed, since the various unipotent subgroups discussed
in §2 and §3 are rather small subgroups of rather non-abelian groups G, it might be reasonable to
expect that representations of the groups G would tend to be of full U -rank, and that the concept of
rank might give little or no information about the dual set G
                                                            b of irreducible representations. Indeed, in
some sense the “typical” representation of G does have full rank. However, in this section, we will see
that G also possesses natural families of representations of low U -rank, with interesting structure.

   5.1. The Heisenberg group and the oscillator representation.

   Our method for constructing representations of given U -rank will use dual pairs inside the symplectic
groups Sp2n . The notion of dual pair was defined some time ago [Howe73-2], and it has proved useful
for studying representations of groups over local fields, and for questions in the theory of automorphic
forms (see [Gelbart77], [Kudla86], [Kudla-Milson86], [Prasad93], and their bibliographies). However,
although there have been some applications to the representations of groups over finite fields [Adams-
Moy93], [Aubert-Michel-Rouquier96], [Aubert-Kraskiewicz-Przebinda16], [Gérardin77], [Srinivasan79]
these have been relatively limited.
   The context for the study of representations of dual pairs is the oscillator representation of the
symplectic group, which arises through its action by automorphisms of the Heisenberg group. This has
been discussed in considerable detail in the literature [Gérardin77], [Gurevich-Hadani07], [Gurevich-


                                                     32
Gurevich and Howe                                                                          Rank and Duality


Hadani09], [Howe73-1], [Weil64]. We will review the basic construction.
   We start with a symplectic vector space W over the coefficient field F, which we are taking to be
a finite field of odd characteristic. Most of the discussion, however, will remain relevant for infinite
local fields. The space W will have additional structure in various contexts below, but for now, we just
assume that W has been coordinatized as in §3.2. The symplectic form on W is denoted with sharp
brackets. We define the Heisenberg group attached to W as the set

                                                  H(W ) ≃ W ⊕ F,                                    (5.1.1a)

with the group law
                                                                         1
                              (w, t) · (w0 , t0 ) = (w + w0 , t + t0 +     < w, w0 >).              (5.1.1b)
                                                                         2
The set
                                               Z(H) = {(0, t) : t ∈ F},

is the center and the commutator subgroup of H(W ) = H.
   It is evident from the formula (5.1.1b) that the symplectic group Sp(W ) = Sp2n acts on H(W ) by
automorphisms, by direct extension of its action on W , and that the action on Z(H) is trivial:

                     g · (w, t) = (g(w), t),     for every g ∈ Sp(W ), w ∈ W, and t ∈ F.

   Consider an irreducible representation ρ of H(W ). Because the center Z(H) will act via operators
that commute with all of H, Schur’s Lemma [Curtis-Reiner62], [Serre77] implies that Z(H) must act
by scalar operators. These scalars will define a character χ of Z(H), referred to as the central character
of ρ. If the central character is trivial, then ρ factors to H(W )/Z(H) ≃ W , which means that ρ will
just be a character of ρ, and in particular will be of dimension 1.
   If the central character χ of ρ is non-trivial, then it turns out that χ determines ρ up to unitary
equivalence. The situation is described by the following celebrated result [Mackey49]:

   Theorem 5.1.2 (Stone-von Neumann-Mackey Theorem). Given a non-trivial character χ
of the center Z(H) of the Heisenberg group H(W ) = H, up to unitary equivalence, there is a unique
irreducible representation ρχ of H(W ) with central character χ. Moreover, the representation ρχ may
be realized as an induced representation
                                                                0
                                                    ρχ ≃ IndH
                                                            L0 χ ,                                   (5.1.3)

where L0 is any maximal abelian subgroup of H, and χ0 is any extension of χ from Z(H) to L0 .

   Remarks 5.1.4. We note that
   a) Lagrangians. A subgroup L0 of H(W ) that contains Z(H) will be commutative if and only if the
image L = L0 /(Z(H) of L0 in W is isotropic: any two vectors in L have symplectic pairing equal zero.
Moreover, such L0 will be maximal commutative if and only if L is Lagrangian, i.e., maximal isotropic
subspace of W . Two examples of maximal isotropic subspaces of the space W ≃ F2n described in
formula (3.2.1), are the space X, consisting of the length 2n vectors ~x for which the last n coordinates
equal zero, and the space Y , consisting of the vectors ~y for which the first n coordinates equal zero.

                                                         33
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


   b) Formulas - Schrödinger model. If we take the subspace X to be the subspace L of the previous
remark, then the realization (5.1.3) of ρχ can be put in the following explicit form. First, we identify
X and Y with abelian subgroups of H(W ), not containing Z(H). Thus, in particular, the maximal
abelian subgroup X 0 of H is the direct product X 0 = X ⊕ Z(H). We choose X 0 to be the subgroup
L0 , and we choose the character χ0 to be the extension of χ to X 0 that is trivial on X. We have
H(W ) = X 0 · Y , so that we can identify the space of the induced representation IndH    0      2
                                                                                     X 0 χ with L (Y ).
With these agreements, we can express the representation ρχ as follows:

                                  • ρχ (~y )f (y~0 ) = f (y~0 − ~y );                               (5.1.5a)

                                 • ρχ (~x)f (y~0 ) = χ(< y~0 , ~x >)f (y~0 );                        (5.1.5b)

                                  • ρχ (0, t)f (y~0 ) = χ(t)f (y~0 ),                                (5.1.5c)

for every ~y , y~0 ∈ Y, ~x ∈ X, t ∈ F, and f ∈ L2 (Y ).

   This realization of ρχ is sometimes called the Schrödinger model attached to the pair (X, Y ) of
Lagrangian subspaces of W .

   The Stone-von Neumann-Mackey Theorem implies that, for any element g of Sp(W ), the automor-
phism of H(W ) defined by g, since it is the identity map on Z(H), will preserve the unitary equivalence
class of ρχ . This leads in turn to a representation of Sp(W ) as follows.
   Given an element g in Sp(W ), the Stone-von Neumann-Mackey Theorem implies that there is a
unitary operator ω(g) on the space of ρχ , such that

                                         ω(g)ρχ (h)ω(g)−1 = ρχ (g(h)),                                (5.1.6)

for all elements h of H(W ). Since ρχ is irreducible, the equation (5.1.6) determines ω(g) up to scalar
multiples. Since both ω(g)ω(g 0 ) and ω(gg 0 ) will satisfy the same equation, we conclude that

                                           ω(g)ω(g 0 ) = β(g, g 0 )ω(gg 0 ),

for some scalar factors β(g, g 0 ) for any two elements of Sp(W ). This yields what is sometimes called a
projective representation of Sp(W ).
   In this context, it is natural to ask, can the scalar factors β(g, g 0 ) be eliminated, to yield an actual
representation of Sp(W )? As Weil showed in [Weil64], for local fields, they cannot be eliminated, but
they can be reduced to ±1. This provides a representation of a two-fold covering group M p(W ) of
Sp(W ), known as the metaplectic group.
   However, in the case of finite fields F = Fq , homological arguments [Matsumoto69], [Steinberg62],
or explicit constructions [Gérardin77], [Gurevich-Hadani07], [Gurevich-Hadani09] show that the scalars
β(g, g 0 ) can all be reduced to 1, and we obtain an representation of the group Sp(W ). We will refer to
this representation as the oscillator representation, because it is an analog of the spin representation for
orthogonal groups [Brauer-Weyl35], and is also related to the quantum mechanical harmonic oscillator
[Howe85]. We denote the oscillator representation by ω.


                                                            34
Gurevich and Howe                                                                                                 Rank and Duality


      The space on which ω acts is by definition the space of ρχ . Although explicit and transparent
formulas for ω(g) for all elements g of Sp(W ) are not available, some g act in simple ways in a given
realization of ρχ . In particular, the action of the parabolic subgroup P of formulas (3.2.3) can be
described nicely in the Schrödinger model on the space L2 (Y ), as described in formulas (5.1.5).
      The subgroup M of formula (3.2.3) restricts to Y as GL(Y ). Suppose we have an element of Mn ,
as described in equation (3.2.3b) . Then we can check that the operators

                                   A   0
                                                                
                                                              det(A)
                            ω                   (f )(~y ) =            f (At ~y ),                                          (5.1.7)
                                   0 (A−1 )t                     q

f ∈ L2 (Y ), ~y ∈ Y , 
                      satisfy 
                              the defining equation (5.1.6) for ω. Here, it turns out the specific value of the
                            det(A)
Legendre symbol3               q      is the correct normalization [Gérardin77], [Gurevich-Hadani07], [Gurevich-
Hadani09].
      The elements of the subgroup Un , described in equation (3.2.3c), also have a simple description: they
act as multiplication operators. From the definitions, one calculates [Gérardin77], [Gurevich-Hadani07],
[Gurevich-Hadani09] that

                                                I   S
                                                                                            
                                                                                 BS (~y , ~y )
                                       ω                     (f )(~y ) = χ                           (f )(~y ),             (5.1.8)
                                                0   I                                2

f ∈ L2 (Y ), ~y ∈ Y.

      5.2. Dual pairs in Sp2n .

      The oscillator representation is a very special representation of Sp2n . It turns out, however, that it
can be used to construct or describe large families of representations of all classical groups [Gurevich-
Howe15]. We give some examples to show how this can be done. However, we will not attempt to
treat all possible examples. The examples that we will not describe here can be dealt with in the same
manner and will appear elsewhere.
      It turns out to be instructive to restrict the oscillator representation to subgroups of Sp2n . However,
such subgroups must be chosen with care. The restriction of a representation to a subgroup can be
very hard to analyze explicitly. When the base field is a local field, it has been found that restricting
the oscillator representation to subgroups of the form G × G0 , where each of G and G0 is the full
centralizer of the other in Sp2n , yields interesting correspondences (the local theta correspondence)
between representations of G and representations of G0 .
      The ideas that were used to create the local theta correspondence do not apply when the base field
is finite. However, it turns out that the notion of U -rank discussed in §4 provides a satisfying substitute,
which also sheds new light on the situation for local fields.
      We call pair of subgroups (G, G0 ) of a group Γ such that each of G and G0 is the full centralizer of
the other, a dual pair of subgroups of Γ.

      Examples 5.2.1. The following pairs of groups form dual pairs in suitable symplectic groups.
                      
  3
      The value of    x
                      q
                           for x ∈ F×                                                       ×
                                    q is 1 or −1 if x is a square or not, respectively, in Fq .




                                                                     35
Gurevich and Howe                                                                      Rank and Duality


   a) The (Sp2n , Ok ) dual pair. If a vector space W is a equipped with a symplectic form < , >W , and
a vector space V is equipped with a symmetric bilinear form B, then the tensor product W ⊗ V can be
endowed with the tensor product of < , >W and B, which is a symplectic form. Thus (Sp(W ), O(V ))
form a dual pair in Sp(W ⊗ V ). If dim W = 2n and dim V = k, then dim(W ⊗ V ) = 2nk, so we may
simply say that
                                  (Sp2n , Ok ) form a dual pair in Sp2nk .

   b) The (GLk , GLn ) dual pair. The groups GLk and GLn acting on the matrices Mk,n by multipli-
cation on the left and on the right, as described in formulas (2.1.1), then (GLk , GLn ) form a dual pair
in GLkn . Moreover, it is well understood [Lang02] that, given any vector space V , the natural pairing
between V and its dual V ∗ can be used to define a symplectic form on W = V ⊕ V ∗ , by the recipe

                                    < (~v , λ), (~v 0 , λ0 ) >= λ0 (~v ) − λ(~v 0 ).

Then the action of GL(V ) on W defined by

                                         g · (~v , λ) = (g(~v ), λ ◦ g −1 ),

embeds GL(V ) into Sp(V ⊕ V ∗ ). Taking V = Mk,n then embeds

                         (GLk , GLn ) as a dual pair in Sp(Mk,n ⊕ Mn,k ) ≃ Sp2kn .


   5.3. Constructing representations of low U -rank.

   The dual pairs described in §5.2 can be used to construct representations of low U -rank for the
groups Sp2n , On,n , and GLn .
   Recall the isotypic decomposition of a representation. Given any representation π of a finite group
G on a vector space V , and an irreducible representation τ of G, the τ -isotypic component πτ of π is
the sum of all the subspaces of V on which G acts irreducibly, by a representation that is unitarily
equivalent to τ [Serre77]. It is well known that Vτ has the structure of a tensor product

                                                   Vτ ≃ V 0 ⊗ τ,

where τ here is standing for a vector space on which G acts irreducibly by the representation τ , and V 0
is an auxiliary space.
   If G0 is a group acting on the same space as G, and commuting with G, then V 0 inherits the structure
of G0 -module, and we can write
                                                           X
                                                  V0 ≃           Vσ0 ,
                                                            b0
                                                          σ∈G

where Vσ0 is the σ-isotypic component of V 0 for G0 . Taking the tensor product with τ gives us a
decomposition
                                                        X
                                               Vτ ≃            Vσ0 ⊗ τ.
                                                         b0
                                                       σ∈G

The spaces Vσ0 ⊗ τ are the G0 × G isotypic components for Vτ .

                                                          36
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


   Theorem 5.3.1 (The eta correspondence). We have
   a) Let k ≤ n be whole numbers.           Consider the oscillator representation ω for the dual pair
(Sp2n , Ok ) ⊂ Sp2nk , where Ok is the isometry group of either of the two symmetric non-degenerate
bilinear forms in dimension k. Then
        1) The representation ω|Sp2n is of U -rank k, and has type corresponding to Ok .
        2) For any irreducible representation τ of Ok , let ωτ ≃ Ωτ ⊗ τ be the τ -isotypic subspace of
ω. Then, as a representation of Sp2n , Ωτ contains a unique irreducible representation η(τ ) of U -rank k
(and type of Ok ). Furthermore, the mapping

                                              η:O
                                                bk ,→ Sp
                                                      c 2n ,                                           (5.3.2a)

is an injection of O
                   bk into the set (Sp
                                    c 2n )U,k of irreducible U -rank k representations of Sp2n .

   b) Let k and n be whole numbers, with 2n ≤ k. Consider the oscillator representation ω for the
dual pair Ok,k × Sp2n ⊂ Sp4nk . Then
        1) The representation ω|Ok,k has U -rank 2n.
        2) For any irreducible representation σ of Sp2n , let ωσ ≃ Υσ ⊗ σ be the σ-isotypic component
of ω. Then, as a representation of Ok,k , Υσ contains a unique irreducible representation η(σ) of rank
2n. Furthermore, the mapping
                                               Sp2n ,→ O
                                             η:c       bk,k ,                                          (5.3.2b)
                   c 2n into the set (O
is an injection of Sp                 bk,k )U,2n of irreducible U -rank 2n representations of Ok,k .

   c) Let k and n be whole numbers, with k ≤ n2 . Consider the oscillator representation for the dual
pair GLk × GLn ⊂ Sp2kn . Then
        1) The representation ω|GLn has U -rank k.
                                                   dk , let ων ≃ Ξν ⊗ ν be the ν-isotypic component
        2) For any irreducible representation ν in GL
of ω. Then, as a representation of GLn , Ξν contains a unique irreducible representation η(ν) of rank k.
Furthermore, the mapping
                                             η:d
                                               GLk ,→ d
                                                      GLn ,                                            (5.3.2c)

is an injection of GL
                   dk into the set (GL
                                    dn )U,k of irreducible U -rank k representations of GLn .

   For what follows, by a twist of a representation π of a group G by a character χ of G (i.e., a one
dimensional representation) we mean the representation χ ⊗ π. Extensive numerics and theoretical
considerations lead us to formulate the following natural conjecture:

   Conjecture 5.3.3 (Exhaustion of the η-correspondence). We have
   a) Every irreducible representation of Sp2n of U -rank k, for k < n, appears in the image of the
mapping (5.3.2a) for (exactly) one of the two possible orthogonal groups Ok .
   b) Every irreducible representation of Ok,k of U -rank 2n, for 2n < k, appears, maybe after a twist
by a character, (exactly once) in the image of the mapping (5.3.2b).


                                                     37
Gurevich and Howe                                                                     Rank and Duality


   c) Every irreducible representation of GLn of U -rank k < n−1
                                                              2 appears, maybe after a twist by a
character, (exactly once) in the image of the mapping (5.3.2c).

   A proof of Theorem 5.3.1.
   A proof of part a) of Theorem 5.3.1 is given in [Gurevich-Howe15]. A proof of part b) can be
given along very similar lines. Here we will offer a proof of part c), which involves using a somewhat
non-standard Schrödinger model.

   Proof. As explained in §5.1, we can construct a realization of the oscillator representation of Sp(W )
for a symplectic vector space W starting from a supplementary pair (X, Y ) of maximal isotropic sub-
spaces of W . In Example 5.2.1, we realize the pair (GLn , GLk ) as a dual pair in Sp2nk by considering
the actions by left and right multiplication of GLk ×GLn on the sum of matrix spaces W = Mk,n ⊕Mn,k ,
and the pair of spaces (Mk,n , Mn,k ) constitute a pair of maximal isotropic subspaces of W . The corre-
sponding realization of the representation ρχ of H(W ) would be on L2 (Mk,n ), and GLk × GLn would
act by means of their permutation actions given by left and right multiplication of matrices.
   This is certainly a pleasant realization of ω|GLk ×GLn , but it does not display the spectral behavior
of the standard subgroups of GLn in as transparent a way as possible. We will use a different pair of
maximal isotropic subspaces that will do this better.
   To this end, we replace the specific spaces Fnq and Fkq with vector spaces X and Y over Fq , of
dimensions n and k respectively. We construct the symplectic vector space

                                    W = Hom(Y, X) ⊕ Hom(X, Y ),                                   (5.3.4)

equipped with the symplectic form

                               < (A, B), (A0 , B 0 ) >= trace(B 0 A − BA0 ).

The oscillator representation of Sp(W ) is then realized on space of the canonical representation of the
Heisenberg group H(W ), as described in §5.1. To produce a concrete space for this representation we
can choose a pair of supplementary Lagrangian subspaces of W .
   We will not use the pair of formula (5.3.4). For our realization of ω, we first choose a decomposition
X = X1 ⊕ X2 of X, with dim X1 = k, and therefore dim X2 = n − k. Then

         W = (Hom(Y, X1 ) ⊕ Hom(X2 , Y )) ⊕ (Hom(X1 , Y ) ⊕ Hom(Y, X2 )) = L ⊕ L0 ,               (5.3.5)

expresses our W as a sum of two Lagrangian subspaces L and L0 . The Schrödinger model attached to
this decomposition is realized on L2 (L0 ). We will look at the action of GL(X) × GL(Y ) in this model.
   Since the groups GL(Y ) and GL(X1 ) × GL(X2 ) ⊂ GL(X) both preserve both Lagrangians of the
decomposition (5.3.5), they will act on L2 (L0 ) by their permutation actions on the points of the set
L0 = Hom(X1 , Y ) ⊕ Hom(Y, X2 ). Adapting to the present context from formulas (5.1.7), we find that
up to a ± sign (that will not matter for the discussion below)

                                   ω(g 0 )(f )(A, B) = f ((g 0 )−1 A, Bg 0 ),


                                                      38
Gurevich and Howe                                                                      Rank and Duality


for g 0 in GL(Y ), A in Hom(X1 , Y ) and B in Hom(Y, X2 ). The diagonal subgroups GL(Xj ) also act
(up to a ± sign) via their obvious permutation actions, adapted from formula (5.1.7):

                                  ω(g1 × g2 )(f )(A, B) = f (Ag1 , (g2 )−1 B),

for (g1 , g2 ) in GL(X1 ) × GL(X2 ).
   As a subgroup of Sp(W ), the standard subgroup U = Hom(X2 , X1 ) ≃ Mk,n−k ⊂ GL(X) acts as
the identity on L, and also acts as the identity on the quotient
                                                  W/L ≃ L0 ,
so it will act on L2 (L0 ) by multiplication operators, by an appropriate adaptation of formula (5.1.8).
   We can define a mapping

                          µ : L0 ≃ Hom(X1 , Y ) ⊕ Hom(Y, X2 ) −→ Hom(X1 , X2 )

by taking the products of the two matrix components:

                                               µ(A, B) = BA,

with A in Hom(X1 , Y ) and B in Hom(Y, X2 ), as before. Using this notation, the action of T in U on
L2 (Hom(X1 , Y ) ⊕ Hom(Y, X2 )) may be described by

                                   ω(T )(f )(A, B) = γµ(A,B) (T )f (A, B).                         (5.3.6)

Here γµ(A,B) is the character of U described by formula (2.4.2).
   We want to use formula (5.3.6) to describe the eigenspaces of U , and especially the rank k spectrum
of U . To do this, we study the structure of the set of pairs (A, B) such that µ(A, B) = BA has rank k.
   The product BA, as an element of Hom(X1 , X2 ), has rank at most equal to the maximum of the
ranks of A and B. Since both A and B are maps to or from Y , neither of them can have rank larger
than k = dim Y .
   Let’s consider the collection of (A, B) such that rank(BA) = k. If BA has rank k, then A must
have rank at least k. Since we have selected X1 so that dim X1 = dim Y = k, the matrix A has rank
at most k, and if it does have rank k then it is an isomorphism from X1 to Y , and we can conclude
that rank(BA) = rank (B). For B to have rank k means that B is injective. If we have two injective
mappings B1 and B2 from Y to X2 , then they differ by an element of GL(X2 ). Thus, if rank(B2 ) =
rank (B1 ) = k, then
                                                 B2 = g2 B1 ,

for some g2 in GL(X2 ).
   Similarly, if A : X1 → Y has rank k, it is bijective. Given two bijective mappings A1 and A2 from
X1 to Y , there is an element g1 of GL(X1 ) such that

                                                 A2 = A1 g 1 .

Putting these two observations together, we conclude that GL(X1 ) × GL(X2 ) acts transitively on the
set of (A, B) such that BA has rank k.

                                                      39
Gurevich and Howe                                                                             Rank and Duality


   We next look at the set µ−1 (BA) of points (A0 , B 0 ) such that µ(A0 , B 0 ) = B 0 A0 = BA = µ(A, B) is
a fixed mapping of rank k.
   If µ(A0 , B 0 ) = B 0 A0 = BA = µ(A, B), with both having rank k, then we know that A and A0
both have rank k, and are therefore both isomorphisms from X1 to Y . This implies that there is an
element g 0 in GL(Y ) such that A0 = g 0 A. Since the products BA and B 0 A0 are equal, this means that
B 0 = B(g 0 )−1 . Conversely, it is clear that (A, B) and (A0 , B 0 ) = (g 0 A, B(g 0 )−1 ) satisfy B 0 A0 = BA. We
conclude that GL(Y ) acts transitively on each set µ−1 (BA) such that the product BA is a fixed rank k
element of Hom(X1 , X2 ). In fact, this action is simply transitive, since if A has rank k, it is surjective,
and g 0 A = A only when g 0 = IY is the identity map of Y .
   Let’s look also at the stabilizer of BA in GL(X1 ) × GL(X2 ). The image space BA(X1 ) is a k-
dimensional subspace of X2 . The stabilizer in GL(X2 ) of BA(X1 ) is a maximal parabolic subgroup of
GL(X2 ), which we will denote PBA . The restriction of an element in PBA to BA(X1 ) defines a surjective
homomorphism
                                         rBA : PBA −→ GL(BA(X1 )).

The kernel QBA of rBA is of course a normal subgroup of PBA . We can get a complement to QBA in
PBA by choosing a vector space complement X3 to BA(X1 ) in X2 . This gives us an isomorphism

                       PBA ≃ GL(BA(X1 )) · QBA ≃ GL(BA(X1 )) · GL(X3 ) · UBA ,

where UBA is the unipotent radical of PBA , and is isomorphic to Hom(X3 , BA(X1 )).
   It is clear that the stabilizer of BA in GL(X1 ) × GL(X2 ) contains QBA . It also contains a subgroup
∆BA = ∆(GL(X1 ) × GL(BA(X1 )) ⊂ GL(X1 ) × GL(BA(X1 )), defined by

                                         ∆BA = (g1 , BAg1−1 (BA)−1 ),                                      (5.3.7)

where g1 is in GL(X1 ), and we interpret (BA)−1 as being the inverse of BA considered as an isomorphism
between X1 and BA(X1 ).
   Now fix a pair (A, B) in L0 , and consider the set µ−1 (BA) of points (A0 , B 0 ) in L0 such that
µ(A0 , B 0 ) = B 0 A0 = BA = µ(A, B). We have seen above that the group GL(Y ) acts simply tran-
sitively on µ−1 (BA). It is also easy to check that the group QBA acts trivially on µ−1 (BA). Since
GL(X1 ) acts simply transitively on the set of A in Hom(X1 , Y ) of rank k, the group ∆BA also will act
simply transitively on µ−1 (BA).
   Thus, we are in the following situation. The delta functions at the points of L0 are all eigenfunctions
for the standard subgroup U ≃ Hom(X2 , X1 ) of GL(X). If we fix a character γµ(A,B) of rank k of U ,
then GL(Y ) acts simply transitively on the set of points (A0 , B 0 ) in L0 whose associated eigencharacter
γµ(A0 ,B 0 ) is the same as γµ(A,B) . Thus, the action of GL(Y ) on the γµ(A,B) eigenspace for U is equivalent
to right regular representation of GL(Y ).
   On the other hand, the subgroup ∆BA of the stabilizer of BA in GL(X1 ) × GL(X2 ) also acts simply
transitively on µ−1 (BA), and this action of course commutes with the action of GL(Y ). It follows that,
if we identify µ−1 (BA) ≃ GL(Y1 ) by selecting (A, B) as a base point, then the action of ∆BA gets
identified to the left regular action of GL(Y ) on itself. We may conclude from the Peter-Weyl Theorem

                                                        40
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


for finite groups [Serre77], [Curtis-Reiner62], that the actions of GL(Y ) and of ∆BA on L2 (µ−1 (BA))
generate mutual commutants in the algebra of operators on L2 (µ−1 (BA)).
   We can use this to prove Theorem 5.3.1 c). Fix an irreducible representation ν of GL(Y ), and
consider the ν-isotypic component ων ≃ Ξν ⊗ν of the oscillator representation for the dual pair GL(Y )×
GL(X) ⊂ Sp(Hom(Y, X) ⊕ Hom(X, Y )). Using the decomposition X = X1 ⊕ X2 described above
(formula (5.3.5)), consider the action of the subgroup U ≃ Hom(X2 , X1 ) on ω. Fix a character γBA of
U of rank k, and consider the ωγBA eigenspace of ω. We have

                                        (ων )γBA   ≃          (Ξν )γBA ⊗ ν.
              P
   Let Ξν ≃     ζ∈d
                  GL(X)
                           mζ ζ be a decomposition of Ξν into irreducible representations for GL(X), with
multiplicities mζ . Then
                                                         X
                                        (Ξν )γBA ≃               mζ ζγBA ,
                                                     ζ∈GL(X)
                                                       d

and so
                                                          X
                                   (ων )γBA   ≃      (            mζ ζγBA ) ⊗ ν.
                                                     ζ∈d
                                                       GL(X)

   For any representation ζ of GL(X), the eigenspace ζγBA will be invariant under the group ∆BA of
formula (5.3.7), and so the subspace (mζ ζγBA ) ⊗ ν of ων will be invariant under ∆BA × GL(Y ). If the
sum of the multiplicities mζ for which ζγBA 6= {0} is more than one, then there will be more than one
∆BA × GL(Y ) invariant subspace of ων . However, our description above of ωγBA shows that ∆BA and
GL(Y ) each generate the commutant of the other group acting on this space. This implies that the
product group ∆BA × GL(Y ) acts irreducibly on the space (ωγBA )ν = (ων )γBA . It follows that there
must be a unique ξ with ξγBA 6= {0}, and that for this ξ, the multiplicity mξ = 1. This is the assertion
of Theorem 5.3.1 Part c).                                                                              

   6. Extensions of the notion of U -rank

   An important feature of U -rank is that it behaves well under restriction to certain subgroups, and
under tensor product. These stability properties allow one to define notions of rank that make sense
beyond the range where U -rank makes sense.

   6.1. Stability of U -rank under restriction.

   For m ≤ n, consider GLm embedded in GLn as m × m block matrices:
                                           A 0
                                              
                                                 ,
                                           0 I
where I here denotes the (n − m) × (n − m) identity matrix. Given a representation π of GLn , consider
the restriction π|GLm of π to GLm . We can ask about the U -rank of π|GLm , and in particular, whether
it has low U -rank. The following stability result is implicit in our analysis of rank in §4.

   Proposition 6.1.1. If a representation π of GLn has low U -rank equal to k, i.e. k < n−1
                                                                                         2 , then if
k < m−1
     2 , the restricted representation π|GLm also has low U -rank k with respect to GLm .


                                                         41
Gurevich and Howe                                                                     Rank and Duality


   Proof. Indeed, according to Step 2 in the proof of Proposition 4.2.2, a representation π of GLn
will have U -rank k, with k < n−1
                               2 , if and only if the restriction of π to a standard subgroup of size
(k + 1) × (k + 1) has rank k. But given the assumed restrictions on k, the subgroup GLm ⊂ GLn
will contain standard subgroups U of this size, and these are also standard subgroups when considered
as subgroups of GLn . Since the rank of π|U is the same, regardless of whether U is considered as a
subgroup of GLm or of GLn , the result follows from Proposition 4.2.2.                                 

   Similar considerations imply parallel results for the groups Sp2n or On,n . To state them we need
to think of smaller groups of a given type as subgroups of larger ones. This can easily be done, in a
manner analogous to our embedding of GLm in GLn . Specifically, with Sp2n realized as described in
§3.2, we define the standard embedding of Sp2m ,→ Sp2n to be the group of 2n × 2n matrices of the
form
                                               A   0 B      0
                                                               
                                            0 I        0 0 
                                                            ,                                    (6.1.2)
                                                           
                                           
                                           C 0         D 0
                                               0   0    0 I
where I denote the (n − m) × (n − m) identity matrix, and
                                               A B
                                                   

                                                   C    D
belongs to Sp2m .
   With On,n described as in §3.3, we embed Om,m in On,n in the analogous way.

   Proposition 6.1.3. We have,
   a) Let π be a representation of Sp2n , of low U -rank k < m ≤ n. Let Sp2m be embedded in Sp2n
by the standard embedding (6.1.2). Then the restriction π|Sp2m also has low U -rank k. Conversely, if π
is a representation of Sp2n whose restriction to Sp2m has low U -rank k, then π also has U -rank k as a
representation of Sp2n .
   b) Let π be a representation of On,n , of low U -rank k < m ≤ n. Let Om,m be embedded in On,n
by the standard embedding analogous to (6.1.2). Then the restriction π|Om,m also has low U -rank k.
Conversely, if π is a representation of On,n whose restriction to Om,m has low U -rank k, then π also has
U -rank k as a representation of On,n .

   Proof. Although there was no need to introduce such considerations for purposes of defining the
U -rank of a representation of Sp2n or On,n , the same ideas that led to the conclusion, that the U -rank
of a representation of GLn is determined by its restriction to standard subgroups of size m × m, for
any m between n and the U -rank of the representation, apply to the present cases also, and imply the
stated results.
   In particular, the inequalities between the rank of a symmetric or skew symmetric matrix and its
components under a direct sum decomposition (see formulas (2.2.5) through (2.2.7)) allow us to make
the following conclusion. If we have a representation ρ of Un ≃ Sn2 that is invariant under the natural
action β (see formulas (2.2.3) and (2.2.4)) of GLn on Sn2 , then if a character of rank k appears in ρ,

                                                       42
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


                                                                2 is the upper triangular unipotent
a character of rank min(k, m) will appear in ρ|Um , where Um ≃ Sm
radical (the Siegel unipotent) for Sp2m . Thus, if ρ = π|Un is the restriction of a representation of Sp2n ,
of low U -rank k < m, then also π|Sp2m will have low U -rank k < m. A parallel argument applies likewise
to the orthogonal groups On,n .                                                                           

   6.2. Asymptotic rank.

   The propositions 6.1.1 and 6.1.3 permit making a definition that extends the range of k for which
one can define the rank of a representation for a given group.
   Let Gn denote one of the groups GLn , Sp2n or On,n . In the definition below, a group Gm should
be taken to denote a group of the same type as Gn . That is, if Gn = Sp2n , then also Gm = Sp2m ; and
likewise for the other two types of groups.

   Definition 6.2.1 (Asymptotic rank). A representation π of Gn will be said to have asymptotic
rank less than or equal to k, if for all sufficiently large numbers m, there is a representation ρ of Gm ,
such that
   i) ρ has low U -rank less than or equal to k; and
   ii) π < ρ|Gn .

   The asymptotic rank of a representation will be sometime denote by A-rank or rankA .

   Remarks 6.2.2. Note that
   a) We may conclude from Proposition 6.1.3 that, if π is of U -rank k or less, with k in the range
where U -rank makes sense for the given group Gn , then the asymptotic rank of π is greater than or
equal to the U -rank of π.
   b) The form of the definition is somewhat awkward. This is because we must entertain the possibility
that the representation of Gm that is needed to find a given low rank representation of Gn has strictly
larger U -rank than the original representation. It is even conceivable a priori that the asymptotic rank
of some representations of G, even representations of low U -rank, could be infinite. We will see shortly
(see inequality (6.5.1)) that this is not the case. We do not know of an example of a representation with
small U -rank for which the asymptotic rank is larger than the U -rank.
   c) Because the restriction of representations from groups to subgroups rarely preserves irreducibility,
it is to be expected that the restriction of even an irreducible representation ρ from GLm with m large
to GLn may well contain many irreducible components, of varying ranks. This consideration entails the
“less than or equal” terminology of the definition.
   d) From the structure of Definition 6.2.1, we see that if a representation π of Gn has asymptotic
rank less than or equal to k, then it has asymptotic rank less than or equal to k + 1, and so on. Thus,
the subsets (Gb n )A,≤k of irreducible representations of asymptotic rank ≤ k increase with k; so they
define a filtration of G
                       b n . We will see later that there is a number kmax such that (G
                                                                                      b n )A,≤k
                                                                                               max = Gn .
                                                                                                     b
(In fact, kmax = n for GLn , n > 1 (for GL1 , kmax = 0), and kmax = 2n for Sp2n or On,n ). The main
point of asymptotic rank is that it provides an analog of the filtration given by U -rank that extends


                                                      43
Gurevich and Howe                                                                      Rank and Duality


beyond the obvious maximum values of U -rank. Thus, it essentially provides a refinement of U -rank to
values higher than those for which U -rank makes sense.

   6.3. Rank and tensor product.

   Tensor product is a natural operation on representations of a group G. For abelian groups, tensor
product of characters is the addition operation in the Pontrjagin dual group. Because of the relation
between addition of matrices and rank, tensor product of representations behaves well with respect to
the notions of rank defined above.
   Again, we let Gn stands for one of the groups GLn , Sp2n or On,n .

   Proposition 6.3.1 (Compatibility with tensor product). We have
   a) Compatibility of tensor product and U -rank. Let π and ρ be representations of Gn , of low U -ranks
k and ` respectively, Suppose that k + ` is less than the upper bound for low U -rank of Gn (i.e., n2 − 1
for GLn , or n − 1 for Sp2n or On,n ). Then the tensor product π ⊗ ρ has low U -rank k + `.
   b) Compatibility of tensor product and asymptotic rank. Let π and ρ be representations of Gn ,
of asymptotic ranks less than or equal to k and ` respectively. Then the tensor product π ⊗ ρ has
asymptotic rank less than or equal to k + `.

   Proof. To simplify the argument, let’s suppose that Gn = GLn . The other cases are dealt with
similarly. With a = n2 or a = n−1
                               2 according as n is even or odd, we can determine the U -ranks of π
and ρ by examining the ranks of their characters of their restrictions to a standard subgroup Ua of size
a × a. The assumption of part a) says that the maximum of these ranks are k for π, and ` for ρ.
   If we take the tensor product then (π ⊗ ρ)|Ua ≃ (π|Ua ) ⊗ (ρ|Ua ). In an abelian group such as Ua ,
the tensor product is formed by taking the sum in the Pontrjagin dual of each character appearing in
π with each character appearing in ρ. As noted, the rank of the sum of two characters is at most the
sum of their ranks. Thus, if every character of π has rank at most k, and every character of ρ has rank
at most `, the characters appearing in (π|Ua ) ⊗ (ρ|Ua ) can have rank at most k + `. Taking into account
the given restrictions on k and `, this implies statement a) of the proposition. Taking into account the
definition of asymptotic rank, this argument also establishes statement b).                             

   Remark 6.3.2 (Filtrations of the representation ring). As noted, both conditions of
   i) U -rank less than or equal to k; and
   ii) asymptotic rank less than or equal to k,
give rise to filtrations of the dual set G
                                         b n of irreducible representations of Gn . Moreover, Proposi-
tion 6.3.1 shows that these filtrations are compatible with tensor product. This means that if we let
R(Gn ) = Z(G b n ) be the representation ring of Gn (aka the Grothendieck ring), namely the integer linear
combinations of irreducible representations of Gn , equipped with tensor product for multiplication, then
the submodules R(Gn )A,≤k = Z((G   b n )A,≤k ⊂ R(Gn ), of representation of asymptotic rank less or equal
to k, give us an algebra filtration of R(Gn ), i.e., we have

                                     · · · R(Gn )A,≤k ⊂ R(Gn )A,≤k+1 · · · ,

                                                       44
Gurevich and Howe                                                                         Rank and Duality

                                                     S
with R(Gn )A,≤i · R(Gn )A,≤j ⊂ R(Gn )A,≤i+j and          k R(Gn )A,≤k = R(Gn ).   We could get an analogous
filtration using U -rank instead of asymptotic rank.

   6.4. Tensor rank.

   Remark 6.3.2 suggests yet another way of defining a rank for representations. We start with repre-
sentations of the smallest possible non-zero rank:
   • For Sp2n , these are the four components of the oscillator representations, the representations that
appear in the dual pairs (Sp2n , O1 ), for the two possible 1-dimensional orthogonal groups.
   • For GLn , these are representations that appear in the dual pair (GLn , GL1 ), or these twisted by
a character (which are the rank 0 representations of GLn ).
   • For the split orthogonal groups On,n , one starts with the representations of rank 2, that appear
in the oscillator representation for the dual pair (On,n , Sp2 ).
   And then, from the starting point of low rank representations, we take tensor products, and introduce
the following notion:

   Definition 6.4.1 (Tensor rank). We say that
   a) A representation σ in Sp
                            c 2n has tensor rank less than or equal to k if it appears as a component
of an `-fold tensor product of components of the oscillator representation, for ` ≤ k.
   b) A representation ν in d
                            GLn has tensor rank less than or equal to k if it appears as a component
of an `-fold tensor product of components of the representations of GLn appearing in the oscillator
representation for the dual pair (GLn , GL1 ) for some ` ≤ k, or the tensor product of one of these times
a character.
   c) A representation τ in O
                            bn,n has tensor rank less than or equal to 2k if it appears as a component
of an `-fold tensor product of components of the representations of On,n appearing in the dual pair
(On,n , Sp2 ), for some ` ≤ k.

   The tensor rank of a representation will be denoted sometime by ⊗-rank or rank⊗ .

   Remark 6.4.2. Note that our definition of tensor rank is given in a uniform manner in the cases of
GLn and Sp2n (observe that Sp2n has no non-trivial characters). The case of On,n is treated differently,
as the relation between tensor rank and the operation of tensoring with the sign (= determinant)
character, which is extremely interesting, requires further investigation.

   6.5. Comparisons.

   Since the representations used to define tensor rank have U -rank equal to their tensor rank, and
since U -rank is compatible with tensor product by Proposition 6.3.1, it follows that the U -rank of a
representation will be less than or equal to the tensor rank. However, tensor rank, like asymptotic rank,
potentially can, and in fact will, make sense for values greater than the maximum value of U -rank.
   Theorem 5.3.1 tells us exactly what are the representations of tensor rank k, for k ≤ n if Gn = Sp2n
or Gn = On,n , and for k ≤ n2 for Gn = GLn . These representations are parametrized by the unitary


                                                      45
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


duals of the other member of the dual pair. It is clear that these representations will appear in the
restrictions from larger groups of the same type. Therefore, their asymptotic rank is also at most k.
We conclude that asymptotic rank is less than or equal to tensor rank.
   Also, we can give explicit upper bounds on the tensor rank of any representation. For example, all
representations of GLn clearly appear in the dual pair (GLn , GLn ). This implies that the tensor rank
of any representation of GLn is at most n. We can get analogous bounds for Sp2n and On,n . Combining
this with the previous paragraph, we can conclude that asymptotic rank is bounded on G b n for any of
the Gn we have been considering.
   Summarizing, we have two proposals for extending the idea of rank to representations that are not
of small U -rank. One is asymptotic rank, and the other is tensor rank. We have the inequalities

                            U −rank ≤ asymptotic rank ≤ tensor rank.                                  (6.5.1)

Since tensor rank is easily seen to be a bounded function on G
                                                             b n for any of the Gn under discussion, it
follows also that asymptotic rank is bounded.
   The U -rank is defined over a much more limited range than asymptotic rank or tensor rank, so there
are clearly representations for which the inequalities in (6.5.1) are strict. An important question is,
whether this happens for reasons other than the obvious ones. In particular, are there any representa-
tions of low U -rank that have strictly larger tensor rank? We do not know any examples of this, and
hope that it does not happen. In fact, the Exhaustion conjecture 5.3.3, if true, tells us that

   Conjecture 6.5.2 (Agreement of ranks). For low U -rank representations the inequalities in
(6.5.1) should be replaced by equalities.

   From the definitions, we can see that all three notions of rank are compatible with tensor product:
if π and ρ are representations of Gn , of ranks less than or equal to k and ` respectively, then π ⊗ ρ will
have rank less than or equal to k + `, for any of the three notions of rank. Thus, if we use any one of
the notions of rank to define a filtration on G
                                              b n , and extend this in the obvious way to the Grothendieck
ring R(Gn ) of representations of Gn , this gives us an algebra filtration on R(Gn ). One can then also
pass to the associated graded ring.

   7. The Oscillator semigroup

   We have seen that the uniqueness of an irreducible representation of the Heisenberg group gives
rise to a representation of the symplectic group. It turns out that this representation can be extended
further, from the symplectic group to a semigroup containing the symplectic group as its set of invertible
elements. This semigroup has an elegant relationship with symplectic geometry, and it sheds light on
the oscillator representation itself, especially on its restriction to dual pairs. This section is devoted to
a discussion of the oscillator semigroup. Many of the results discussed are analogs for finite fields of the
results in the review paper [Howe87], and can be found in the unpublished manuscript [Howe73-2].

   7.1. Quantization of Lagrangians.



                                                     46
Gurevich and Howe                                                                             Rank and Duality


   Let W be a symplectic vector space. Recall that a subspace L of W is called Lagrangian if the
symplectic form restricted to L is identically zero, and L is maximal with respect to this property.
We also say that L is a maximal isotropic subspace. In the concrete realization of a symplectic vector
           q in §3.2, the subspace X consisting of vectors whose last n coordinates vanish, and the
space W = F2n
subspace Y consisting of vectors whose first n coordinates vanish, are both Lagrangian subspaces.
   The symplectic group Sp(W ) will permute the Lagrangian subspaces. It is a corollary of Witt’s
Theorem [Artin57] that Sp(W ) acts transitively on the set of all Lagrangian subspaces. It is also
easy to check that the subgroup of Sp(W ) that leaves the subspace X invariant is the Siegel parabolic
subgroup P of formulas (3.2.3). Thus the set L(W ) of Lagrangian subspaces is in natural bijection with
the coset space Sp(W )/P .

   The quantization vector attached to a Lagrangian. If L ⊂ W is Lagrangian, then AL = L⊕Fq
is a maximal abelian subgroup of the Heisenberg group H(W ) (see (5.1.1a)). We can extend the
character χ of Fq (see Theorem 5.1.2) to a character χ̃L of AL by letting χ̃L be trivial on L. As was
stated in Theorem 5.1.2, the induced representation
                                                        H(W )
                                                   IndAL        χ̃L ,

will be a realization of the unique irreducible representation ρχ of H(W ) with central character χ.
   It follows by Frobenius reciprocity that there is a unique (up to multiple) non-zero vector in ρχ that
is invariant under L. We denote this vector (more precisely a line minus zero) by qL , and call it the
quantization of L. This gives us the quantization mapping

                                                   q : L 7−→ qL ,                                          (7.1.1)

from L(W ) to the projective space of ρχ . From the relation (5.1.6) defining the oscillator representation,
we can conclude that the quantization map is equivariant with respect to the natural action of Sp(W )
on L(W ) and the action of Sp(W ) on the projective space of ρχ induced by the oscillator representation.

   Remark 7.1.2. Below, when we mention qL , we are intending to specify it only up to a non-zero
scalar multiple. In particular, different formulas for qL may differ from each other by a scalar multiples,
which we may not specify explicitly.

   Formula for the quantization vector. We can describe the vector qL explicitly in the realization
of ρχ given in formulas (5.1.5). This realization is constructed using a complementary pair (X, Y ) of
Lagrangian subspaces of W . Using this pair of Lagrangians, we can identify the set L(W ) with the
collection of pairs {(Y 0 , BY 0 )}, where Y 0 ⊂ Y is any subspace, and BY 0 is any symmetric bilinear form
on Y 0 . Indeed, let us denote by pY the natural projection X ⊕ Y → Y . Then we associate with a
Lagrangian L in W the pair

                             YL = pY (L), BYL (~y , y~0 ) =< ~l, y~0 >,

where ~y , y~0 ∈ YL , and l~ is any vector in L such that pY (~l) = ~y , i.e., such that ~y − l~ belongs to X. Note
that YL = (X ∩ L)⊥ ∩ Y , where (X ∩ L)⊥ indicates the usual notion of orthogonal subspace relative to

                                                         47
Gurevich and Howe                                                                              Rank and Duality


a given bilinear form. That is, (X ∩ L)⊥ consists of all vectors in W whose symplectic pairing with any
vector in X ∩ L is zero. In particular, since ~l is well-defined up to a vector in X ∩ L, its choice does not
affect the pairing < ~l, y~0 >, since y~0 is in (X ∩ L)⊥ .
      Finally, in the realization of ρχ via formulas (5.1.5), we can describe the vectors qL as follows:
                                                       1
                                               qL = χ(− BYL )δYL ,                                          (7.1.3)
                                                       2
where δYL is counting measure on the subspace YL ⊂ Y , and BYL is the function on YL taking the value
BYL (~y , ~y ) at ~y . We recall that this definition is only up to a scalar multiple, and a different normalization
of qL might be convenient, according to context.
      Example 7.1.4. We note, in particular, the two examples:
      • For the Lagrangian X we have

                                  qX = the delta function at the origin of Y.

      • For the Lagrangian Y we have

                       qY = the constant function 1 (= the counting measure) on Y.


      7.2. Conjugation action of ω(Sp2n ).

      The basic Stone-von Neumann-Mackey Theorem (Theorem 5.1.2) can be refined slightly, by looking
more closely at the mapping from the group algebra of H(W ) to the space of operators on the space of
the representation ρχ . This space can be regarded as a Hilbert space, denoted HS(ρχ ), with respect to
the Hilbert-Schmidt inner product
                                                            1
                                       BHS (T 0 , T ) =          trace(T 0 T ∗ ),                           (7.2.1)
                                                          dim ρχ

where T ∗ is the Hermitian transpose of the operator T (with respect to the quadratic extension C of
R).

      Remark 7.2.2. The normalization in (7.2.1) makes the identity, and all unitary operators, into
unit vectors. Note that his normalization does not make sense in the case of local fields, and a different
normalization should be used there.

      It is not difficult to verify [Gurevich-Hadani07],[Howe73-2],[Howe87] that

      Theorem 7.2.3 (Weyl transform). The mapping

                                            ρχ : L2 (W ) −→ HS(ρχ ),                                        (7.2.4)
                P
given by f 7→      w∈W f (w)ρχ (w, 0) is a canonical isometry of Hilbert spaces. In particular, the operators
                   ~
ρχ ( ~
    w, 0) for w
              ~ in W , form an orthogonal basis for HS(ρχ ).

      The mapping (7.2.4) is called the Weyl transform.

                                                           48
Gurevich and Howe                                                                     Rank and Duality


   Combining Theorem 7.2.3 with the defining relation (5.1.6) for the oscillator representation ω yields
the following result.

   Corollary 7.2.5. The action on HS(ρχ ) by conjugation by ω(g), for g in Sp(W ), is equivalent to
the action of g on L2 (W ) by means of its permutation action of g on W .

   This in turn has the following appealing consequence. Recall that the commutant AΓ of a given set
Γ of operators is the set of all operators that commute with each element of Γ. For any collection Γ of
operators, the commutant AΓ will be an algebra: closed under the operations of addition, multiplication
by scalars, and operator multiplication. If the set Γ is closed under taking Hermitian conjugates, for
example if it is a group of unitary operators, then AΓ will likewise be invariant under taking Hermitian
conjugates. Such an algebra is called self-adjoint. We sometimes also call the commutant of Γ the
commuting algebra of Γ.

   Remark 7.2.6. In fact, mapping (7.2.4) is an isomorphism of algebras, where L2 (W ) is equipped
with the multiplication given by twisted convolution:
                                           X                       1
                         (f1 ∗ f2 )(w) =         f1 (w1 )f2 (w2 )χ( < w1 , w2 >).
                                         w +w =w
                                                                   2
                                            1   2

   Corollary 7.2.7. For any subgroup G of Sp(W ), the commutant Aω(G) has an orthogonal basis
corresponding via the map ρχ to the G-orbits in W .

   Example 7.2.8. The full group Sp(W ) has two orbits when acting on W : the zero vector,
and the collection of all non-zero vectors. It follows that the commuting algebra Aω(Sp(W )) is two-
dimensional. This in turn implies that ω is composed of two irreducible summands (These summands
are the eigenspaces for the center of Sp(W ), which consists of ±IW , where IW denotes the identity
operator on W ). The algebra Aω(Sp(W )) is the direct sum of the scalar operators on each summand.

   7.3. The signed double and the oscillator semigroup.

   The space HS(ρχ ) can also be thought of as a module for H(W ). Indeed, it can be thought of an
H(W )-module in two ways: multiplication on the left, and multiplication on the right. This double
action is described by the formula:

                                      ρ̃χ (h, h0 )(A) = ρχ (h)Aρχ ((h0 )−1 ),

for elements h and h0 in H(W ). This in fact defines a representation of H(W ) × H(W ), and this
representation is irreducible.
   It is isomorphic to the outer tensor product of ρχ with the contragredient representation ρ∗χ :

                                                 ρ̃χ ≃ ρχ  ρ∗χ .

Indeed, a similar construction could be made for any irreducible representation of any finite group.
What is special about this situation is that we can again regard ρ̃χ as a representation of a single
Heisenberg group, the Heisenberg group of the signed double 2W of W . We define

                                                2W = W ⊕ W,

                                                        49
Gurevich and Howe                                                                                 Rank and Duality


as vector spaces, but instead of taking the direct sum of the symplectic form < , > with itself, we put
the negative of < , > on the second factor. Thus 2W is understood to have the symplectic form

                            < (w
                               ~ 1, w       ~ 10 , w
                                    ~ 2 ), (w      ~ 20 ) >2W = < w    ~ 10 > − < w
                                                                  ~ 1, w               ~ 20 > .
                                                                                  ~ 2, w

for vectors w   ~ j0 in W . It is not difficult to check that the (( ~
            ~j, w                                                           ~ 0 , t0 )) 7→ (w
                                                                    w, t), (w                  ~ 0 , t − t0 ) defines a
                                                                                            ~ ⊕w
surjective group homomorphism from ν : H(W ) × H(W ) → H(2W ). Moreover, we have the following
factorization
                                                                    ν
                              H(W ) × H(W )                                         H(2W )

                                                  ρ̃χ                         ρ̃χ
                                                            GL(HS(ρχ ))

of the action ρ̃χ to the irreducible representation (that by abuse of notation we denote also by) ρ̃χ of
H(2W ), with central character χ, given by

                                             ~ 0 , t)(A) = χ(t)ρχ (w
                                          ~ ⊕w
                                     ρ̃χ (w                        ~ 0 )Aρχ (− ~
                                                                              w).                              (7.3.1)


    When we need to distinguish between the two summands of 2W , we will denote the first one by
W + , and the second one by W − .

    We clearly have an embedding

                                          Sp(W ) × Sp(W ) −→ Sp(2W ),

by letting each copy of Sp(W ) act on the respective summand of 2W .

    The operator associated with a Lagrangian in 2W . Since HS(ρχ ) ≃ L2 (W ) (canonically, see
equation (7.2.4)) is the space for the irreducible representation ρ̃χ of H(2W ), we have the quantization
map (see equation (7.1.1))
                                                        q : L̃ 7−→ qL̃ ,                                       (7.3.2)

from the variety L(2W ) of Lagrangian subspaces of 2W to (the projective space of) HS(ρχ ) ≃ L2 (W ).
Thus, if L̃ is a Lagrangian subspace of 2W , its quantization qL̃ will have an interpretation as an operator
on ρχ , and as a function on W . Sometime, we might denote this operator by q(L̃). Note that formula
(7.3.1) implies that q(L̃) is the unique operator (up to a non-zero scalar multiple) satisfying

                                                  ~ 0 )q(L̃) = q(L̃)ρχ ( ~
                                              ρχ (w                     w),                                    (7.3.3)

for every ( ~ ~ 0 ) ∈ L̃.
           w, w

    A decomposition of the Lagrangian Grassmannian L(2W ). The decomposition 2W = W + ⊕
W − leads to a decomposition of the set L(2W ), according as to how a Lagrangian subspace of 2W sits
with respect to the two summands. Let p+ and p− respectively be the projections of 2W on W + and
on W − . Let L be a Lagrangian subspaces of 2W . Set

                                      L+ = L ∩ W + ;                 L− = L ∩ W − .

                                                              50
Gurevich and Howe                                                                             Rank and Duality


It is evident that L± must be isotropic subspaces of W ± . Then, elementary symplectic linear algebra
considerations [Howe87] shows that

                       dim L+ = dim L− ,         p+ (L) = (L+ )⊥ ,        p− (L) = (L− )⊥ .             (7.3.4)

Here (L+ )⊥ denotes the orthogonal subspace in W + with respect to the original symplectic form, and
(L− )⊥ is the analogous subspace of W − . The relations (7.3.4) also imply that L/(L+ ⊕ L− ) is the
graph of an isomorphism αL between p+ (L)/L+ and p− (L)/L− . These spaces both inherit symplectic
forms from W ± , by restriction and reduction modulo L± . The condition that L be isotropic translates
to the condition that α should be an isometry between p+ (L)/L+ and p− (L)/L− (but with p− (L)/L−
endowed with the original form, not its negative).
   Thus, we get a parametrization of L(2W ) by triples

                                          L(2W ) ≃ {(L+ , L− , α)},

where L+ and L− are isotropic subspaces of W , of the same dimension, and α is an isometry between
(L+ )⊥ /L+ and (L− )⊥ /L− . We can describe the action of Sp(W ) × Sp(W ) on L(2W ) using these
parameters. We have
                              (g, g 0 )(L+ , L− , α) = (g(L+ ), g 0 (L− ), g −1 αg 0 ),

for an element (g, g 0 ) in Sp(W )×Sp(W ). We can conclude from this that the number of Sp(W )×Sp(W )
orbits in L(2W ) is finite, and equal to n + 1, if dim W = 2n. Also, the set of elements for which
L+ = {0} = L− is naturally isomorphic to Sp(W ). Indeed, the graph of any element of Sp(W ) defines
Lagrangian subspace of 2W with this property. For any infinite field, the subset of L(2W ) filled out
by Sp(W ) is Zariski open and dense. In this sense, L(2W ) may be regarded as a “compactification” or
“completion” of Sp(W ).

   The oscillator semigroup. Two notable Lagrangian subspaces of 2W are:

                    ∆(W ) = ( ~
                             w, ~    ~ ∈ W }, and ∆− (W ) = {( ~
                                w) : w                        w, − ~   ~ ∈ W },
                                                                  w) : w

called, respectively, the diagonal and the anti-diagonal. These may be thought of as the graphs of the
identity map of W to itself, and of the negative of the identity map of W . The vectors in L2 (W )
corresponding to these Lagrangians (see (7.3.2)) are:
   • q∆(W ) = δ0 , the delta function at the origin of W ; and
   • q∆− (W ) = the constant function 1 (= the counting measure) on W.
   On the other hand, the operators in HS(ρχ ) corresponding to these two Lagrangians in 2W are:

                          q(∆(W )) = the identity operator in HS(ρχ ) = ω(e),

where e here denotes the identity element of Sp(W ), and

                                             q(∆− (W )) = ω(−e),

where −e here denotes the negative identity element in Sp(W ).

                                                         51
Gurevich and Howe                                                                             Rank and Duality


   The Lagrangians ∆(W ) and ∆− (W ) are, respectively, the parallels for 2W to the two Lagrangian
subspaces X and Y of W , that were used to construct the realization (5.1.5) of ρχ .
   In view of the action of Sp(W ) on L(2W ) through the embedding of Sp(W ) in Sp(2W ) (via its
action on W − ) and the equivariance of the quantization mapping (7.3.2), we conclude that

                                               q(g(∆(W )) = ω(g),

for any g in Sp(W ). Thus, the group ω(Sp(W )) = {ω(g); g ∈ Sp(W )} of operators is contained in

                                S(2W ) = q(L(2W )) = {q(L̃); L̃ ∈ L(2W )},                              (7.3.5)

and left and right multiplication by ω(Sp(W )) preserves q(L(2W )). In fact, the whole set S(2W ) is
closed under multiplication.

   Theorem 7.3.6 (The oscillator semigroup). The set S(2W ) of operators is a semigroup.

   We will call S(2W ) the oscillator semigroup for ρχ .

   A proof of Theorem 7.3.6 first appeared in [Howe73-2]. We will give here an argument which is closely
related to the works [Guillemin-Sternberg79],[Weinstein80] on the symplectic “category”, and especially
the work [Nazarov95] on the oscillator semigroup over a p-adic field. We will explicitly describe the
semigroup law. Define the composition M̃ ◦ L̃ ⊂ 2W of two Lagrangians M̃ , L̃ ∈ L(2W ) by

                             M̃ ◦ L̃ = {( ~ ~ 0) | ∃ ( ~
                                         w, w            ~ 00 ) ∈ L̃, (w
                                                      w, w             ~ 00 , w
                                                                              ~ 0 ) ∈ M̃ }.

   Proposition 7.3.7. For every M̃ , L̃ ∈ L(2W ) we have
   i) M̃ ◦ L̃ ∈ L(2W ).
   ii) q(M̃ )q(L̃) = α(M̃ , L̃) · q(M̃ ◦ L̃), for α(M̃, L̃) ∈ C∗ .

   The meaning of 7.3.7 i) is that (L(2W ), ◦, ∆(W )) is a semigroup (with ∆(W ) being the identity
element), while 7.3.7 ii) is telling us that indeed S(2W ) is a semigroup and the quantization mapping

                                           q : L(2W ) −→ P(HS(ρχ )),

is a (projective) semigroup representation. It follows that S(2W ) is in a natural way a central extension

                                   1 −→ C∗ −→ S(2W ) −→ L(2W ) −→ 1.


   Proof of Proposition 7.3.7. The proof of i) is straightforward [Guillemin-Sternberg79]. For ii) one
can use the characterization (7.3.3) as was done in [Nazarov95]. Take ( ~ ~ 0 ) ∈ M̃ ◦ L̃ and an element
                                                                       w, w
~ 00 ∈ W such that ( ~
w                      ~ 00 ) ∈ L̃ and (w
                    w, w                ~ 00 , w
                                               ~ 0 ) ∈ M̃ . Now compute,

                          q(M̃ )q(L̃)ρχ ( ~             ~ 00 )q(L̃) = ρχ (w
                                         w) = q(M̃ )ρχ (w                 ~ 0 )q(M̃ )q(L̃),

where the first and second equalities are by (7.3.3). We conclude that ii) holds true.                       


                                                          52
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


   Remark 7.3.8. Every element of L(2W ) that is not in Sp(W ) is in the Sp(W )-orbit of some triple of
the form (Z, Z, IZ ⊥ /Z ), where Z ⊂ W is non-trivial isotropic subspace (see discussion on decomposition
of Lagrangian Grassmanian above). Up to multiples, q((Z, Z, IZ ⊥ /Z )) is counting measure on Z. As an
operator, it is (a multiple of) projection to the space of ρZ                                           ⊥
                                                            χ of Z-invariant vectors in ρχ . Note that Z /Z
inherits a symplectic structure from W , and the space ρZ
                                                        χ forms the standard irreducible representation
for H(Z ⊥ /Z). The Sp(W ) equivariance of the quantization map then tells us that q(Z, Z 0 , α) is a partial
                        0                                                                   0
isometry from ρZ     Z
               χ to ρχ , implemented by means of some element β in Sp(W ) such that β(Z) = Z , and
such that the map from Z ⊥ /Z to Z 0⊥ /Z 0 induced by β is α.

   8. The oscillator semigroup, dual pairs, and old vs. new spectrum

   One of the most interesting phenomena associated to the oscillator representation ω of a symplectic
group Sp(W ) is the insight it gives into representations of other classical groups via the study of dual
pairs of subgroups. The main observation is that, if (G, G0 ) is a dual pair in Sp(W ), then ω(G) and
ω(G0 ) approximately generate mutual commutants inside the algebra HS(ρχ ) of operators on the space
of the underlying representation ρχ of the Heisenberg group H(W ). Unfortunately, except in a few cases,
it is not strictly true that ω(G) and ω(G0 ) generate the full commutant of the other. The challenge
then is, to make precise sense in which they “approximately” do so. The notion of U -rank provides
an approach to this issue. As indicated in Theorem 5.3.1, in a large number of cases, if one restricts
attention to the representations of G of maximal possible U -rank, then ω(G0 ) generates the commutant
of ω(G) on this subspace.

   8.1. The oscillator semigroup and dual pairs.

   Another approach to the issue is to enlarge the collection of operators under consideration, by
looking at the oscillator semigroup. It turns out [Howe73-2] that this always gives us a description of
the commutant of the image under the oscillator representation of either member of a dual pair.
   Let S(2W ) = q(L(2W )) be the oscillator semigroup in HS(ρχ ), for the standard representation ρχ
of the Heisenberg group H(W ), for the symplectic vector space W (see equation (7.3.5)). The symplectic
group Sp(W ), or more correctly, its image ω(Sp(W )) in the operators on ρχ , is a subgroup of S(2W ),
and so can act on it by multiplication on the left, by multiplication on the right, and by conjugation.
   Let (G, G0 ) be a dual pair of subgroups of Sp(W ). Consider the set S(2W )G of elements of S(2W )
that are invariant under conjugation by G, or equivalently, that commute with G, as operators on the
space ρχ ,
                 S(2W )G = {q(L̃) ∈ S(2W ); ω(g)q(L̃) = q(L̃)ω(g), for every g ∈ G}.

Evidently, since G0 is by definition the set of elements in Sp(W ) that commute with G, we have
ω(G0 ) ⊂ S(2W )G . Also, it is easy to see that S(2W )G is a subsemigroup of S(2W ). In particular,
it is a semigroup. It bears a similar relationship to G0 , as a “compactification” or “completion”, that
L(2W ) bears to Sp(W ). For our current purposes, our main interest in S(2W )G is the following result.

   Theorem 8.1.1. Given a dual pair (G, G0 ) in Sp(W ), the semigroup S(2W )G spans the commuting


                                                    53
Gurevich and Howe                                                                                               Rank and Duality


algebra of ω(G) in HS(ρχ ).

    Proof. The proof of this result, like that of many others in the theory of the classical groups, devolves
into considering a collection of cases. We will discuss here the most interesting case, that of the pair
(G, G0 ) = (Sp(V ), O(V 0 )), corresponding to a symplectic vector space V , a space V 0 endowed with an
inner product, both contained in Sp(W ), with W = V ⊗ V 0 .
    By duality, we can also describe V ⊗ V 0 as Hom(V 0 , V ), or as Hom(V, V 0 ) (with the “Hom”s here
signifying Fq linear maps). We let < , > denote the symplectic form on V , and let ( , ) denote the
inner product on V 0 . We can realize the isomorphism Hom(V 0 , V ) ≃ Hom(V, V 0 ) by the mapping


                                                           T 0 ←→ T,

where T and T 0 are related by the condition

                                              < T 0 (~v 0 ), ~v >= (~v 0 , T (~v )),                                      (8.1.2)

for T 0 in Hom(V 0 , V ), ~v in V and ~v 0 in V 0 .
    The relation (8.1.2) implies that T 0 T is an operator on V such that the bilinear form

                                            BT 0 T (~u, ~v ) =< T 0 T (~u), ~v >,

is symmetric (equal to (T (~u), T (~v )). Similarly, the operator T T 0 induces on V 0 the bilinear form

                                             ΛT T 0 (~u0 , ~v 0 ) = (T T 0 (~u0 ), ~v 0 ),

which is skew-symmetric (equal to < T 0 (~u0 ), T 0 (~v 0 ) >).
    Remark 8.1.3. The collection of all operators β on V such that < β(~u), ~v > defines a symmetric
bilinear form is naturally identified to sp(V ), the symplectic Lie algebra associated to < , > [Jacob-
son62]. Likewise, the collection of all operators β 0 on V 0 such that the bilinear form (β(~u0 ), ~v 0 ) is skew
symmetric may be identified to the Lie algebra so(V ), of the orthogonal group of the inner product ( , )
[Jacobson62]. Thus, we have mappings

                                                    T 0 ∈ Hom(V 0 , V )


                          T 0 T ∈ sp(V )                                                     T T 0 ∈ so(V 0 )

These maps are known in the symplectic geometry literature as moment mappings.
    We need to show that the commutant algebra Aω(G) of G = Sp(V ) in HS(ρχ ) is equal to the
subalgebra spanned by S(2W )G .
    Using the Weyl transform (7.2.4) we can view those algebras inside L2 (W ). We know from Corollary
7.2.7 that the commutant Aω(Sp(V )) of Sp(V ) is spanned by the characteristic functions of the Sp(V )
orbits in W ≃ Hom(V 0 , V ). We will show that these are in fact in the span of S(2W )G .
    Indeed, Witt’s Theorem implies that the Sp(V ) orbit of T 0 in Hom(V 0 , V ) is determined by the
following data:

                                                                 54
Gurevich and Howe                                                                            Rank and Duality


   i) The skew-symmetric bilinear form ΛT T 0 on V 0 ;
   ii) The kernel of T 0 .

   On the other hand, equation (7.1.3) tells us that the elements of S(2W ) are given by “exponential
quadratic characters” on subspaces Z of W , that is, by functions of the form χ(B(~z, z~)), where B is a
symmetric bilinear form on Z. The elements of S(2W )G arise when the subspace Z is invariant under
Sp(V ), and the bilinear form B is invariant under Sp(V ) acting on Z. A subspace Z of W = V ⊗V 0 that
is invariant under Sp(V ) has the form V ⊗ Z 0 , where Z 0 is a subspace of V 0 . A symmetric bilinear form
on Z that is invariant under Sp(V ) has the form < , > ⊗Λ0 , where Λ0 is a skew-symmetric bilinear form
on Z 0 . The values of an element S(2W )G on an Sp(V ) orbit O in W is of course equal to zero unless O
is contained in Z. If O is contained in Z, then the value of the element of S(2W )G corresponding to the
skew form Λ0 on Z 0 is the value of the pairing of Λ0 with the restriction to Z 0 of the form ΛT T 0 defining
the orbit. Thus the pairing of elements of S(2W )G with orbits essentially amounts to Fourier analysis
on the skew-symmetric forms on Z 0 . Since Λ0 is allowed to vary over all possible skew-symmetric forms,
it follows that sums of these elements can produce the point mass at the restriction to Z 0 of ΛT T 0 . Since
we can repeat this analysis for each possible invariant subspace that could possibly contain a given orbit,
we can also separate, i.e., span the characteristic function of, orbits that correspond to the same form
ΛT T 0 , but have different kernels. It follows that S(2W )G will separate Sp(V ) orbits in W , as claimed.
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                      0
   Remark 8.1.4. Notice that, although S(2W )G spans the commutant of ω(G), and S(2W )G spans
                                                                                         0
the commutant of ω(G0 ), it will typically be the case that S(2W )G and S(2W )G do not commute
with each other. The linear spans of ω(G) and ω(G0 ) are (usually) slightly too small to be mutual
                                                                  0
commutants, and the linear spans of S(2W )G and S(2W )G are (usually) slightly too large to be
mutual commutants; that is, they usually will not commute with each other.

   8.2. Old and new spectrum.

   Theorem 8.1.1 reveals that ω(G0 ) usually will not generate the full commutant of ω(G), and thus
the restriction of ω to G × G0 will not produce a well-defined matching between representations of G
and representations of G0 . Nevertheless, it does allow one to establish a partial result of that nature.
Again, we take a pair (Sp2n , Ok ) as an illustration of what happens. As above, we let V and V 0 be the
spaces on which the two groups operate, so that W = Hom(V 0 , V ) is the symplectic space such that
Sp2n × Ok ⊂ Sp(W ).
   As discussed in §1, the inner product ( , ) on V 0 of which Ok is the isometry group is the orthog-
onal sum of an anisotropic inner product and a certain number ` of hyperbolic planes. This in turn
implies that the restriction of ω to Sp2n is the tensor product of the representation ωa coming from
the anisotropic form, together with ` copies of the representation ω1,1 of Sp2n attached to the dual
pair (Sp2n , O1,1 ). One way to interpret the discussion of §7.2 is, that ω1,1 is exactly the permutation
representation of Sp2n acting on V , its defining symplectic vector space. Since this representation con-
tains the trivial representation (in fact, with multiplicity 2), we can conclude that, if we tensor any
representation τ of Sp2n with ω1,1 , the resulting representation τ ⊗ ω1,1 will contain a copy of τ . Thus,

                                                     55
Gurevich and Howe                                                                       Rank and Duality


              c 2n that appears with non-zero multiplicity in ωa ⊗ ω ⊗` is strictly increasing with `.
the subset of Sp                                                     1,1
   Denote by c Sp2n (a, `) the subset of c
                                         Sp2n consisting of representations that appear with non-zero
                      ⊗  `
multiplicity in ωa ⊗ ω1,1 . Then according to the previous paragraph, we have

                                         Sp2n (a, ` − 1) ⊂ c
                                         c                 Sp2n (a, `).

                    c 2n (a, ` − 1) of previously appearing representations the “old spectrum”, and the
We can call the set Sp
difference set
                                                       Sp2n (a, ` − 1),
                                         Sp2n (a, `) r c
                                         c

the “new spectrum”. In addition, let us denote by
                                                new
                                             ⊗`               ⊗`
                                       ωa ⊗ ω1,1      ⊂ ωa ⊗ ω1,1 ,
                                                     G

the subspace that is the sum of the isotypic components for representations of G in the “new spectrum”.
With this terminology, we can state the following result.
                                                      
                                                    ⊗`
    Proposition 8.2.1. The operators ωa ⊗ ω1,1           (G0 ) generate the commutant of G acting on
            new                                                      new
        ⊗`                                                           ⊗`
  ωa ⊗ ω1,1       . In particular, the action of G × G0 on ωa ⊗ ω1,1         defines a bijection of some
            G                                                             G
          c0 to Sp
subset of G                   c 2n (a, ` − 1).
                c 2n (a, `) r Sp

                                                                  ⊗       `
   Proof. For purposes of this argument, we will abbreviate ωa ⊗ ω1,1 = ω. We know from Theorem
8.1.1 that the commutant of ω(G) in the operators on the space of ω is spanned by S(2W )G . Besides
ω(G0 ), the other elements of S(2W )G are gotten (see Remark 7.3.18) by multiplying with projections
to the fixed vectors for isotropic subspaces of W . If such a subspace is invariant for Sp(V ), it must
have the form Z = V ⊗ Z 0 , where Z 0 is an isotropic subspace of V 0 . The space ρZ
                                                                                   χ of fixed vectors
for Z will be the standard irreducible representation for the Heisenberg group H(Z ⊥ /Z), and the pair
of groups (Sp2n , O(Z 0⊥ /Z 0 ) will be a dual pair inside Sp(Z ⊥ /Z). The group O(Z 0⊥ /Z 0 ) is a smaller
group in the same Witt tower as G0 = O(V 0 ). The representation of Sp(V ) on the space ρZ
                                                                                         χ will be
the representation attached to the dual pair (Sp2n , O(Z 0⊥ /Z 0 )), and therefore, the set of irreducible
                                                   c 2n (a, ` − 1), that is, they will be old spectrum. It
representations of Sp(V ) appearing will belong to Sp
follows that the operators of S(2W )G r ω(G0 ) will act by zero on the new spectrum. Therefore, on the
new spectrum, the commutant must come from ω(G0 ), as desired.                                           

   Remarks 8.2.2. We note that
   a) A result similar to Proposition 8.2.1 holds, with the appropriate modifications, for any of the
previously described classical dual pairs (G, G0 ) , when G0 varies in a Witt tower. For example in the
(GLn , GLk ) case.

   b) Proposition 8.2.1 gives another sense in which ω(G0 ) is “approximately” the commutant of ω(G),
and it does establish a matching between certain representations of the two groups. However, it does
not provide any description of what representations of G or of G0 are involved, except the very indirect
condition of “new spectrum”. However, it is a natural extension of the η-correspondence (see Theorem
5.3.1). Indeed, when it applies, the notion of U -rank provides a clear criterion for a representation

                                                      56
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


of the group G to belong to the new spectrum. More precisely, it gives a sufficient criterion for a
representation to belong to the new spectrum, and then Theorem 5.3.1 shows that this must account
for the entire new spectrum, since the full group algebra of G0 is required to generate the commutant for
these representations. It is also worth remarking that the version of Theorem 5.3.1 given in [Gurevich-
Howe15] establishes a close relationship between corresponding representations, including a relationship
between their dimensions.

    c) On the other hand, Theorem 5.3.1 gives no insight into the nature of what we have labeled here
the “old spectrum”. In particular, it does not establish that it consists of representations that have
appeared in correspondences for dual pairs (G, G00 ), where G00 is a smaller member of the same Witt
tower as G0 .

    d) The content of Sections §7 and §8 is based on the paper [Howe73-2], which was circulated as a
preprint in the 1970s, but never published.

    9. A description of the new spectrum for the dual pair (GLn , GLk )

    In this section we describe the new spectrum (that was defined in §8.2) for the dual pairs (GLn , GLk ).
This description holds for all k, in particular, for k > n2 , so it provides an extension of Theorem 5.3.1
c), and yields a complete description of the irreps of arbitrary tensor rank (which can go up to n for
GLn ) using the eta correspondence. We will sketch the main ideas. Complete details will appear in
[Gurevich-Howe17].

    9.1. Intrinsic characterization for the new spectrum and tensor rank for GLn .

    We begin with an alternative characterization of the new spectrum and tensor rank that is available
for GLn .
    First we note that,

    Remark 9.1.1. a representation ρ of GLn has tensor rank k if and only if, up to tensoring by a
character, it appears in the k-fold tensor product of the natural permutation representation of GLn on
Fnq , and does not appear in the l-fold tensor product of that representation for l < k. This k-fold tensor
product is just the natural permutation representation on k copies of Fnq . This action can be identified
with the permutation representation of GLn on space of n × k matrices Mnk , by multiplication on the
left.

    Next, let ~ej be the j-th standard basis vector of Fnq , whose j-th coordinate is 1, and all other
coordinates are equal to 0. Let Hk be the subgroup of GLn defined by

                             Hk = {g ∈ GLn ; gej = ej for every 1 ≤ j ≤ k}.                          (9.1.2)

Then Hk is conjugate to the subgroup that leaves any k-dimensional subspace of Fnq point-wise fixed.
Evidently Hk ⊂ Hk−1 . Now, we can write down the intrinsic criterion.

    Proposition 9.1.3 (Intrinsic characterization for new spectrum tensor rank for GLn ).


                                                    57
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


Assume 0 ≤ k ≤ n. A representation ρ of GLn is in the new k-spectrum (respectively, has tensor rank
k) if and only if it admits an invariant vector (respectively, eigenvector) for Hk but not for Hl for l < k.

    Proof. It is enough to prove the assertion on new k-spectrum (see Remark 9.1.1).
    By definition, a representation ρ of GLn is in the new k-spectrum if and only if it appears in the
k-fold tensor product (and not before) of the natural permutation representation of GLn on its standard
vector space Fnq . As remarked earlier, this action can be identified with the permutation representation
of GLn on space of n × k matrices Mnk , by multiplication on the left. Of course, GLk will act also on
Mnk , by multiplication on the right. The two actions commute with each other. A GLn × GLk orbit is
defined by the rank of its elements. The rank can vary from 0 to min(k, n), which we assume is k.
    For 1 ≤ ` ≤ k, the group H` is the stabilizer in GLn of the matrix J` , whose first ` diagonal entries
are 1, and all other entries are 0. The matrix J` evidently has rank `.
    It is a standard fact that the representation of a group on the functions on a coset space G/H is
identifiable with the induced representation IndG
                                                H 1, from the trivial representation of the stabilizing
subgroup H. Because of the containments H`−1 ⊃ H` , it follows that the representation of GLn on the
functions on Mnk is contained in a certain number of copies of the induced representation IndGL n
                                                                                             Hk 1.
   Frobenius reciprocity now tells us that a representation ρ in d
                                                                 GLn will appear in the functions on
Mnk if and only if it contains a fixed vector for Hk . This completes the proof of the proposition        

    9.2. The new spectrum.

    The following description of isotypic components will be useful. Let Pk,n−k denote the block upper
triangular parabolic subgroup, whose block diagonal Levi component is GLk × GLn−k . Then Hk is a
normal subgroup of Pk,n−k , and further we have Pk,n−k ≃ GLk · Hk . For a representation ν of GLk , let
ν̃ be the representation of Pk,n−k pulled back from ν via the quotient mapping Pk,n−k → GLk . Clearly
ν̃ will be trivial on Hk .

    Proposition 9.2.1 (Formula for an isotypic component in the new spectrum). Consider
the joint action of GLn ×GLk on GLn /Hk , with GLn acting by translations on the left, and GLk (which
normalizes Hk ) acting by translations on the right. Fix an irreducible representation ν of GLk . Then
the ν isotypic component of L2 (GLn /Hk ) is the representation
                                                         
                                            IndGL  n
                                                Pk,n−k ν̃   ⊗ ν.


    Proof. The group GLk normalizes Hk , and the product GLk · Hk is the parabolic subgroup Pk,n−k .
The result follows from the standard formula for IndGL n
                                                    Pk,n−k ν̃.                                            

    Propositions 9.1.2 and 9.2.1 together imply,

    Corollary 9.2.2. Let η(ν) be the irreducible representation of GLn in the new spectrum for the
dual pair (GLn , GLk ) corresponding to an irreducible representation ν of GLk . Then,

                                            η(ν) < IndGL n
                                                      Pk,n−k ν̃.




                                                    58
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


   Proof. According to Proposition 9.1.3, the new spectrum consists of representations of GLn that,
up to twisting by a character, appear in L2 (GLn /Hk ), but do not have any fixed vectors for Hk−1 .
Since, by definition, η(ν) must lie in the ν-isotypic component of the oscillator representation for the
pair (GLk , GLn ) and must also lie in the new spectrum for GLn , the result follows from Proposition
9.2.1.                                                                                                    

   Finally, the intrinsic criterion of Proposition 9.1.3 can assist in the characterization of the new
spectrum (as described in §8.2) for the dual pair (GLn , GLk ) with for all k.
   Here is the formulation.

   Theorem 9.2.3 (The domain of the eta correspondence for (GLn , GLk )). Assume 0 ≤ k ≤ n.
Then, a representation ν of GLk contributes, via the (GLn , GLk ) duality, to the new k-spectrum for
GLn if and only if ν appears in the new l-spectrum of GLk for some l ≥ 2k − n.

   Proof of the necessity statement. If ν appears in the new l-spectrum for l < 2k − n then ν has a fixed
            0
vector for H2k−n−1 , the stabilizer of the first 2k − n − 1 basis vectors in Fkq . This in turn implies that
ν is contained in an induced representation IndGL
                                               P0
                                                  k
                                                             (ν̃ ⊗ 1n−k+1 ) from the maximal parabolic
                                                2k−n−1,n−k+1
            0                            0
subgroup P2k−n−1,n−k+1 ≃ GL2k−n−1 · H2k−n−1 of GLk , and from a representation that is trivial on
  0
H2k−n−1 , tensored with an appropriate representation ν̃ of GL2k−n−1 . Combining this with Corollary
9.2.2, we conclude that any candidate for η(ν) will be contained in an induced representation

                                   IndGL
                                      P̃
                                         n
                                           (ν̃ ⊗ 1n−k+1 ⊗ 1n−k ) = IndGL
                                                                      P̃
                                                                         n
                                                                           τ1 ,
                                        1                                1


where P̃1 = P2k−n−1,n−k+1,n−k is the upper triangular parabolic subgroup with Levi component L̃1 =
GL2k−n−1 × GLn−k+1 × GLn−k , and ν̃, 1n−k+1 , and 1n−k , are the factors of the inducing representation
τ1 on the three factors of L̃1 .
   Consider the upper triangular parabolic P̃2 = P2k−n−1,n−k,n−k+1 , with Levi component L̃2 =
GL2k−n−1 × GLn−k × GLn−k+1 , and the representation

                                            τ2 = ν̃ ⊗ 1n−k ⊗ 1n−k+1 ,

of L̃2 . It is clear that P̃1 and P̃2 are associate (namely, their Levi components are conjugated), and that
the element that conjugates L̃1 to L̃2 by interchanging the last two factors will also conjugate τ1 to τ2 .
   The philosophy of cusp forms (see Section 10.1) tells us that IndGL n         GLn
                                                                    P1 τ1 and IndP2 τ2 are equivalent.
But since P2 contains Hk−1 , we see that IndGLn
                                            P2 τ2 will consist of representations that belong to the new
l-spectrum for l at most k − 1. Thus, so also does IndGLn
                                                      P1 τ1 , which amounts to the statement of the
necessity part of the theorem.                                                                            

   The main idea involved in our proof of the sufficiency part of Theorem 9.2.3 will be given in §10.

   Remark 9.2.4. In a recent preprint [Guralnick-Larsen-Tiep17] Guralnick, Larson and Tiep study
representations from a point of view related to the notion of tensor rank of §6. They announced that,
using different techniques, i.e., a substantial amount of character theory, they are also able to prove
Theorem 9.2.4.


                                                       59
Gurevich and Howe                                                                         Rank and Duality


   10. New Spectrum and Tensor Rank for GLn via the Philosophy of Cusp Forms

   In Theorem 9.2.3, we have seen an easy argument showing that only irreps from the set (GL
                                                                                          dk )new,≥2k−n ,
of irreps of GLk belonging to the new l-spectrum for l at least 2k − n, can give rise to irreps of GLn
from the new k-spectrum, i.e., from the set (d
                                             GLn )new,k .
   It is harder to show that each member of (GL
                                             dk )new,≥2k−n do give rise to uniquely defined represen-
tations of GLn of rank k. Our argument for this passes through a fairly precise description of the tensor
rank of representations, and of the η correspondence, which invokes the “philosophy of cusp forms”
[Harish-Chandra70], [Howe-Moy86], and is somewhat long. Here we will give a sketch of the main ideas.
More details will appear in [Gurevich-Howe17].
   In this approach, the basic case to understand is the spherical principal series, i.e., the representations
of GLn that appear in L2 (GLn /B), where B is a Borel subgroup; or in other words, in the action of
GLn on the variety of complete flags (nested sequences of subspaces) inside Fnq . In turn, the spherical
principal series can be understood in terms of the representation theory of the symmetric group Sn
[Green55], [Howe-Moy86], [Zelevinsky81].
   Let us start with the basics of the philosophy of cusp forms.

   10.1. The philosophy of cusp forms.

   Recall that, a representation π of GLn is called cuspidal if it does not contain a fixed vector for the
unipotent radical of any parabolic subgroup. Given this definition, it is easy to show that any irreducible
representation is contained in a representation induced from a representation ρ of a parabolic subgroup
P that
   i) is trivial on the unipotent radical UP of P , and
   ii) is a cuspidal representation of the quotient P/UP .
Note that P/UP is reductive, and in fact, for the case of GLn , is a product of GLm s for m < n, so
that the philosophy of cusp forms provides an inductive construction (in two senses) of all irreducible
representations.
   The main ingredients needed to carry out this construction explicitly are
   a) knowledge of the cuspidal representations of GLm , and
   b) decomposing the representations induced from cuspidal representations.
With regard to a), the cuspidal representations of GLm are well known. They were already accounted
for by Green [Green55], and further insight came from the work of S. I. Gelfand [Gelfand70]. We will
not need to deal explicitly with this part of the theory here. With regard to b), there is a very general
result that relates different induced-from-cuspidal representations. Recall that two parabolic subgroups
P1 and P2 are called associate if their Levi components are conjugate. Given parabolic subgroups P1
and P2 , with cuspidal representations ρ1 and ρ2 respectively, then the representations of GLn induced
from the ρa , for a = 1, 2 are either equivalent, which happens when the Pa are associate, and for
some element g in GLn , we have LP2 = g(LP1 )g −1 , and moreover ρ2 ≃ gρ1 g −1 ; or they are completely
disjoint - they have no irreducible components in common (more precisely, the double cosets P1 gP2 that

                                                     60
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


support intertwining operators between the two induced representations are exactly the ones for which
g can be chosen to conjugate LP1 to LP2 , and to be an equivalence of the representations ρ1 and ρ2
[Howe-Moy86]). Thus, associativity classes of cuspidal representations of parabolic subgroups define a
partition of the unitary dual of GLn into disjoint subsets.
   As noted already, for GLn , any Levi component is a product of GLm s, with m ≤ n. The collection
DP = {mj } of the sizes of the GL factors of a Levi component define a partition of n. Up to conjugation,
we can assume that P consists of block upper triangular matrices. Given this, we let mj be the size of
the j-th block from the upper left corner of the matrices. Then the mj form a partition of n. We will
refer to this as the P partition. Also, we will say that a cuspidal representation of GLm has cuspidal
size m. Thus, the cuspidal sizes of a cuspidal representation of a parabolic subgroup P also define
a partition, the same as the P partition. Up to associativity of parabolic subgroups in GLn , we can
arrange that the block sizes mj of P , equivalently, cuspidal sizes of ρ, decrease as j increases. We then
also associate to the partition, and to P , a Young diagram DP [Fulton97], whose j-th row has length
mj .
   If the block sizes are all equal to 1, then the parabolic is (conjugate to) the Borel subgroup B of
upper triangular matrices. We will refer to constituents of representations induced from characters of
B as the split principal series. Constituents of the representation induced from the trivial character of
B will be referred to as spherical principal series. Any representation induced from a (one dimensional)
character of a parabolic subgroup will have constituents all belonging to the split principal series.
   On the other hand, if the block sizes are all greater than 1, then no constituent will contain a
character of any parabolic subgroup. We will refer to the components of representations induced from
cuspidal representations of parabolics with block sizes of 2 or larger (i.e., no blocks of size 1) as unsplit
representations.
   The general representation is gotten by combining unsplit representations and split principal series.
More precisely, given the parabolic PD as described above, let Pr,s ⊃ PD be the maximal parabolic
subgroup, with Levi component GLr × GLs , where GLr contains all the blocks of PD of size greater
than 1, and GLs contains all the blocks of PD of size 1. Then a constituent of a representation of GLr
induced by a cuspidal representation of GLr ∩PD will be an unsplit representation of GLr . On the other
hand, a constituent of the representation of GLs induced from a cuspidal representation of GLs ∩ PD
(which is the upper triangular Borel subgroup of GLs ) will be a split principal series of GLs . We call
these constituents σr and τs respectively. Since both GLr and GLs are quotients of Pr,s , we can regard
both σr and τs as representations of Pr,s . Because GLr × GLs is also a quotient of Pr,s , the tensor
product σr ⊗ τs will also define a representation of Pr,s , and this representation will be irreducible. Now
if we look at the induced representation

                                     π = π(σr , τs ) = IndGL
                                                          Pr,s (σr ⊗ τs ),
                                                             n




the philosophy of cusp forms tells us that π is irreducible, and further says that all irreducible repre-
sentations of GLn arise in this way, (including the cuspidal representations, which correspond to the
situation when PD = GLn ).


                                                      61
Gurevich and Howe                                                                            Rank and Duality


   There is a second partition, that permits a more refined understanding of the split principal series,
essentially reducing it to understanding the spherical principal series. A character χ of the standard
upper triangular Borel subgroup B is given by a collection ψj , 1 ≤ j ≤ n, of characters of GL1 ≃ F×
                                                                                                   q ,
where ψj is the restriction of the character χ to the j-th diagonal entry of an element of B. Up to
associativity, these characters can be reordered as desired. Thus, we may arrange that all diagonal
entries j for which the ψj are equal to a given character of GL1 are consecutive. Given this, we can
consider a block upper triangular parabolic subgroup Pχ such that, in each diagonal block, the characters
ψj are equal, and the ψj contained in different diagonal blocks are different. We may also assume when
convenient that the sizes of these blocks decrease from top to bottom. This associates a well-defined
Young diagram Dχ , and a parabolic subgroup Pχ , to a given character χ of B.
   Let the i-th block from the top of Pχ be GLmi . Let τ be a constituent of the representation of Pχ
induced from the character χ of B. Then, the philosophy of cusp forms tells us that:
Scholium 10.1.1. we have,
   a) the representation IndGL n
                            Pχ τ , induced from Pχ to GLn , will be irreducible;

   b) τ ≃ ⊗i τi , where τi is a constituent of the representation of GLmi induced from the restriction of
χ to B ∩ GLmi ; and
   c) this process gives a bijection to the set of constituents of IndGLn
                                                                      B χ from the set of constituents
      P                                                                        GLm
of IndBχ χ, and this set is the product of the sets of constituents of the IndB∩GL
                                                                                 i
                                                                                   m
                                                                                     χ.
                                                                                         i
                                                                      GLmi
   Moreover, because of the way P was defined, each representation IndB∩GL mi
                                                                              χ has the form

                                                         GLm
                                       (χi ◦ det) ⊗ (IndB∩GL
                                                           i
                                                             m
                                                               1),
                                                               i


where χi here indicates the common character of GL1 assigned to the diagonal entries of B ∩ GLmi , and
as usual, det is the determinant homomorphism from GLmi to GL1 . This means that each constituent
               GLm
                 i
τi of each IndB∩GL m
                     χ has the form τi ≃ (χi ◦ det) ⊗ τ̃i , where τ̃i is a constituent of the spherical
                      i
principal series for GLmi .

   10.1.2. Standard realization. Combining the decomposition of Scholium 10.1.1 with the split-
unsplit decomposition noted above, we see that every representation π of GLn is induced irreducibly
                                                              Q
from a parabolic subgroup Qπ = Q with Levi component LQ ≃ j GLmj , and a representation ρπ = ρ
of Q, trivial on the unipotent radical UQ , and given on LQ by a tensor product ρ ≃ ⊗j σj , where:
   i) σ1 is an unsplit representation of GLm1 ; and
   ii) for j ≥ 2, σj ≃ (χi ◦ det) ⊗ νj , where the χj are distinct characters of GL1 ,
      and νj is an irreducible spherical principal series representation of GLmj .

We will call this realization of π the standard realization, and will refer to Qπ and the constituents σj
of ρπ as the standard data for realizing π.

   10.2. The spherical principal series and tensor rank.

   Since most of the constituents σj of the representation ρπ (described just above) are spherical

                                                    62
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


principal series twisted by characters, the next step in understanding π is to focus on the spherical
principal series (SPS). We will see that an SPS representation is of tensor rank k exactly when it appears
in the new k-spectrum, and moreover, this common k can be read easily from the parametrization of
the SPS representation by a Young diagram.

    The spherical principal series of GLn have been studied extensively [Green55], [Howe-Moy86],
[Zelevinsky81]. Our principal reference for this account will be [Howe-Moy86].
    The spherical principal series can be helpfully studied through the family of induced representations
IP = IndGL
        P
           n
             1, for all parabolic subgroups, where 1 is the trivial representation of the relevant group.
Up to conjugation, it is enough to consider the parabolics that contain the Borel subgroup of upper
triangular matrices, i.e., the block upper triangular parabolic subgroups. Also, it is standard that if P
and P 0 are associate parabolics, then the representations IndGL
                                                              P
                                                                 n
                                                                   1 and IndGL n
                                                                            P 0 1 are equivalent. Thus,
we can select a representative from each associativity class of parabolics. We do this in the usual way,
by requiring/assuming that the block sizes mi of the diagonal blocks GLmi of P , listed from top to
bottom, are decreasing with increasing i. This again gives us a partition (our third partition) of n,
with an associated Young diagram DP . (We note that, if all of the above discussion is referenced to
a fixed original n, then the successive partitions we have been describing are partitions of parts of the
preceding partition.)
    Let P = PD be a parabolic as in the preceding paragraph, with blocks whose sizes decrease down
the diagonal, associated to the Young diagram D. Consider the induced representation

                                          ID = IPD = IndGL n
                                                        PD 1.


All the constituents of ID are spherical principal series representations. We can be somewhat more
precise. Recall that the set of isomorphism classes of representations of a group G form a free abelian
semigroup on the irreducible representations, and as such, has a natural order structure, given by domi-
nance of all coefficients in the expression of a given representation as a sum of irreducibles. Equivalently,
one representation dominates a second one if the second one is equivalent to a subrepresentation of the
first.
    The set of partitions also has a well-known order structure, the dominance order [Ceccherini-
Silberstein-Scarabotti-Tolli10]. We know the following facts (see [Howe-Moy86]).

Scholium 10.2.1. We have,
    i) The map D 7→ ID is order preserving from the set of partitions with its reverse dominance order
to the semigroup of spherical principal series representations of GLn .
    ii) ID contains an irreducible constituent νD with multiplicity one, and with the property that νD
is not contained in any ID0 with D0 > D in the dominance order.
    iii) The νD constitute the full collection of irreducible spherical principal series representations.

Remarks 10.2.2. We have,
    a) The representation νD can be distinguished by its dimension: it is the only constituent of ID


                                                     63
Gurevich and Howe                                                                         Rank and Duality


whose dimension, as a polynomial in q, has the same degree as the cardinality of GLn /PD . It also can
be distinguished as being the only constituent that contains certain characters of U D , the unipotent
radical opposite to the unipotent radical of P . For this, see Section 10.5 below.
   b) The facts stated in Scholium 10.2.1 are parallels of similar facts for the symmetric group Sn .
                                                                                 o be the irreducible
For a given partition D of n, let SD denote the stabilizer of D in Sn , and let νD
                                                               ◦ be the representation of S induced
representation of Sn associated to the partition D. Also, let ID                           n
                                                                                                           ◦.
from the trivial representation of SD . Then the analogs of facts i), ii) and iii) are valid also for the ID
                o is contained in I o with multiplicity one.
In particular, νD                  D

   c) Moreover, the Bruhat decomposition for GLn [Borel91] implies that the intertwining number of
                                                                                 ◦ and I ◦ . In this
ID1 and ID2 for two partitions D1 and D2 is equal to the intertwining number of ID1     D2
sense, the description of the spherical principal series representations of GLn is essentially the same as
the representation theory of the symmetric group.
                         o =            o
                              P                            P
   d) For example, if νD         E cDE IE , then also νD =  E cDE IE . That is, the expression of the
irreducible spherical principal series representations νD as linear combinations of the induced represen-
tations ID involves exactly the same coefficients as the parallel expressions for Sn .

   It is easy to determine the new k-spectrum to which a spherical principal series representations
belongs and its tensor rank.

   Proposition 10.2.3. For a partition D of n, normalized as above, the spherical principal series
representation νD belongs to the new k-spectrum and is of tensor rank k for k = n − d1 , where d1 is the
longest row of the associated Young diagram.

   For the complete proof of Proposition 10.2.3, we refer to [Gurevich-Howe17]. Here we mention that
the argument relies on the Pieri rule for representations of Sn , and its parallel for the spherical principal
series. Here is the Pieri Rule for the symmetric group [Ceccherini-Silberstein-Scarabotti-Tolli10].

   Scholium 10.2.4. Let D̂ be a partition of k. Then the induced representation

                                           IndSSnk ×Sn−k (νD̂
                                                           o
                                                              ⊗ 1),

                                                                                                    o of S ,
where 1 here is the trivial representation of Sn−k , is a multiplicity free sum of representations νD     n
where the partition D satisfies the conditions that:
   i) D̂ ⊂ D (in the sense of containment of Young diagrams); and
   ii) D − D̂ is a skew row.

   For the notions of containment of Young diagrams and of skew row see [Ceccherini-Silberstein-
Scarabotti-Tolli10].

   10.3. New spectrum and tensor rank for general irreps of GLn .

   Combining Scholium 10.2.4 with the description of a representations by means of its standard data,
as described at the end of §10.1, allows us to determine when a general irrep π of GLn appears in the
new spectrum and what is its tensor rank. Indeed,

                                                     64
Gurevich and Howe                                                                      Rank and Duality


   Proposition 10.3.1. Let π be an irreducible representation of GLn . Let Qπ be the parabolic
subgroup associated to π in Paragraph 10.1.2, and let {σj } be the standard data for realizing π. As
described there, for j ≥ 2, the σj ≃ (χj ◦ det) ⊗ νj , where νj is a spherical principal series for GLmj .
Let us assume the χ1 is he trivial character and ν1 the corresponding SPS representation. Then,
   (a) π appears in the new k-spectrum for k equal n minus the size of the longest row of the Young
diagram parameterizing ν1 .
   and
   (b) the tensor rank of π is equal to n minus the size of the longest row over all the Young diagrams
that parameterize the νj , j ≥ 2.

   For the details of proof, we again refer to [Gurevich-Howe17].

   10.4. Explicit description of the eta correspondence for the pair (GLn , GLk ).

   Proposition 10.3.1, along with the results of Sections 10.1 and 10.2, allow us to give a succinct
description of the η correspondence for the pair (GLk , GLn ).
   Take a representation ν of GLk , of the new l-spectrum for l at least 2k − n. Form the standard
block upper triangular parabolic subgroup Pk,n−k ≃ GLk · Hk . The group Hk (which pointwise fixes
the first k coordinate subspace of Fnq ) is a normal subgroup of Pk,n−k . Extend ν to a representation of
Pk,n−k , that we will also denote ν, by letting Hk act trivially. Form the induced representation

                                               IndGL n
                                                  Pk,n−k ν.


Then η(ν), that we want to describe, will be the unique constituent of IndGL n
                                                                          Pk,n−k ν from the new k-
spectrum.
   To get an explicit formula of η(ν), and to be sure that it determine a well-defined representation, we
invoke the philosophy of cusp forms, use it to give a more refined description of ν, and then to describe
η(ν).
   First, suppose that we start with a spherical principal series representation ν̂ = νD̂ of GLk , where
D̂ is a partition of k. The condition that ν̂ be from the new l-spectrum for l at least 2k − n, implies
that no part of D̂ has size greater than n − k. As just described, η(ν̂) is a constituent of IndGL n
                                                                                                Pk,n−k ν̂.
The decomposition of this induced representation is described by the parallel of Scholium 10.2.4 for
the spherical principal series of GLn . It consists of spherical principal series representations νD , for
partitions D of n, such that

   • the Young diagram of D contains the diagram for D̂, and

   • the difference D − D̂ is a skew row.

It should not be hard for the reader to conclude that the only such D that has no rows longer than
n − k is the one η(D̂) corresponding to adjoining one part of size n − k to the parts of D̂. We then have

                                             η(νD̂ ) = νη(D̂) ,


                                                    65
Gurevich and Howe                                                                      Rank and Duality


where νη(D̂) is the spherical principal series representations of GLn attached to η(D̂) (see Scholium
10.2.1.).
   Now let ρ be any representation of GLk , from a new spectrum which is at least 2k − n. Using the
philosophy of cusp forms (see Section 10.1), we can realize ρ as an induced representation

                                           ρ = IndGL
                                                  P`,k−` (σ ⊗ ν̂),
                                                     k




where:
   i) P`,k−` is the standard upper triangular parabolic subgroup of GLk , with Levi component GL` ×
GLk−` ;
   ii) σ is an irreducible representation of GL` whose standard data includes no spherical principal
series; and
   iii) ν̂ is an irreducible spherical principal series of GLk−` .
Let D̂ be the partition of k − ` that parametrizes ν̂. Then the new spectrum condition implies that D̂
contains no part larger than n − k.
   By transitivity of induction, we know that

                                  IndGL            GLn
                                     Pk,n−k ρ ≃ IndP`,k−`,n−k (σ ⊗ ν̂ ⊗ 1),
                                        n




where 1 here denotes the trivial representation of the third factor of the Levi component GL` × GLk−` ×
GLn−k of P`,k−`,n−k .
   Let P`,n−` ⊃ P`,k−`,n−k be the parabolic subgroup with Levi component GL` × GLn−` , and such
that GLn−` ∩ P`,k−`,n−k = Pk−`,n−k is the parabolic subgroup of GLn−` with Levi component GLk−` ×
GLn−k , consisting of the last two factors of the Levi component of the Levi of P`,k−`,n−k . Then,
                        P
the representation IndP`,n−`
                       `,k−`,n−k
                                 (σ ⊗ ν̂ ⊗ 1), will factor to a representation of GL` × GLn−` , and this
representation will have the form
                                                   GL
                                                    n−`
                                          σ ⊗ IndPk−`,n−k (ν̂ ⊗ 1).

Again by the GLn−` analog of Scholium 10.2.4, we know that
            GL
   • IndPk−`,n−k
           n−`
                 ν̂ ⊗ 1 decomposes multiplicity freely, and

   • with a unique component η(ν̂) = νη(D̂) , a spherical principal series of GLn−` , such that η(D̂) has
      no parts greater than n − k (so that η(ν̂) is a member of the new ` + k − n spectrum).

If we now form IndGL
                  P`,n−` (σ ⊗ η(ν̂)), then since σ has no spherical principal series in its standard data,
                     n


we know that this representation will be irreducible, and a member of the new k-spectrum. It is η(ρ):

                                        η(ρ) = IndGL
                                                  P`,n−` (σ ⊗ η(ν̂)).
                                                     n
                                                                                                  (10.4.1)

This completes the explicit description of the eta correspondence for the pair (GLn , GLk ).

   10.5. Generalized Whittaker rank



                                                      66
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality


    In this subsection, we would like to offer a complement to the theme of U -rank. This is not necessary
for understanding tensor rank, but perhaps it can play a role in providing suitable spectral analogs that
extend U -rank. Also, it provides an argument, independent of the Bruhat decomposition, for Scholium
10.2.1 ii).
    We analyzed the η correspondence for (GLn , GLk ) in the range k < b n2 c using the notion of U -rank,
as discussed in §5 above. This invoked the spectral behavior of representations under restriction to
the unipotent radicals of maximal parabolic subgroups. Since these unipotent radicals are abelian, this
analysis comes down to studying the characters of these groups. In the literature of representation
theory, considerable attention has been paid to the appearance in representations of characters of
maximal unipotent subgroups [Jacquet67], [Kostant78], [Shalika74]. In this context also, there is a
natural notion of rank, but it has not been emphasized; rather the interest has been in studying
representations that allow an eigenvector (in some distributional sense) for the maximal unipotent
subgroup, with respect to a character of maximal rank. Such vectors are known in the literature as
Whittaker vectors.
    For GLn , and for any parabolic subgroup P , with unipotent radical UP , there is a straightforward
way to define the rank for characters of UP . Indeed, given a Levi component LP for P , the center of LP
acts on (the Lie algebra of) UP , and the eigenspaces for this action are standard matrix subgroups, in
the sense of §3.1. Moreover, the complement to the commutator subgroup/subalgebra of UP is spanned
by a sum of these eigenspaces. Therefore, given a character of UP , the restriction of this character to
any one of the eigenspaces has a well-defined rank.
    Let D = {d1 ≥ d2 ≥ d3 . . . ≥ d` } be a partition of n, and let PD be the corresponding block upper
triangular parabolic subgroup, with blocks of size di along the diagonal. Let LD be the Levi component
of PD consisting of block diagonal matrices. Let UD be the unipotent radical of PD , and let U D be the
opposite unipotent subgroup. Then U D is normalized by LD , which therefore acts by conjugation on
the characters of U D .

    Proposition 10.5.1. We have,
    a) The characters of U D of maximal rank form a single orbit under conjugation by LD .
    b) A character of maximal rank of U D appears with multiplicity one in the induced representation
ID = IndGLn
        PD 1.

    c) Let D0 > D be a partition that (strictly) dominates D. Then the representation ID0 , when
restricted to U D , does not contain any characters of maximal rank.

    Proof. a) Consider two adjacent diagonal blocks, of sizes di ≥ di+1 . The (standard) group U (i)
of size (di , di+1 ) of unipotent matrices, whose only non-zero off-diagonal entries are in the di × di+1
rectangular block directly below the diagonal block of size di and directly to the left of the diagonal
block of size di+1 , is conjugated to itself by the action of GLdi × GLdi+1 . As discussed in §3.1, matrices
                                                                   d
with entries in this block may be regarded as maps from Fdq i to Fq i+1 , with the conjugation action being
multiplication on the right by GLdi and on the left by GLdi+1 . The elements of U (i) of maximal rank
(i.e., rank di+1 ) define surjective maps, and any two such maps differ by multiplication on the right by


                                                    67
Gurevich and Howe                                                                      Rank and Duality


an element of GLdi . Dualizing, we see through considerations explained in §2.1, that the same is true
for characters of maximal rank of U (i). Because of this, we see that, if we start at the bottom of the
matrix, and work our way to the top, that by conjugating by LD , we can transform any character of
maximal rank of U D to any other.
   Remark: The analogous result for a parabolic subgroup whose diagonal blocks are not ordered by
size could be false.
   b) Now consider the representation ID = IndGL n
                                              PD 1. The restriction of ID to U D consists of a sum
of permutation representations, one for each double coset U D gPD , for g in GLn . Thanks to the Bruhat
decomposition [Borel91], we may select g to have the form g = hw, where h is in LD , and w is an
element of the symmetric group of permutation matrices, which is the Weyl group for GLn . Since h
normalizes U D , and we are dealing with a property that is invariant under automorphisms of U D , we
may ignore the effect of h, and just deal with the double coset U D wPD . The action of U D on the given
double coset U D wPD is just the action by left translations on the coset space U D /(U D ∩ wPD w−1 ).
   In the action of U D on any given double coset, a given character of U D will appear with multiplicity
1 or 0. Since the action of U D on U D wPD is equivalent to the action by left translations on the coset
space U D /(U D ∩ wPD w−1 ), a given character φ of U D will appear with multiplicity 1 if and only if
U D ∩ wPD w−1 is contained in the kernel of φ. If w = I, the identity element, then U D ∩ gPD g −1 = U D ∩
PD = {I}, the identity element, so the action of U D on this double coset is the regular representation
of U D , and the multiplicity of any character of UD in this representation is 1. Thus, we want to show
that the multiplicity of any maximal rank character in the action on any other double coset is 0. So
consider some other permutation w, and consider U D ∩ wPD w−1 = w((w−1 U D w) ∩ PD )w−1 .
   Let Eab be the matrix units of the n × n matrices - the matrices with exactly one non-zero entry, in
the a-th row and b-th column, which is a 1. For a 6= b, set

                                       Γab = {I + αEab : α ∈ Fq }.

Then Γab is a one parameter group of transvections. We can compute that

                                       w−1 Γab w = Γw−1 (a)w−1 (b) ,

where, on the right side of this equation, w is indicating the permutation of indices defined by w.
   Note that we are free to multiply w on the left and the right by permutations that preserve the
partition D. Thus, all that matters about w is how many indices in each block it distributes to a given
other block, not which particular indices in a given block go to which indices in another given block.
   Consider the smallest index a that gets moved by w from its block to a lower block. (Note that
all the blocks above the block of a must then be preserved by w. For, if a does not belong to the
first/highest block, then all the indices in this block must be mapped to other indices in this block;
so the block is preserved. This argument extends until we reach the block containing a.) This implies
that, up to multiplication by an element of PD , we can take w to act as the identity on these blocks.
For purposes of this argument, these blocks might just as well not be there.
   One of the one-parameter groups Γc` will belong to the group U (i) defined in the proof of part a) if
and only if

                                                    68
Gurevich and Howe                                                                        Rank and Duality



                                    X                 X                X
                                           dk ≤ ` ≤         dk ≤ c ≤           dk .
                                   k≤i−1              k≤i              k≤i+1

   If c = w(a) is in a lower block than a, then w−1 (c) = a is in a higher block than c.       Indeed, from
our choice of a, we know that it is in the highest possible block that it not preserved by w. Hence,
w−1 (`) cannot be in a higher block than a. It follows that w−1 Γc` w = Γaw−1 (`) is in PD , and therefore, a
character of U D that appears in the functions on U D wPD /PD must be trivial on Γc` . This argument is
valid for any ` in the range defined by U (i). But a character of maximal rank of U (i) must be non-trivial
on one of the Γc` . Thus, a character of maximal rank of U D , since its restriction to U (i) must have
maximal rank, cannot occur in U D wPD /PD , and statement b) is established.
   The argument for part c) of the proposition is essentially the same as the argument for b). What
is new about part c) is that even the identity double coset is disqualified, since the condition that D0
dominates D implies that, for some k, the sum i≤k d0i will be strictly larger than I≤k di . For this k,
                                               P                                     P

the top row of U (k) will then be contained in PD0 , so no non-trivial character of this row can appear in
the action of UD on UD /(UD ∩ PD0 ), which means that no maximal rank character of UD can occur. 

   Remark 10.5.2. Proposition 10.5.1 implies that the constituent of ID = IndGLn
                                                                             PD 1 that contains
a character of maximal rank for U D will occur with multiplicity one, and that it will not occur in ID0
for any D0 that strictly dominates D. In other words, this is the constituent νD identified in Scholium
10.2.1.

   11. On the agreement between the various notions of ranks for GLn

   We don’t know yet to show that in general all notion of ranks agree in the range of small U -rank
representations (Conjecture 6.5.2). However, for the group GLn we can show that this is the case at
least for representations of U -rank k < n4 . As a result, we are able to conclude (see Theorem 11.4) that,
for GLn , asymptotic rank and tensor rank agree for all representations.
   We will use here the intrinsic criterion given in Proposition 9.1.3 for determining tensor rank.
   We begin with a somewhat curious weaker result.

   Proposition 11.1. A representation of GLn of U -rank k < b n2 c has tensor rank at most 2k.

   Proof. This argument involves working with a certain collection of standard unipotent subgroups of
GLn . We will introduce the actors here before getting down to the details.
   In this paragraph, “matrix” means “n × n matrix”. As in §10, Eij indicates the matrix unit with an
entry of 1 in the i-th row and j-th column, and zeroes everywhere else. Each of the groups we want to
define here consists of matrices gotten by adding the identity matrix (denoted I) to a linear combination
of certain matrix units.
   We start with the group U1 given by

                                   U1 = I + span {Eij : j ≤ k < i ≤ n}.



                                                        69
Gurevich and Howe                                                                         Rank and Duality


The group U1 is the unipotent radical of the standard parabolic Pk,n−k with diagonal blocks of size k
and n − k.
     Next, we define the group

                                U2 = I + span {Eij : j ≤ k; n − k < i ≤ n}.

This is the standard subgroup of GLn with matrix units in the upper right k × k corner. In the
terminology of §3.1, U2 has size (k, k).
     Now we look at the group

                                     U3 = I + span {Eij : j ≤ k < i ≤ n − k},

and we note that U3 and U2 are complementary subgroups of U1 , so that U1 ≃ U2 × U3 . This is a
decomposition of U1 of the type considered in Formula (2.1.3).
     We also define the group
                                            U4 = I + span{En−k,k+1 }

which is a one-parameter group with non-zero entry in the upper right corner of the middle (n − 2k) ×
(n − 2k) diagonal block of matrices.
     In addition, we consider the group

                                    U5 = I + span{Eij : j ≤ k + 1; n − k ≤ i},

namely, the standard subgroup in the upper right (k + 1) × (k + 1) corner. It contains both U2 and U4 ,
and it is of size (k + 1, k + 1).
                         e 2k the group of matrices T such that T − I has its first k columns and last
   Finally, we denote by H
k columns equal to 0. Note that He 2k

     − is conjugate to H2k ;
     − normalizes U1 ;
     − satisfies U1 ∩ H
                      e 2k = U3 .

     Note that we can find a character ψ of U1 that has rank k, but is trivial on U3 . Thus, the restriction
ψ|U2 will also have rank k. Observe also that, since ψ is trivial on U3 it will be invariant under conjugation
by He 2k .
    Now, take an irreducible representation ρ of GLn which has U -rank k. Then the ψ-eigenspace of ρ|U1
will be non-trivial. Denote this space by ρψ . Since ψ is invariant under conjugation by H
                                                                                         e 2k , the space
ρψ will be invariant under ρ|He 2k . Thus, it defines a representation of H
                                                                          e 2k . We call this representation
σ.
     Claim. The representation σ must be trivial on the commutator subgroup of H
                                                                               e 2k .

     Note that the above claim implies that σ is a sum of characters, which in its turn implies that ρ is
of tensor rank at most 2k.


                                                       70
Gurevich and Howe                                                                      Rank and Duality


   Let us verify the claim. Indeed, if σ is not trivial on the commutator subgroup of H
                                                                                      e 2k , then
in particular, it must be not trivial on the one-parameter subgroup U4 . This is because the normal
subgroup of He 2k generated by U4 is the full commutator subgroup of H
                                                                     e 2k . Since U4 is commutative, we
can decompose the space ρψ into eigenspaces for U4 . Let ρ1ψ be one of these eigenspaces, corresponding
to a non-trivial character λ of U4 .
   The group U5 contains U2 and U4 , and is commutative, so it will preserve the space ρ1ψ . So we can
decompose ρ1ψ into eigenspaces for U5 . The characters of U5 that give rise to non-zero eigenspaces in ρ1ψ
will restrict to ψ on U5 ∩ U1 , and to the the character λ on U4 . Such a character of U5 would have rank
k + 1, contradicting the assumption that ρ has U -rank only k. Thus, the claim is proven, and ρ must
have tensor rank at most 2k.                                                                            

   Although Proposition 11.1 seems to give a rather loose bound on tensor rank in terms of U -rank, it
can be used to verify the following agreement:

                              GLn be a representation of U -rank k with k < n4 . Then the tensor
   Proposition 11.2. Let ρ in d
rank of ρ is equal to k.

   Proof. We know from Proposition 11.1 that the tensor rank of ρ can be at most 2k. Since k < n4 ,
it follows that the tensor rank ` of ρ is less than n2 , and therefore, it appears in the representation
associated to the dual pair (GLn , GL` ), and not in the representations for dual pairs (GLn , GLm ) for
m < `. But then it follows from Part c) of Theorem 5.3.1, that the U -rank of ρ is also `. Thus ` = k,
as desired.                                                                                             

   Our next goal is Theorem 11.4. We will use the following Lemma:

   Lemma 11.3. Suppose n < m. Then,
   a) Representations of GLm of tensor rank less than or equal to k restrict to representations of GLn
of tensor rank less than or equal to k.
   b) All representations of GLn of tensor rank at most k appear in restrictions of representations of
GLm of tensor rank at most k.

   Proof. Part a) follows from the characterization of tensor rank in terms of eigenvectors for the
subgroups Hk . Part b) follows directly from the definition of tensor rank                              

   Now, using Proposition 11.2 we may conclude the following:

   Theorem 11.4 (Agreement between asymptotic and tensor ranks). For GLn , asymptotic
rank and tensor rank agree for all representations.

   Proof. First recall from §6.2 that the asymptotic rank k of a representation ρ of GLn is the smallest
number such that, for all sufficiently large m, there is a representation ρm of GLm , of U -rank k, and
such that the restriction to GLn of ρm contains ρ. If m > 4k, Proposition 11.2 tells us that ρm would
also be of tensor rank k. Hence, by Part a) of Lemma 11.2, ρ has tensor rank at most k.
   By the minimality condition in the definition of asymptotic rank, we know that representations of


                                                   71
Gurevich and Howe                                                                      Rank and Duality


GLm of U -rank less than k will not contain ρ when restricted to GLn . Again by the condition m > 4k,
these representations are all the tensor rank less than k representations of GLm , and, by Part b) of
Lemma 11.2, their restrictions to GLn will contain all representations of tensor ranks less than k. We
conclude that k is also the tensor rank of k, as desired.                                               


                                              References

   [Adams-Moy93] Adams J. and Moy A., Unipotent representations and reductive dual pairs over
finite fields. Trans. AMS 340 (1993), 309-321.
   [Artin57] Artin E., Geometric Algebra. Interscience Publisher (1957).
   [Aubert-Kraskiewicz-Przebinda16] Aubert A.M., Kraskiewicz W., and Przebinda T., Howe corre-
spondence and Springer correspondence for dual pairs over a finite field. Lie Algebras, Lie Superalgebras,
Vertex Algebras and Related Topics, Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics 92, AMS (2016).
   [Aubert-Michel-Rouquier96] Aubert A.M., Michel J., and Rouquier R., Correspondance de Howe
pour les groupesréductifs sur les corps finis. Duke Math. J. 83 (1996), 353-397.
   [Auslander-Kostant71] Auslander L., and Kostant B., Polarization and unitary representations of
solvable Lie groups. Invent. Math. 14 (1971), 255-354.
   [Bernat-Conze-Duflo-Lévy-Nahas-Rais-Renouard-Vergne72] Bernat P., Conze N., Duflo M., Lévy-
Nahas M, Rais M., Renouard P., Vergne M., Représentations des groupes de Lie résolubles. Monogra-
phies de la Société Mathématique de France, No. 4., Paris (1972).
   [Borel91] Borel A.. Linear algebraic groups. Springer-Verlag, New York (1991).
   [Brauer-Weyl35] Brauer R. and Weyl H., Spinors in n dimensions. American J. of Math, Vol. 57 -
2, 425–449 (1935).
   [Carter93] Carter R., Finite Groups of Lie Type: Conjugacy Classes and Complex Characters. Wiley
Classics Library (1993).
   [Casselman-Hecht-Milicic98] Casselman W., Hecht H., and Milicic D., Bruhat filtrations and Whit-
taker vectors for real groups. The mathematical legacy of Harish-Chandra (Baltimore, MD, 1998),
151-190, Proc. Sympos. Pure Math. 68, AMS, Providence (2000).
   [Ceccherini-Silberstein-Scarabotti-Tolli10] Ceccherini-Silberstein T., Scarabotti F., and Tolli F.,
Representation Theory of the Symmetric Groups: The Okounkov-Vershik Approach, Character For-
mulas, and Partition Algebras. Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics 121 (2010).
   [Curtis-Reiner62] Curtis C.W. and Reiner I., Representation theory of finite groups and associative
algebras. Interscience, New York, 1962.
   [Diaconis88] Diaconis P., Group representations in probability and statistics. IMS LNM. Ser. vol.
11 (1988).
   [Diaconis96] Diaconis P., The cutoff phenomenon in finite Markov chains. PNAS, vol. 93, 1659-1664
(1996).


                                                   72
Gurevich and Howe                                                                       Rank and Duality


   [Diaconis-Shahshahani81] Diaconis P. and Shahshahani M., Generating a random permutation with
random transpositions. Z. Wahrsch. 57 (1981), 159-179.
   [Duke-Howe-Li92] Duke W., Howe R., and Li J.S., Estimating Hecke eigenvalues of Siegel modular
forms. Duke Math. J. 67 (1992) no. 1, 219-240.
   [Feit82] Feit W., The representation theory of finite groups. North-Holland Mathematical Library
25, Amsterdam-New York (1982).
   [Frobenius1896] Frobenius F.G., Über Gruppencharaktere. Sitzber. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. (1896)
985-1021.
   [Fulton97] Fulton W., Young Table. Lon. Mat. Soc. Stu. Tex. 35, Cambridge University Press
(1997).
   [Gan-Takeda16] Gan W. T. and Takeda S., A proof of the Howe duality conjecture. JAMS 29
(2016), 473-493.
   [Gelbart75] Gelbart S., Automorphic forms on adèle groups. Annals of Mathematics Studies, No.
83. Princeton University Press (1975).
   [Gelbart77] Gelbart S., Examples of dual reductive pairs. Automorphic forms, representations and
L-functions, Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Oregon State Univ., Corvallis, Ore., (1977), Part 1, pp.
287-296.
   [Gelfand70] Gelfand S.I., Representations of the full linear group over a finite f]ield. Math. USSR-
Sb., 12 (1970) 13-39.
   [Gérardin77] Gérardin P., Weil representations associated to finite fields. J. Alg. 46 (1977), 54-101.
   [Gluck97] Gluck D., Characters and Random Walks on Finite Classical Groups. Adv. in Math. 129
(1997), 46-72.
   [Green55] Green J.A., The characters of the finite general linear groups. TAMS 80 (1955) 402-447.
   [Guillemin-Sternberg79] Guillemin V.W. and Sternberg S., Some problems in integral geometry and
some related problems in micro-local analysis. Amer. J. Math. 101 (1979), 915-955.
   [Guralnick-Larsen-Tiep17] Guralnick R., Larsen M., and Tiep P.H., Character Levels and Character
Bounds. https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.03844 (2017).
   [Guranick-Malle14] Guralnick R. and Malle G., Rational rigidity for E8 (p). Comp. Math., v.150
(2014).
   [Gurevich-Hadani07] Gurevich S. and Hadani R., The geometric Weil representation. Selecta Math.
13 (2007), 465-481.
   [Gurevich-Hadani09] Gurevich S. and Hadani R., Quantization of Symplectic Vector Spaces over
Finite Fields. J. of Symp. Geom 7 (2009), 475-502.
   [Gurevich-Howe15] Gurevich S. and Howe R., Small Representations of Finite Classical Groups. Rep-
resentation Theory, Number Theory, and Invariant Theory: In Honor of Roger Howe on the Occasion
of his 70th Birthday (2015), Progress in Mathematics (2017).


                                                   73
Gurevich and Howe                                                                   Rank and Duality


   [Gurevich-Howe17] Gurevich S. and Howe R., Harmonic Analysis on GLn over Finite Fields. In
Preparation (2017).
   [Gurevich-Howe18] Gurevich S. and Howe R., A Look at Representations of SL(2, q) through the
Lens of Size. Joe Wolf ’s 80s vol. (2018).
   [Gurevich17] Gurevich S., Small Representations of finite Classical Groups. Special Lecture at IAS,
March 8, 2017: https://video.ias.edu/specialrep/2017/0308-ShamgarGurevich.
   [Harish-Chandra70] Harish-Chandra., Eisenstein series over finite fields. Functional analysis and
related fields, Springer (1970) 76-88.
   [Hildebrand92] Hildebrand M., Generating random elements in SL(n, q) by random transvections.
J. Alg. Comb. 1 (1992),133-150.
   [Howe73-1] Howe R., On the character of Weil’s representation. Tran. AMS. 177 (1973), 287-298.
   [Howe73-2] Howe R., Invariant theory and duality for classical groups over finite fields with appli-
cations to their singular representation theory.Preprint, Yale University (1973).
   [Howe77] Howe R., θ-series and invariant theory.       Automorphic forms, representations and L-
functions, Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Oregon State Univ., Corvallis, Ore. (1977), Part 1, pp. 275-285.
   [Howe80] Howe R., On the role of the Heisenberg group in harmonic analysis. Bul. Amer. Math.
Soc., Vol. 3, Num. 2 (1980) 821-843.
   [Howe82] Howe R., On a notion of rank for unitary representations of the classical groups. Harmonic
analysis and group representations, 223-331, Liguori, Naples, (1982).
   [Howe85] Howe R., Dual pairs in physics: Harmonic oscillators, photons, electrons, and singletons.
Lectures in Applied Mathematics, Vol. 21, AMS, (1985) 179-207.
   [Howe87] Howe R.. The oscillator semigroup. The mathematical heritage of Hermann Weyl. Proc.
Sympo. Pure Math 48, AMS (1988) 61-132.
   [Howe17-1] Howe R., On the role of rank in representation theory of the classical groups. Special
Lecture at IAS, March 8, 2017: https://video.ias.edu/reptheory/2017/0308-RogerHowe.
   [Howe17-2] Howe R., Rank and Duality in Representation Theory. Video of the 19th Takagi lectures,
RIMS - Kyoto University, Japan, July 8-9 (2017):
   http : //www.ms.u−tokyo.ac.jp/ toshi/jjm/JJM HP/contents/takagi/19th/takagi19−video.htm.
   [Howe-Moy86] Howe R. and Moy A., Harish-Chandra homomorphisms for p-adic groups. CBMS
Regional Conference Series in Mathematics 59 (1986).
   [Isaacs76] Isaacs I.M., Character theory of finite groups. Pure and Applied Mathematics, No. 69.
Academic Press, New York-London (1976).
   [Jacobson62] Jacobson N., Lie Algebras. Dover Publications (1979).
   [Jacquet67] Jacquet H., Fonctions de Whittaker associées aux groupes de Chevalley. Bulletin de la
Société Mathématique de France, 95 (1967) 243–309.



                                                  74
Gurevich and Howe                                                                   Rank and Duality


   [Kirillov62] Kirillov A.A., Unitary representations of nilpotent Lie groups. Uspehi Mat. Nauk 17
(1962), no. 4, 57-110.
   [Kirillov04] Kirillov A.A., Lectures on the orbit method. GSM 64, AMS, Providence (2004).
   [Knapp86] Knapp A., Representation theory of semisimple groups. An overview based on examples.
Princeton Mathematical Series 36, Princeton University Press (1986).
   [Kostant78] Kostant B., On Whittaker Vectors and Representation Theory. Inventiones mathemat-
icae 48 (1978) 101-184.
   [Kudla86] Kudla S., On the local theta-correspondence. Invent. Math. 83 (1986), no. 2, 229-255.
   [Kudla-Milson86] Kudla S. and Millson J., The theta correspondence and harmonic forms. Math.
Ann. 274 (1986), no. 3, 353-378.
   [Lam73] Lam T.Y., The algebraic theory of quadratic forms. MLNS. W. A. Benjamin, Mass.
(1973).
   [Lang02] Lang S, Algebra, GTM 211. Springer-Verlag, New York, (2002).
   [Larsen-Shalev-Tiep11] Larsen M, Shalev A., and Tiep P.H., The Waring problem for finite simple
groups. Annals of Math. 174 (2011), 1885-1950.
   [Li89-1] Li J.S., Singular unitary representations of classical groups. Invent. Math. 97 (1989), no.
2, 237-255.
   [Li89-2] Li J.S., On the classification of irreducible low rank unitary representations of classical
groups. Compositio Math. 71 (1989), no. 1, 29-48.
   [Li92] Li J.S., Nonexistence of singular cusp forms. Compositio Math. 83 (1992), no. 1, 43-51.
   [Liebeck17] Liebeck M.W., Character ratios for finite groups of Lie type, and applications. Contem-
porary Mathematics 694 (2017), American Math. Soc., 193-208.
   [Liebeck-O’Brien-Shalev-Tiep10] Liebeck M.W., O’Brien E.A., Shalev A., and Tiep P.H., The Ore
conjecture. JEMS 12 (2010), 939-1008.
   [Liebeck-Shalev05] Liebeck M.W. and Shalev A., Character degrees and random walks in finite
groups of Lie type. Proc. LMS. 90 (2005), 61-86.
   [Lusztig84] Lusztig G., Characters of reductive groups over a finite field. Annals of Mathematics
Studies 107. Princeton University Press (1984).
   [Mackey49] Mackey G., A theorem of Stone and von Neumann. Duke Math. J. 16, (1949). 313-326.
   [Malle14] Malle G., The proof of Ore’s conjecture. Sém. Bourbaki, Astérisque 361 (2014), 325-348.
   [Matsumoto69] Matsumoto H., Sur les sous-groupes arithmétiques des groupes semi-simples déployés.
Ann. Sci. Ec. Norm. Sup 2 1969) 1-62.
   [Moeglin-Vigneras-Waldspurger87] Moeglin C., Vigneras M.F., and Waldspurger J.L., Correspon-
dence de Howe sur un corps p-adique. LNM 1291, Springer-Verlag (1987).
   [Nazarov95] Nazarov M., The Oscillator Semigroup over a non-archimedean field. Journal of func-


                                                   75
Gurevich and Howe                                                                     Rank and Duality


tional analysis 128, 384-438 (1995).
   [Mostow-Sampson69] Mostow G. and Sampson J., Linear algebra. McGraw-Hill Book Co. (1969).
   [Prasad93] Prasad D., Weil representation, Howe duality, and the theta correspondence. Theta
functions: from the classical to the modern, 105-127, CRM Proc., AMS, Providence (1993).
   [Pukanszky67] Pukanszky L., Leçons sur les représentations des groupes. Monographies de la Société
Mathématique de France, No. 2, Paris (1967).
   [Pukanszky78] Pukanszky L., Unitary representations of Lie groups with co-compact radical and
applications. Tran. AMS. 236 (1978), 1-49.
   [Sahi17] Sahi S., Private communication. Weizmann Institute - Israel, June 2017.
   [Saloff-Coste04] Saloff-Coste L., Random Walks on Finite Groups. vol. 110, Encyclopaedia of Math.
Sciences (2004), 263-346.
   [Serre77] Serre J.P., Linear Representations of Finite Groups. Springer-Verlag (1977).
   [Shalev07] Shalev A., Commutators, Words, Conjugacy Classes and Character Methods. Tur. J
Math 31 (2007), 131-148.
   [Shalev09] Shalev A., Word maps, conjugacy classes, and a non-commutative Waring-type theorem.
Annals of Math., 170 (2009), 1383-1416.
   [Shalev15] Shalev A., Conjugacy classes, growth and complexity. Finite Simple Groups: Thirty
Years of the Atlas and Beyond (2015), Cont. Math. 694 (2017) 209-221.
   [Shalika74] Shalika J.A., The Multiplicity One Theorem for GLn. Annals of Math 100 no. 2, (1974)
171-93.
   [Srinivasan79] Srinivasan B., Weil representations of classical groups. Invent. Math. 51 (1979),
143-153.
   [Steinberg62] Steinberg R., Générateurs, relations et revêtements de groupes algébriques. Colloque
sur la Théoriedes groupes Algébriques, Bruxelles (1962) 113-127.
   [Strang76] Strang G. , Linear algebra and its applications. Academic Press, New York-London
(1976).
   [Vergne83] Vergne M., Representations of Lie Groups and the Orbit Method. Emmy Noether in
Bryn Mawr. Springer (1983), 59-101.
   [Vogan80] Vogan D.A., The size of infinite-dimensional representations. LNM vol 795, Springer
(1980), 172-178.
   [Vogan16] Vogan D.A., The size of infinite-dimensional representations. Takagi Lectures (2016),
Jap. J of Math, vol 12 (2017), 175-210.
   [Wallach82] Wallach N., Real reductive groups. I. Pure and Applied Mathematics, 132. Academic
Press, Boston, (1988).
   [Wallach92] Wallach N., Real reductive groups. II. Pure and Applied Mathematics, 132-II. Academic



                                                  76
Gurevich and Howe                                                                   Rank and Duality


Press, Boston (1992).
   [Weil64] Weil A., Sur certains groupes d’opérateurs unitaires. Acta Math. 11 1964, 143-211.
   [Weil74] Weil A., Basic number theory. Die Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften, Band
144. Springer-Verlag (1974).
   [Weinstein80] Weinstein A.D., The symplectic “category”. Proc. Conf. Differential Geometric
Methods in Mathematical Physics (1980).
   [Weyl46] Weyl H., The classical groups, their invariants and representations. Princeton Univ. Press
(1946).
   [Zelevinsky81] Zelevinsky A., Representations of finite classical groups. A Hopf algebra approach.
LNM 869. Springer-Verlag (1981).




                                                 77
