                                            PLANCHEREL DECOMPOSITION OF HOWE DUALITY AND
                                           EULER FACTORIZATION OF AUTOMORPHIC FUNCTIONALS




arXiv:1610.06202v1 [math.RT] 19 Oct 2016
                                                                       YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS


                                               A BSTRACT. There are several global functionals on irreducible automor-
                                               phic representations which are Eulerian, that is: pure tensors of local func-
                                               tionals, when the representation is written as an Euler product π = ⊗′v πv
                                               of local representations. The precise factorization of such functionals is
                                               of interest to number theorists and is – naturally – very often related to
                                               special values of L-functions.
                                                   The purpose of this paper is to develop in full generality the Plancherel
                                               formula for the Weil or oscillator representation, considered as a unitary
                                               representation of a reductive dual pair, and to use it in order to demon-
                                               strate a very general principle of Euler factorization: local factors are
                                               determined via the Langlands correspondence by a local Plancherel for-
                                               mula. This pattern has already been observed and conjectured in the
                                               author’s prior work with Venkatesh in the case of period integrals. Here,
                                               it is shown that the Rallis inner product formula amounts to the same
                                               principle in the setting of global Howe duality.



                                                                                                                  To Roger Howe,
                                                                                                                   in admiration.



                                                                              C ONTENTS
                                           1. Introduction                                                                      2
                                           1.1. Acknowledgements                                                                7
                                           2. Adams’ conjecture and the L-group of Howe duality                                 7
                                           2.1. Groups (overview)                                                               7
                                           2.2. Metaplectic group and the oscillator representation                             8
                                           2.3. L-groups                                                                       10
                                           2.4. The L-group and Arthur-SL2 of Howe duality                                     13
                                           2.5. A Plancherel-theoretic version of Adams’ conjecture                            16
                                           3. Plancherel decomposition of the oscillator representation                        18
                                           3.1. Growth of matrix coefficients of ω                                             19
                                           3.2. Comparison of Schrödinger models                                              23
                                           3.3. Plancherel decomposition of the oscillator representation                      26
                                           4. Euler factorization                                                              29
                                           4.1. Global conjecture and theorem                                                  29
                                           4.2. Reinterpretation of the Rallis inner product formula                           34
                                           References                                                                          36
                                                                                    1
2                            YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

                             1. I NTRODUCTION
   The purpose of this paper is to develop the Plancherel formula for the
Weil or oscillator representation, considered as a unitary representation of
a reductive dual pair, and to show how known results on global Howe
duality, more precisely Rallis’ inner product formula (and its most recent
extensions, in particular by Gan, Qiu and Takeda [GQT14]) can be reformu-
lated as an identity between global and local functionals that generalizes a
pattern already observed in the case of period integrals of automorphic
forms.
   Here is the general setup, which covers both period integrals and Howe
duality (a.k.a. theta correspondence, [How89]): One is given a reductive
group G over a global field k, and a unitary representation ω of the adelic
points G(Ak ), which is a restricted tensor product of local unitary represen-
tations ω v . One is also given a suitable irreducible automorphic represen-
tation of G with a factorization:
                                       O′
                                   π=      πv                             (1.1)
                                       v

as a tensor product of irreducible representations of the local groups Gv ,
and an invariant pairing:
                               P : π ⊗ ω0 → C                             (1.2)
of “global” nature (i.e. given by some integral of automorphic functions
over [G] := G(k)\G(Ak )), where ω 0 is a dense (Eulerian) subspace of smooth
vectors in ω. For what follows we will ignore the difference between ω and
ω 0 in our notation, and formulate statements that hold for suitable dense
subspaces of vectors. We denote by π, ω etc. both the spaces of the repre-
sentations and the corresponding actions of the group.
   Examples of this setup include:
    (1) Period integrals over subgroups of G, which can equivalently be
        described as pairings:
                             π ⊗ S(X(Ak )) → C,
       where X = H\G is a homogeneous G-variety, and S denotes the
       space of Schwartz functions. Here ω = L2 (X(Ak )), and the pairing
       is given by:
                                           Z
              P : π ⊗ S(X(Ak )) ∋ ϕ ⊗ Φ 7→   ϕ(g)ΣΦ(g)dg,            (1.3)
                                               [G]
                                                   P
        where ΣΦ denotes the automorphic function γ∈X(k) Φ(γg), assum-
        ing that this integral converges.
    (2) The Weil representation ω, when G = G1 × G2 denotes a dual pair,
        whereby for Φ ∈ ω ∞ and ϕ1 ⊗ ϕ2 in an automorphic representation
        π = π1 ⊗ π2 , the pairing is given by the theta series of the pair
                   HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                          3

       (Φ, ϕ1 ) integrated against ϕ2 , or vice versa. It can be written in the
       symmetric form:
                                 P : π ⊗ ω ∞ ∋ ϕ1 ⊗ ϕ2 ⊗ Φ 7→
              Z
                           ϕ1 (g1 )ϕ2 (g2 )Σ(ω(g1 , g2 )Φ)d(g1 , g2 ),       (1.4)
               [G1 ×G2 ]

       where Σ denotes the standard automorphic functional on ω ∞ , pro-
       vided these integrals converge.
  In general, not all integrals above are convergent, and one needs to suit-
ably regularize them.
  Suppose that, for some reason, one knows that the pairing P is Eulerian,
that is: a pure tensor in the space
                                             ′
                                             O
              HomG(Ak ) (π ⊗ ω, C) ≃                 HomGv (πv ⊗ ω v , C).   (1.5)
                                                 v

(This restricted tensor product also needs some qualifications, in general,
depending on the subspace of vectors that one is considering.) This is au-
tomatically true in the multiplicity-one case, i.e. when the spaces
                                 HomGv (πv ⊗ ω v , C)
are (at most) one-dimensional, which is the case for Howe duality and for
many spherical varieties. The question is, then, to describe an explicit fac-
torization of P into local functionals.
   Such local factors will depend on how one fixes the isomorphism (1.1),
hence there is a better hope of getting a meaningful answer if we double
all variables, and consider the corresponding pairing P × P on the pair
π ⊗ π ∨ , where π ∨ is the dual representation of π, realized in a natural way
on the space of automorphic representations. (Typically, π will belong to
L2 ([G]) up to a character twist, and π ∨ will be its complex conjugate up to
the inverse twist.) The tensor product π ⊗ π ∨ has a canonical factorization:
                                           ′
                                           O
                               π ⊗ π∨ =          (πv ⊗ πv∨ ),                (1.6)
                                             v

dictated by the preservation of the dual pairing, and so does the product of
ω with its dual (which, by unitarity, is just its complex conjugate). There-
fore, we have a functional:
                     P × P : (π ⊗ π ∨ ) ⊗ (ω ⊗ ω ∨ ) → C,                    (1.7)
which is invariant under G(Ak ) × G(Ak ) acting diagonally on the 1st and
3rd, resp. 2nd and 4th factors, and one is asking for an Euler factorization
into local functionals with the analogous invariance property:
                            (πv ⊗ πv∨ ) ⊗ (ω v ⊗ ω ∨
                                                   v ) → C.                  (1.8)
4                            YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

  Equivalently, since the (admissible) dual of πv ⊗ πv∨ is πv∨ ⊗ πv , we can
view the global and local functionals as morphisms:
                              ω ⊗ ω ∨ → π ∨ ⊗ π,
and because π is assumed to be irreducible, these are determined uniquely
by their composition with the canonical pairing
                         J : ω ⊗ ω ∨ → π ∨ ⊗ π → C,                         (1.9)
which we will call a relative character. (It is a generalization of the notion of
character, when ω 0 = S(H(Ak )), the Schwartz space of a group H under
the G = H × H-action.)
  If we denote by J Aut (for “automorphic”) the relative character that we
get from the global pairing P, we are seeking an Euler factorization:
                                            Y
                                  J Aut =       Jv .                       (1.10)
                                            v
   Such an Euler factorization was conjectured in [SV] for the case of Euler-
ian period integrals, generalizing a conjecture of Ichino and Ikeda [II10]
for the Gross-Prasad periods. The main idea is that the local relative char-
acters Jv of (1.10) will be provided by the Plancherel decomposition of the
unitary representations ω v , assuming that this satisfies a relative local Lang-
lands conjecture. Namely, it is conjectured (and proven in several cases) that
the Plancherel decomposition for ω v reads:
                                 Z
                          ωv =        temp
                                           Hσ µω,v (σ),
                                   Gd
                                    ω,v

where:
    • the group Gω is a reductive group determined by the representation
       ω;
    • µω,v is the standard Plancherel measure on the unitary dual of Gω,v =
       Gω (kv ) (supported on the set of tempered representations);
    • The (possibly zero) Hilbert space Hσ is ι(σ)-isotypic, where
                                       temp
                              ι : Gd
                                   ω,v
                                             bv
                                            →G
       is a map from the tempered dual of Gω,v to the unitary dual of Gv
       determined by a distinguished map of L-groups:
                              L
                                  Gω × SL2 → L G.                          (1.11)
       To be precise, the map of L-groups, including the “Arthur” SL2 -
       factor determines, by the Langlands and Arthur conjectures, a map
       φ 7→ Πι(φ) from the set of tempered Langlands parameters into
       L G to the set of (unitary) Arthur packets of G . Thus, in real-
           ω                                              v
       ity the above integral should be an integral over L-parameters into
       L G (the actual group G plays no role), the measure µ
           ω                     ω                              ω,v is the
       Plancherel measure on the set of those parameters (by conjectures
                   HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                      5

       of Hiraga-Ichino-Ikeda [HII08] it is well-defined, up to a small in-
       teger factor in the case of exceptional groups) and the space Hσ is
       isotypic for the set of representations in the Arthur packet Πι(φ) .
       However, for the purposes of the introduction we can ignore these
       fine differences.
   Assuming this conjecture, for µω,v -almost every σ we get a local rela-
tive character JσPlanch associated to the representation ι(σ), such that the
Plancherel decomposition holds:
                             Z
              hΦ1 , Φ2 iωv =          J Planch (Φ1 ⊗ Φ̄2 )µω,v (σ).
                                  temp σ
                                                                      (1.12)
                             Gd
                              ω,v


In other words, JσPlanch is pulled back from the inner product in the Hilbert
space Hσ .In practice, this relative character is continuous on the tempered
dual of Gω,v , and hence the Jσ ’s are defined for every tempered σ.
   Now assume that we are interested in the Euler factorization of the global
relative character J Aut for an automorphic representation π which is a func-
torial lift ι(σ) of a tempered automorphic representation σ of Gω via the
above map of L-groups. (That is, π belongs to the space of automorphic
forms associated to the “global Arthur parameter” obtained by the “global
Langlands parameter” of σ, if one can make sense of such global param-
eters, by composition with the above map.) Then the conjecture states,
roughly, that up to a rational global factor which is missing from (1.10), the
local factors Jv are the ones given by the above Plancherel decomposition,
that is:
                                  Jv = JσPlanch
                                          v
                                                .                       (1.13)
   The Euler product should be understood with the help of partial L-functions,
as it will not converge, but almost all factors will be equal to a special value
of an unramified L-function.
   In the case of spherical periods, i.e. ω = L2 (X(Ak )) where X is a (suit-
able) spherical variety, the L-group L Gω is the L-group of that spherical
variety, which can be defined in some generality – s. [SV] for split groups –
and is based on the dual group attached by Gaitsgory and Nadler [GN10].
   The purpose of this article is to unify the case of period integrals and the
case of the theta correspondence, showing that the same principle of Euler
factorization, as outlined above, is valid for the theta correspondence, as
well. Here, the L-group and the map (1.11) are provided by a conjecture of
Adams [Ada89]. Essentially, if G = G1 × G2 is a dual pair, then L Gω is the
L-group of the “smaller” of the two, embedded diagonally in L G; and the
map from SL2 corresponds to a principal unipotent orbit in the commutator
of its image. I give a more careful account of the appropriate conventions
for L-groups for this case in §2.3.
   Of course, the Euler factorization of (the square of the absolute value of)
the global Howe pairing (1.4) is known in most cases by the name of “Rallis
inner product formula”, and is a consequence of the Siegel-Weil formula
6                            YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

developed by the work of Rallis, Kudla, Mœglin, Ichino, Jiang, Soudry,
Gan, Qiu, Takeda and Yamana [Ral87, KR88a, KR88b, KR94, Mœg97, Ich01,
Ich04, Ich07, JS07, GT11, GQT14, Yam11, Yam14]. In this article I restrict my
attention to Howe duality for the so-called non-quaternionic, type I dual
pairs, i.e. symplectic-orthogonal or unitary. The goal of this article is to
reinterpret the appropriate Rallis inner product formulas – more precisely,
those in the “boundary” and “second term range” in the sense of [GQT14] –
showing that the local factors of the Euler factorization of (1.4) are the ones
of the local Plancherel formula (1.12) for the Weil representation restricted
to a dual pair.
   To describe the contents of the paper in more detail, in section 2 I intro-
duce the formalism of “the L-group of Howe duality” and Adams’ con-
jecture – which are, however, only needed to establish the analogy with
the “relative Langlands program” for spherical varieties, not for any of the
results which follow.
   In section 3 I develop the Plancherel formula for Howe duality. It states
(Theorem 3.0.2) that, if G1 × G2 is a dual pair (over a local field) with G2
the “small” group, and if ω denotes the oscillator representation of G1 ×
G2 (considered as a unitary representation) then ω admits the Plancherel
decomposition:
                                  Z
                   hΦ1 , Φ2 i =            JπPlanch (Φ1 , Φ2 ) µG2 (π2 ),   (1.14)
                                      c2
                                      G

where µG2 denotes Plancherel measure for G2 , and π stands for the rep-
                   ⊗π2 . The hermitian forms JπPlanch are the ones explicitly
resentation θ(π2 ) ˆ
defined by Jian-Shu Li in [Li89], and their positivity (proven under addi-
tional assumptions by Hongyu He in [He03]) is part of the theorem. The
result is probably known to experts, and at least parts of it have appeared
in the literature, cf. [How79, Gel76, RS77, ØZ95, ØZ97, GG14].
   Finally, in section 4 I reformulate the Rallis inner product formula, in its
most recent form as appearing in [Yam14] and [GQT14], in terms of the lo-
cal hermitian forms JπPlanch above. The main result (Theorem 4.1.4) states
that the relative characters (1.9) of global Howe duality admit a factoriza-
tion as in (1.10), whose local factors are precisely those hermitian forms.
   It is by no means the first time that Howe duality and the theory of pe-
riod integrals are being brought together; the theta correspondence has re-
peatedly been used to study period integrals, at least since the ground-
breaking work of Waldspurger [Wal80, Wal85], and there has been a very
systematically back-and-forth between these two methods in recent years
around the program established by the Gan-Gross-Prasad conjectures [GGP12].
However, I am not aware of a uniform formulation of the principle of Euler
factorization that was outlined above, and it may help in the understanding
of some general principles underlying the theory of automorphic represen-
tations.
                  HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                      7

1.1. Acknowledgements. This paper is dedicated to Professor Roger Howe,
in deep admiration of the wealth of ideas that he has brought to the world
of representation theory.
   The paper would not have been possible without the kind guidance of
Wee Teck Gan who patiently answered my questions a few years ago and
effectively guided me into the world of Howe duality. Moreover, the essen-
tial results that this paper is based on are all found in papers by him and
his collaborators, which are in turn based on earlier work of Kudla, Rallis
and others, building up on the groundbreaking ideas of Roger Howe.
   I am also grateful to Jeff Adams for conversations on his conjecture on
the Arthur parameters of Howe duality – a conjecture which paved the way
for unifying the theta correspondence with the Langlands program, based
on the work of his and his collaborators in the real case.
   Finally, I am indebted to the anonymous referee for a very prompt and
comprehensive report, including several corrections and suggestions for
improvement.


    2. A DAMS ’ CONJECTURE AND THE L- GROUP OF H OWE DUALITY
2.1. Groups (overview). Fix a sign ǫ = ±1, and a field E of degree 1 or 2
over our base field k.
   We will work in the context of Kudla-Rallis’ Siegel-Weil formula, as gen-
eralized in [GQT14]. Thus, we will consider the theta correspondence be-
tween an (almost) arbitrary isometry group G1 of an ǫ-hermitian form on a
vector space V , and the isometry group G2 of an (−ǫ)-hermitian form on a
vector space W . When necessary, one of these groups will be replaced by
its double metaplectic cover. Obviously, up to replacing ǫ by −ǫ (and except
for a technical condition that we will eventually impose on the Witt rank of
V in order to apply known results on the Rallis inner product formula), the
situation is symmetric in V, W and we can interchange G1 and G2 , but we
will take G2 to be the “smaller” of these groups.
   More precisely, let k be a number field, E = k or a quadratic field ex-
tension, η = ηE/k the (possibly trivial) quadratic idele class character of k
attached to E by class field theory. The action of the Galois group of E/k
will be denoted by a bar (¯), with the understanding that it is trivial when
E = k. We will sometimes use F to denote a completion of k, in which case
we will abuse notation (when no confusion arises) and denote again by E
the ring E ⊗k F , and by ηE/F the corresponding quadratic character of F × .
The set of points of a variety X over a completion kv will be denoted both
by X(kv ) and by Xv .
   Fix a sign ǫ = ±1, and consider a non-degenerate ǫ-hermitian space
V , that is: V is a vector space over E equipped with a non-degenerate
ǫ-hermitian form:
                              (v, w) = ǫ(w, v).
8                            YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

Similarly, let W denote a non-degenerate (−ǫ)-Hermitian space of dimen-
sion n.
   We will denote by G1 and G2 , respectively, certain central extensions of
the isometry groups of V and W by C1 = {z ∈ C× | |z| = 1}. These covers
split in most cases, so by abuse of notation we may also denote by G1 , G2
the groups appearing in the following table:

                         G1 (V )   Ǧ1  Ǧ2  G2 (W )           d(n)
           (E : k) = 2    Um      GLm   GLn   Un                n
       ǫ = −1, n even     Spm SOm+1 SOn       On               n−1
                                                                            (2.1)
        ǫ = −1, n odd    Mpm      Spm  Spn−1  On               n−1
        ǫ = 1, m even     Om      SOm SOn+1   Spn              n+1
         ǫ = 1, m odd     Om     Spm−1  Spn   Mpn              n+1
   Here Mpm denotes the double metaplectic cover of the symplectic group
Spm . (Our notation for symplectic groups uses Spm to denote the isometry
group of a symplectic space of dimension m, so m is even.)
   The table above includes, besides the groups G1 and G2 , their Langlands
dual groups, i.e. the identity components of their L-groups. The value d(n)
is the value of m corresponding to the boundary case, that is: the case when
the standard representations of L G1 and L G2 have the same dimension (if
possible by parity restrictions).
   We will assume throughout (as we may without loss of generality, by
symmetry) that d(n) ≤ m, i.e. G2 (or, rather, its dual) is the smaller group,
while G1 is the larger one.
   The table above is provided for convenience of the reader – however,
there are many non-canonical choices that need to be made in order to
identify the groups of Howe duality with the above groups, and their L-
groups with the given L-groups. We are about to describe more canonical
definitions, which will free us from the necessity to make such choices.
2.2. Metaplectic group and the oscillator representation.    Q Fix an additive
character ψ : Ak /k → C× , and a factorization ψ = v ψv into unitary
characters of the completions kv . Whenever no confusion arises, we will
be using the same letter to denote the composition of ψ with the trace map
from AE to Ak , and for its restrictions to the various completions of E.
   The space V ⊗ W , considered as a vector space over k, has a natural
symplectic structure. Restricting to a completion kv , the associated Heisen-
berg group has a unique, up to isomorphism, irreducible representation
ω v = ω v,ψv where its center acts by ψv . This gives rise to a projective repre-
sentation of Sp(V ⊗ W )(kv ), and hence a representation of the group:
                      GL(ω v ) ×PGL(ω v ) Sp(V ⊗ W )(kv ),
which is a central extension of Sp(V ⊗W )(kv ) by C× . This is the oscillator, or
Weil, representation [Wei64]. Moreover, there is a canonical subextension
                   HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                         9

by C1 = {z ∈ C× | |z| = 1}:

                      f ⊗ W )(kv ) → Sp(V ⊗ W )(kv ) → 1,
             1 → C1 → Sp(V                                                  (2.2)

characterized by the fact that it acts unitarily on ω v . We will be working
with C1 -extensions.
   Let G(V ), G(W ) ⊂ Sp(V ⊗ W ) be the isometry groups of V , resp. W , and
                                        f ⊗W )(kv ), of the images of G(V )(kv ),
let G̃1,v , G̃2,v be the preimages, in Sp(V
resp. G(W )(kv ) in Sp(V ⊗ W )(kv ). These are central C1 -extensions of the
corresponding classical groups. Note (as we will soon recall) that the iso-
morphism class of G̃1,v does not only depend on the space V , but also on
W , and similarly for G̃2,v .
   Throughout this paper we will denote by ω ∞        v the smooth vectors of ω v
                                              f
with respect to the big symplectic cover Sp(V ⊗W )(kv ). The pull-back of ω v
to G̃v := G̃1,v × G̃2,v gives rise to the theta correspondence (Howe duality).
More precisely, for any irreducible representation π of G̃1,v which occurs
as a quotient of ω ∞    v , there is a unique irreducible representation θ(π) of
G̃2,v such that π ⊗ θ(π) occurs as a quotient, and vice versa when we in-
terchange G1,v and G2,v [Kud96]. This was proven by Howe [How89] for
Archimedean fields, by Waldspurger [Wal90] for p-adic fields with p 6= 2,
and by Gan and Takeda [GT16] for all p-adic fields.
   The local theta correspondence is naturally a correspondence between
genuine representations of G̃1,v , G̃2,v , i.e. representations where the central
C1 acts by the identity character. To translate this to a correspondence be-
tween representations of more classical groups, one needs to make some
choices which give rise to splittings G(V )v → G̃1,v , G(W )v → G̃2,v , or
at least (when this is not possible), splittings over the metaplectic double
cover of G(V )v , G(W )v .
   Such choices are described by Kudla in [Kud94] and they are quite stan-
dard nowadays in the theory of Howe duality. There is a standard (de-
scribed by Ranga Rao [RR93]) set-theoretic splitting Sp(V ⊗ W )(kv ) →
f ⊗ W )(kv ) and an ensuing 2-cocycle, valued in the group µ8 (C) of 8-th
Sp(V
roots of unity, which describes the C1 -extension Sp(V f ⊗W )(kv ). Given that,
Kudla [Kud94, Theorem 3.1], [Kud96, §II.3] describes explicit 1-cocycles
βV : G(W ) → C1 , βW : G(V ) → C1 , depending on some choices, which
trivialize the 2-cocycle over G(V ), G(W ), or over their double (metaplectic)
covers. As the notation suggests, βV depends on V and βW depends on
W (because the groups G̃2,v , resp. G̃1,v do), and this dependence will also
appear in the L-groups that we are about to define.
   However, these choices are non-canonical and complicate the relation-
ship between Howe duality and Langlands correspondence. Therefore, in
this paper I will make the following convention: G1,v , G2,v will, strictly
speaking, denote the covering groups G̃1,v , G̃2,v encountered above, and
10                             YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

by “representations” of those groups we will always mean genuine repre-
sentations. In the next subsection, I will assign (non-standard) L-groups
to these groups. I will also explain how certain choices give rise to usual
L-groups, in parallel to Kudla’s splitting of the covers. Following that, we
will allow ourselves to abuse language and treat G1,v , G2,v as a classical
group or a double cover thereof, as in Table 2.1, when no confusion arises.

2.3. L-groups. We will adopt the following definitions of non-standard L-
groups; notice that L-groups are defined globally, based on local consider-
ations on covering groups. The definitions given here are compatible with
the ones given by Adams [Ada89] in the Archimedean case, up to conju-
gacy (cf. Remark 2.4.2). I will also explain how choices related to Kudla’s
cocycles correspond to choices that modify these L-groups into standard
L-groups.
     (1) For V a quadratic space of odd dimension m over k, we let
                        L
                            G1 = Spm−1 (C) × Gal(k̄/k).                   (2.3)
         Here the space W is a symplectic space over W , and Kudla’s cocycle
         βW giving rise to G(V ) ֒→ G̃1,v does not depend on any data of W .
            For m odd we have: Om = SOm × Z/2, and an irreducible repre-
         sentation for Om is given by an irreducible representation for SOm
         and a sign for Z/2. The L-group of Om should be identified with the
         L-group of SOm , with the sign of Z/2 not affecting the L-parameter
         (or Arthur parameter) of a representation; this is compatible with
         results on the theta correspondence that will be recalled later (such
         as the results of Atobe-Gan [AGa]).
     (2) For V a quadratic space of even dimension m over k, again the cocy-
         cle does not depend on any data of W , and we let:
                        L
                            G1 = Om (C) ×{±1} Gal(k̄/k),                  (2.4)

        where Om maps to {±1} via the determinant and Gal(k̄/k) maps via
        χ̃V , the (trivial or non-trivial) quadratic Galois character associated
        to the normalized discriminant of the quadratic space V . (“Normal-
        ized” refers to the fact that for a split quadratic space it is a square,
                                                                         m
        i.e. the normalized discriminant is the square class of (−1) 2 times
        the determinant of a matrix of the quadratic form.)
           In the split case (χ̃V = 1) this is just the direct product SOm (C) ×
        Gal(k̄/k), but in the  p non-split case its quotient through the map
        Gal(k̄/k) → Gal(k( disc(V ))/k) can be identified with Om (C). While
        this identification is customary, we should remind ourselves how it
        relates to the more “standard” version of the L-group of SOm as a
        pinned semi-direct product:
                                            p
                         SOm (C) ⋊ Gal(k( disc(V ))/k).                     (2.5)
              HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                       11

    We may fix a pinning for SOm . Any two such pinnings are con-
    jugate by a unique element of SOm (C), up to the center {±1} of
    the group. Identifying, then, the group Om (C) with the pinned
    semi-direct product SOm (C) ⋊ Gal(k̄/k) depends on choosing an
    element ǫ ∈ Om (C) r SOm (C) which acts by the outer automor-
    phism on the pinning, and with ǫ2 = 1. There are two inequivalent
    choices for such an ǫ (when m > 2, whose quotient is the central
    −1 ∈ SOm (C). We choose the ǫ which corresponds to a simple reflection
    under the standard representation of Om (C), i.e. with eigenvalues
    (1, 1, . . . 1, 1, −1). This is the standard choice in the literature.
       Finally, we mention that equivalence classes of Langlands or Arthur
    parameters for Om will be classes of parameters into the above L-
    group modulo the action of Om (C) by conjugation.
(3) For V a symplectic space of dimension m (and hence W a quadratic
    space, whose discriminant Galois character we will denote by χ̃W ),
    the 1-cocycle βW depends on W , and only trivializes the cover if
    dim(W ) is even; in the odd case, it reduces the cover G̃1,v to the
    double metaplectic cover Mpm (kv ) of Spm (kv ). Hence, we distin-
    guish two sub-cases:
       • If n = dim(W ) is even, we take:
                 L
                     G1 = Om+1 (C) ×{±1} Gal(k̄/k),                   (2.6)

        where Om+1 maps to {±1} via the determinant and Gal(k̄/k)
        maps via χ̃W .
        Of course, this is still isomorphic to the direct product of SOm+1 (C)
        with Gal(k̄/k), simply by multiplying by the diagonal of χ̃W .
        We view this operation at the level of L-groups as the analog of
        Kudla’s cocycle, which identifies G̃1,v with C1 ×Spm . However,
        in view of the behavior of the theta correspondence in terms of
        Langlands parameters, it is better to adopt the above definition
        of L-group for G̃1,v .
      • If n = dim(W ) is odd, we take:
                      L
                          G1 = Spm (C) × Gal(k̄/k),                   (2.7)

        however: this is not the L-group of the double-cover metaplectic
        group Mpm that is found in the literature. Namely, we recall
        from [Wei14, §4.3] that the choice of an additive character ψv
        (and the standard choice of fourth root of unity i ∈ C) identi-
        fies the L-group of the metaplectic double cover Mpm (kv ) with
        Spm (C) × Gal(k̄/k). Kudla’s cocycle (which depends on W )
        defines a splitting:

                             Mpm (kv ) ֒→ G̃1,v .
12                                   YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

              This splitting corresponds to an identification of L-groups:
      L                                       ∼
                                   → L Mpm = Spm (C) × Gal(k̄/k)
          G1 = Spm (C) × Gal(k̄/k) −                                         (2.8)
              given by multiplication by the quadratic character associated to W ,
              that is:
                             (g, σ) 7→ (χ̃W (σ)g, σ).
     (4) In the unitary case, Kudla’s cocycle βW depends on the choice of a
         unitary character χW of (the local quadratic extension) E × which
         extends the n-th power of the quadratic character η associated to
         the extension E/kv (where, again, n = dim(W )). Rather than mak-
         ing such a choice, we define the L-group L G1 as the inflation to
         Gal(k̄/k) of the possibly non-split extension:
                     n
                ]
                GL                  2      n
                   m := GLm (C), σ|σ = (−1) , σgσ
                                                  −1
                                                     = gc ,                  (2.9)
          where GLm  (C) is considered as a pinned group, and g c is the pinned
          Chevalley involution, in other words:
                                              n
                          L        ]
                              G1 = GL m ×Gal(E/k) Gal(k̄/k),                (2.10)
                                          n
                            ]
          where, of course, GL m maps to Gal(E/k) with σ mapping to the
          non-trivial element.
            The Langlands parameter of an idele class character χW of E
                                                 n
          which extends the quadratic character ηE/k is a homomorphism:

                 Wk → L ResE/k Gm = (C× × C× ) ⋊ Gal(E/k)
          (where Wk denotes the Weil group of k) with the property that com-
          posing with the map:
                     L
                         ResE/k Gm → L Gm = C× × Gal(E/k)
          given on connected components by (z1 , z2 ) 7→ z1 z2 we get the n-th
          power of the quadratic character of Wk associated to E/k. Such a
          parameter is necessarily of the form:
                                       w 7→ (χ̃W , χ̃σW ),
          where χ̃W : Wk → GL g1 n and χ̃σ denotes its σ-conjugate in GL
                                                                      g1 n . (I
                                         W
          am confusing here maps to non-connected groups and their projec-
          tions to the connected components, but the reader should have no
          difficulty discerning the meaning.) Thus, a choice of χW gives rise
          to an isomorphism:
                               L      ∼
                                      → GLm (C) ⋊ Gal(k̄/k)
                                   G1 −                                     (2.11)
          (the latter being the L-group of the unitary group), namely multi-
          plication by χ̃W . We see this isomorphism as the identification of
          L-groups provided by the corresponding splitting:
                                       Um (kv ) ֒→ G̃1,v
                      HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                            13

        defined by Kudla. One readily checks from Kudla’s formulas that
        multiplying a given χW by a character χ′ of U1 has the effect of mul-
        tiplying the above splitting by χ′ composed with the determinant,
        which is compatible with the modification of (2.11) that would en-
        sue.
  This completes the description of L G1 , and L G2 is defined in a com-
pletely analogous way, by interchanging the role of V and W .
2.3.1. Remark. It would be interesting to see an account of how the covering
groups G̃1,v , G̃2,v might be seen as arising from the K2 -covers of Brylinski
and Deligne [BD01], and their L-groups above arising from the canonical
L-groups attached to these covers by Weissman [Wei].
2.4. The L-group and Arthur-SL2 of Howe duality. From now on we de-
note by G1,v , G2,v (or G1 (kv ), G2 (kv )) the covering groups G̃1,v , G̃2,v , or their
simplified versions of Table (2.1), when no confusion arises. However, we
do not adopt the simplified versions of their L-groups appearing in that ta-
ble, which depend on choices. Rather, we work throughout with the defini-
tions of L G1 , L G2 given in the previous subsection. We set Gv = G1,v ×G2,v ,
and L G = L G1 ×Gal(k̄/k) L G2 .
   From now on we assume throughout (as we may, by symmetry) that
d(n) ≤ m, i.e. G2 is the “small” group. We define the L-group of Howe duality
to be:
                                   L
                                      Gω := L G2 ,                                (2.12)
endowed with a canonical morphism:1
                                 L
                                     Gω × SL2 → L G,                             (2.13)
which is described as follows: To define the restriction of this map to L Gω ,
it is enough to define two L-morphisms (i.e. compatible with the quotient
to Gal(k̄/k): L Gω → L G1 and L Gω → L G2 . The latter is taken to be the
identity, and the former will be the “natural” morphism which will be de-
scribed below. We then map SL2 to the centralizer of the image of L Gω in
the connected component of L G1 .
    Before we proceed to the description of the map
                        L                              γ
                            Gω × SL2 = L G2 × SL2 −
                                                  → L G1 ,                       (2.14)
let us assume it to recall Adams’ conjecture, restricted to tempered repre-
sentations of G2 . (Non-tempered representations of the small group will
not play any role in this paper, and in any case the “naive” version of the
conjecture needs to be corrected in this case, see [Mœg11b, §7.1].
2.4.1. Conjecture (Adams’ conjecture). The theta lift to G1,v of a tempered
representation π of G2,v with Langlands parameter φ, if non-zero, belongs to an

  1S. Remark 2.4.2.
14                                YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

Arthur packet with Arthur parameter
                                        φ×Id              γ
                        φ′ : Wk′ v × SL2 −−−→ L G2 × SL2 −
                                                         → L G1 ,              (2.15)
where γ is the morphism (2.14).
   Here Wk′ v denotes the Weil (in the Archimedean case) or Weil-Deligne
group (in the non-Archimedean case) of kv .
   This conjecture, for tempered representations, has been proven in sev-
eral cases over Archimedean fields by Adams, Barbasch, Mœglin and Paul
[Ada89, AB95, Mœg89, Pau98, Pau00, Pau05]. In the non-Archimedean
case, it is very close to being a theorem, summarized in [AGa, Theorems 4.3
and 4.5], based on results of Atobe, Ichino, Gan and Savin [Ato, AGa, GI16,
GS12] extending previous results of Muić [Mui04, Mui06, Mui08a, Mui08b]
and Mœglin [Mœg11b, Mœg11a]. More precisely, the relevant cases of the
aforementioned theorems are when m ≥ m1 (statements (2),(3),(4)) in The-
orem 4.3, and statements (1), (2), (3) in Theorem 4.5. In all cases but the
“base case” of the “going-up tower” (i.e. statements (1), (2) in Theorem
4.5) it is immediate to see that the Langlands parameters given by [AGa]
are the ones of the “main” Langlands packet inside our desired Arthur
packet. In the remaining cases, one needs to argue that the stated repre-
sentations belong to our desired Arthur packet, as was done in [Mœg11b,
§8] for symplectic-even orthogonal pairs.
   We now come to a description of the morphism (2.14), commenting on
its relation with the definitions of Adams [Ada89] and the results of [AGa].
In all cases, after we describe the map from L Gω , we will map SL2 to the
centralizer of the image of L Gω in the identity component of L G1 , so that
the non-trivial unipotent orbit in SL2 maps into the principal unipotent orbit
in this centralizer. Hence, it remains to describe the map from L Gω .
         (1) When V is a quadratic space of odd dimension m, we embed:
          L
              Gω = Spn (C) × Gal(k̄/k) → L G1 = Spm−1 (C) × Gal(k̄/k)          (2.16)
             by identifying the symplectic space associated to the former with a
             symplectic subspace of the latter.
                Recall, however, from (2.8) that in this case the L-group L G1 is
             not the “standard” L-group of the two-fold cover of the metaplectic
             group, but a twist of it by the discriminant character of V . Therefore,
             the map (2.14) induces a map on L-parameters that corresponds to
             the one of [AGa], where a twist by χ−1 V appears. (The character χW
             of loc.cit. is in this case trivial.)
         (2) When V is a quadratic space of even dimension m, we embed:
     L
         Gω = On+1 (C) ×{±1} Gal(k̄/k) → L G1 = Om (C) ×{±1} Gal(k̄/k) (2.17)
              by identifying the quadratic space of the first group with a subspace
              of the quadratic space of the latter. Notice that for both L-groups,
               HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                     15

    Gal(k̄/k) maps to {±1} via the determinant of V , so the morphism
    is well-defined.
       To compare with the results of [AGa], notice that our choices for
    the L-group of G2 coincide, while to identify the L-groups of L G1
    one needs to multiply by the quadratic character χ̃V – this accounts
    for the factor of χ−1
                       V in their formulas, while χW is again trivial.
(3) When V is symplectic, W is orthogonal and we repeat what was
    done in the previous two cases, with the only difference that the
    ‘small” L-group is the one of the orthogonal space. Notice that now
    the character χV in the results of [AGa] will be trivial, while the
    character χW accounts for our twisted definition of L-groups.
(4) When V is unitary and the difference m − n of the dimensions of
                                                                         n
    V and W is an even number 2s, in which case both covers GL      ]  m
              m
    and GLgn of (2.9) are simultaneously split or non-split, and having
    the “standard” pinning of general linear groups in mind, we embed
    GLn (C) into the “middle” block of GLm (C). The element σ = σn of
                                                                  n
     gn m will go to the corresponding element σ = σm of GL
    GL                                                       ]  m when
    m and n are even (the extensions are split), and to the element:
                                       
                           Is
                                       
                              In        σm ,                      (2.18)
                                    −Is
   as in [Ada89], in the odd case, in order to make this map a homo-
   morphism. When m − n is odd, so exactly one of the two covers
        n
   ]
   GL          g m is non-split, we embed, as in [Ada89], the con-
       m and GLn
   nected component GLn (C) into the top left block of GLm (C), and
   map σn to the element:
                                      !
                                  In
                                        σm .                    (2.19)
                           Im−n
      A more linear-algebraic description of Langlands parameters into
   L G , L G will make the above definitions appear more natural, and
      1     2
   will clarify the relation with the results of [AGa]: It is easy to see
   that equivalence classes (i.e. GLm (C)-conjugacy classes) of Lang-
                                 n
   lands parameters into GL  ] m are conjugacy classes of Frobenius-
   semisimple homomorphisms
                         φ : WE′ → GLm (C)
   with the property that there is a non-degenerate bilinear form B on
   Cm with
                B(φ(w)x, φ(τ wτ −1 )y) = B(x, y),                (2.20)
   and
               B(y, x) = (−1)m+n+1 B(x, φ(τ 2 )y),               (2.21)
16                          YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

       where τ is some (any) chosen element of WF r WE .
          It is now easy to see that Langlands parameters into L G2 natu-
       rally give rise to (equivalence classes of) Langlands parameters into
       L G , and that this map between equivalence classes corresponds to
           1
       the map of L-groups described above. Moreover, the description of
       parameters in [AGa] is identical, except that the factor (−1)m+n+1 of
       (2.21) is replaced by (−1)m+1 . This corresponds to the twist by χ̃W
       that is needed to pass from L G1 to the L-group of Um , as in (2.11),
       and a similar twist by χ̃V is needed to pass from L G2 to the L-group
       of Un ; this explains the factors χ−1
                                          V χW appearing in the formulas of
       [AGa].
  This completes the description of the “L-group of Howe duality”, en-
dowed with a “canonical” morphism (2.13).
2.4.2. Remark. The morphism (2.13) that we defined ad-hoc appears to be the
“correct” one for equivalence classes of Langlands parameters; hence, it is
the “correct” one up to conjugacy by the connected component Ǧ of L G.
This makes it less canonical than the connected component ǦX of the L-
group of a spherical variety X which, in [SV], was given with a morphism:
                               ǦX × SL2 → Ǧ
canonical up to conjugacy by the canonical maximal torus (and completely
canonical if we were working with pinned groups). It would be desirable,
not only for aesthetic reasons, to have a more geometric definition of L Gω ,
together with an analog of the “boundary degenerations” of a spherical va-
riety for Howe duality, that would allow us to pinpoint a more canonical
map (2.13) of L-groups.
2.5. A Plancherel-theoretic version of Adams’ conjecture. Now consider
the unitary oscillator representation ω v at a place v as a genuine, unitary
representation of the dual pair Gv = G1,v × G2,v . Throughout this paper,
the “unitary dual” of these groups means the genuine unitary dual.
   The abstract theory of the Plancherel formula tells us that there is a de-
composition:                      Z
                             ωv =        Hπ µv (π),                     (2.22)
                                    cv
                                    G
where µv is a measure on the unitary dual, and for an irreducible unitary
representation π of Gv , the unitary representation Hπ is isomorphic to a
sum of copies of π.
   For more careful presentations of the Plancherel decomposition, includ-
ing issues of measurability, I point the reader to [Ber88] and [SV, §6.1]. For
the decomposition (2.22) to make sense, one needs to specify morphisms
from a dense subspace ω 0v of ω v to the Hilbert spaces Hπ , and the decom-
position is essentially unique, in the sense that the resulting measure on Gcv
                                                         0
which is valued in the space of Hermitian forms on ω v is unique.
                    HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                       17

   We will later see that in this case one can take ω 0v = ω ∞
                                                             v , or, in the lan-
guage of [Ber88], the decomposition is pointwise defined on ω ∞  v . Assuming
this, for (µ-almost) every irreducible unitary π = π1 ⊗ π2 of Gv , the mor-
phism ω ∞ v → Hπ of the Plancherel decomposition has to factor through a
(semisimple) πv -isotypic quotient of ω ∞  v . The Howe duality theorem im-
plies that π1 and π2 completely determine each other, and that the quotient
is multiplicity-free; in the notation used before, π1 = θ(π2 ) and π2 = θ(π1 ).
(Notice that we are throughout omitting the dependence on the character
ψv from the notation.) Hence, we have a Plancherel decomposition of the
form:
                               Z
                         ωv =       θ(π2 ) ˆ
                                          ⊗π2 µ2,v (π2 ),                 (2.23)
                                 d
                                 G 2,v

where µ2,v is now some measure on the unitary dual of G2,v (the push-
forward of the measure µv on G   cv ). The fact that the decomposition is point-
wise defined on ω ∞  v will be shown    in the context of the proof of Theorem
3.0.2, in §3.3.
   We formulate the following unitary variant of Adams’ conjecture. It
is the analog of the “relative local Langlands conjecture” [SV][Conjecture
16.2.2] for the L2 -space of a spherical variety. Recall that we are assuming
that G2 is the “small” group, i.e. m ≥ d(n).

2.5.1. Conjecture. There is a direct integral decomposition:
                                    Z
                             ωv =       Hφ µ2,v (φ),                       (2.24)
                                         [φ]

where:
     • [φ] runs over isomorphism classes of local tempered (i.e., bounded) Lang-
       lands parameters into L Gω = L G2 ;
     • µ2,v is in the natural class of measures on the set of such Langlands pa-
       rameters;
     • Hφ is isomorphic to a (possibly empty) direct sum of irreducible represen-
       tations belonging to the Arthur packet associated to the composition:
                              φ×Id
                 Wk′ v × SL2 −−−→ L Gω × SL2 → L (G1 × G2 ),               (2.25)

         where the last arrow is the canonical morphism (2.13).

   Notice that, by abuse of notation, we use the same symbol µ2,v for the
Plancherel measure on the unitary dual of G2,v , and for a measure on the
set of its tempered Langlands parameters. By “class” of the measure µ2,v ,
we mean, as in [SV], an equivalence class of measures that are absolutely
continuous with respect to each other. Given a choice of additive charac-
ter ψv , this equivalence class has a “canonical” representative which corre-
sponds to the conjecture of Hiraga-Ichino-Ikeda [HII08] on formal degrees.
18                              YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

For discrete parameters, this measure is:
                                   1
                    µ2,v ({φ}) = ♯ |γ(0, φ, Ad, ψv )|,                          (2.26)
                                 |Sφ |

where Sφ♯ is a finite group related to a centralizer of the parameter. Notice
that the adjoint γ-factor appearing in the formula makes sense also for our
non-standard versions of L-groups, and it remains unchanged under the
isomorphisms with more “classical” L-groups discussed in §2.3.
   It is clear that Conjecture 2.5.1 follows immediately from Adams’ conjec-
ture 2.4.1, once one knows that the Plancherel measure µ2,v of the oscillator
representation (2.23) is absolutely continuous with respect to the Plancherel
measure of the group G2,v – we will prove this in Theorem 3.0.2, including
the stated fact that the Plancherel decomposition is pointwise defined on
ω∞v .
   Given that, and choosing µ2,v = µG2,v , the Plancherel measure for G2,v ,
in (2.23) (determined by a choice of Haar measure on G2,v , which will be
done globally), and independently from Conjecture 2.5.1, we get canonical
morphisms from (2.23):

                             ω∞          ˆ
                              v → θ(π2 )⊗π2 ,                        (2.27)
up to scalars of absolute value 1, for µ2,v -almost every π2 . We will ac-
tually see that these morphisms are “continuous” in π2 , and hence well-
defined (possibly zero) for every tempered π2 , and we will see that these
morphisms factorize the square of the absolute value of the global theta
pairing.

3. P LANCHEREL DECOMPOSITION OF THE OSCILLATOR REPRESENTATION
  The discussion of L-groups and Conjecture 2.5.1 in the previous section
was formulated in such a way to establish the analogy with the theory of
period integrals, but to proceed we do not need to invoke Langlands pa-
rameters. The following theorem implies Conjecture 2.5.1 if one assumes
Adams’ conjecture 2.4.1:
3.0.2. Theorem. In the previous setting, there is a direct integral decomposition:
                             Z
                      ωv =               ˆ 2 µG2,v (π2 ),
                                  θ(π2 )⊗π                                    (3.1)
                                 d
                                 G 2,v

where µG2,v denotes Plancherel measure for G2,v (depending on a choice of Haar
measure on G2,v ), and it is understood that θ(π2 ) can be zero.
   The decomposition is pointwise defined on ω ∞  v , and for almost all π2 the hermit-
ian form on ω ∞v that  is pulled back from the  unitary structure of π = θ(π2 ) ˆ⊗π2 is
equal to:
                           XZ
     Planch
   Jπ       (Φ1 ⊗ Φ̄2 ) :=               hω v (g)Φ1 , Φ2 iωv hπ2 (g)ϕ, ϕiπ2 dg, (3.2)
                            ϕ   G2,v /C1
                    HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                           19

where ϕ runs over an orthonormal basis of π2 .
  In other words, for Φ1 , Φ2 ∈ ω ∞
                                  v we have:
                             Z
              hΦ1 , Φ2 iωv =       JπPlanch (Φ1 ⊗ Φ2 ) µG2,v (π2 ),             (3.3)
                                d
                                G 2,v

                          ˆ 2 , and the JπPlanch are positive semi-definite her-
where π stands for θ(π2 )⊗π
mitian forms (for µG2,v -almost all π2 ).
   In comparison to the abstract decomposition (2.23), this theorem spec-
ifies that the Plancherel measure for ω v is absolutely continuous with re-
spect to the Plancherel measure on G2,v , and determines the hermitian
forms of the Plancherel decomposition. The result is probably known to
experts, and at least parts of it have appeared in the literature – s. [Li89] for
the hermitian forms above and [GG14] for the determination of the mea-
sure in the “stable range”; cf. also [How79, Gel76, RS77, ØZ95, ØZ97] for
special cases. The proof of this theorem will be the goal of this section. For
the rest of this section we omit the index v from the notation, e.g. ω = ω v ,
G2 = G2,v , µG2 = µG2,v etc. At some points we may denote the fixed com-
pletion kv of our global field by F .
3.0.3. Remark. In the non-Archimedean case it has been proven by Yamana
[Yam14, Lemma 8.6] (s. also [GQT14, Proposition 11.5]) that the forms JπPlanch
are non-vanishing if and only if θ(π2 ) 6= 0. In particular, the support of
Plancherel measure coincides with the (closure of the) set of tempered rep-
resentations of G2,v which are distinguished by Howe duality. It is expected
that this should also be true in the Archimedean case. (To emphasize again
the analogy with spherical varieties, this is the analog of Theorem 6.4.1 in
[SV].)
3.1. Growth of matrix coefficients of ω.
3.1.1. Proposition. The matrix coefficients of the oscillator representation,
                              g 7→ hω(g)Φ1 , Φ2 iω ,
for Φ1 , Φ2 ∈ ω ∞ , when restricted to G2 , lie in the Harish-Chandra Schwartz space
C (G2 ) of genuine functions on G2 .
   This is essentially [Li89, Corollary 3.4] – actually, its proof is contained
in the proof of Theorem 3.2 of this paper. However, we shall formulate its
proof in terms of “doubling zeta integrals” (and a convergence result for
those due to Gan and Ichino), in order to establish facts that we need for
our global application. It should be pointed out that the interpretation of
local zeta integrals in terms of matrix coefficients was observed already in
[Li92].
   For a recollection of the notion of Harish-Chandra Schwartz space C (G2 )
for the points of reductive algebraic groups, and more generally groups of
“polynomial growth”, see [Ber88]. It coincides with the space of all smooth
20                          YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS


functions which are integrable against Ξ(g) (log kgk)N for all N (and sim-
ilarly for their derivatives under the universal enveloping algebra, in the
Archimedean case), where Ξ is the Harish-Chandra Ξ function and k · k is
any norm of polynomial growth on the group. The same definitions apply
to functions C1 -covers of algebraic groups, and we denote by C (G2 ) the
space of genuine Harish-Chandra Schwartz functions on G2 , i.e. those on
which the central C1 acts by the identity character.
   The proposition will follow from interpreting integrals against matrix
coefficients of ω as local zeta integrals of the doubling method for the stan-
dard L-function, and invoking well-known results for that case. While do-
ing so, we will be careful about canonically fixing certain isomorphisms,
for later use. In particular, we will also be making some comments about
global measures etc.
   Consider the (−ǫ)-hermitian space W = W ⊕(−W ), where (−W ) denotes
the same vector space with opposite hermitian form, and the direct sum is
an orthogonal one. The diagonal copy W diag ⊂ W is an isotropic subspace,
and the oscillator representation ω̃ associated to the symplectic space V ⊗W
and the additive character ψ has a Schrödinger model:
                             ω̃ ≃ L2 (V ⊗ W/ℓ),                          (3.4)
where ℓ is the Lagrangian V ⊗ W diag . In the next subsection, we will recall
that there is a canonical model up to canonical isomorphism for the oscilla-
tor representation, a canonical Haar measure (given the additive character
ψ) on V ⊗ W/ℓ and a distinguished isomorphism between the canonical
model for ω̃ and L2 (V ⊗ W/ℓ); hence, we can consider (3.4) as a canonical
isomorphism.
   By the symplectic form, we can identify the quotient V ⊗ W/ℓ with the
F -linear dual ℓ∗ . The space of smooth vectors is ω̃ ∞ = S(ℓ∗ ), the space of
Schwartz functions. The functional:
                           ev0 : S(ℓ∗ ) ∋ Φ 7→ Φ(0)                      (3.5)
                                                    f ⊗ W) stabilizing ℓ,
is an eigen-functional for the Siegel parabolic S ⊂ Sp(V
with eigencharacter which we temporarily denote by χ. Thus, by Frobenius
reciprocity the functional defines a morphism:
                                      f ⊗W)
                                      Sp(V
                           ω̃ ∞ → IndS        (χ),                       (3.6)
where Ind denotes unnormalized induction.
             f ⊗ (−W )) can canonically be identified with Sp(V
  The cover Sp(V                                                 f ⊗ W)
through an anti-genuine involution (i.e. the central C maps to C1 through
                                                      1

the inverse character). Thus, the oscillator representation associated to the
symplectic space V ⊗ (−W ) and the character ψ is canonically identified
with the dual ω ∨ = ω = ω ψ−1 .
  The embedding Sp(V ⊗ W ) × Sp(V ⊗ W ) → Sp(V × W) gives rise to a
morphism:
                  f ⊗ W ) × Sp(V
                 Sp(V           f ⊗ W ) → Sp(V  f ⊗ W)                   (3.7)
                      HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                              21

which is genuine in the first copy and anti-genuine in the second. Restrict-
ing the oscillator representation of the big group, there is an isomorphism:
                                   ∼
                           ωˆ
                            ⊗ω −
                               → ω̃| f
                                    Sp(V ×W )⊗ f
                                              Sp(V ⊗W )
                                                        .                            (3.8)
As we will recall in the next subsection, there is a canonical choice of a uni-
tary such isomorphism, and it has the following property: For any maximal
isotropic subspace Y ⊂ V ⊗ W whose linear dual Y ∗ is endowed with a
Haar measure, there are canonical unitary isomorphisms with Schrödinger
models:
                            ⊗ω ≃ L2 (Y ∗ ) ˆ
                           ωˆ              ⊗L2 (Y ∗ )                      (3.9)
and
                              ω̃ ≃ L2 (Y ∗ ⊕ Y ∗ ),                      (3.10)
                                               2
and then (3.8) is the canonical isomorphism:
                  L2 (Y ∗ ) ˆ
                           ⊗L2 (Y ∗ )   =    L2 (Y ∗ ⊕ Y ∗ ),                       (3.11)
                           Φ1 ⊗ Φ2 7→ Φ(x, y) := Φ1 (x)Φ2 (y).
(And, similarly, subspaces of smooth vectors are identified with the corre-
sponding spaces of Schwartz functions.)
  Moreover:
3.1.2. Lemma. For the canonical choices of isomorphisms (3.4) and (3.8), the com-
position of ev0 with the morphism (3.8) is the functional:
                                Φ1 ⊗ Φ2 7→ hΦ1 , Φ2 iω .                            (3.12)
   For our current purposes an equality up to a scalar of absolute value one
would be just as good; however, for our global application the exact equal-
ity is important, combined with the compatibility of the canonical isomor-
phisms with global models. This lemma is well-known, cf. [Li92, p.182],
but we will repeat its proof in the next subsection to clarify the canonical
nature of various isomorphisms.
   Assuming this lemma from now, we conclude:
3.1.3. Corollary. The matrix coefficients g 7→ hgΦ1 , Φ2 iω , lie in the space of
                                  f
                                  Sp(V ⊗W)
the induced representation IndS     (χ), identified with the space of functions
{f : f
     Sp(V ⊗W) → C|f (pg) = χ(p)f (g) ∀p ∈ S, g ∈ f  Sp(V ⊗W)}, and restricted
                f                f
as functions to Sp(V ⊗ W ) × 1 ⊂ Sp(V ⊗ W).
   Let now G(W) denote the preimage of the isometry group of W (consid-
                                     f ⊗ W), and P the corresponding
ered as a subgroup of Sp(V ⊗ W)) in Sp(V
Siegel parabolic of G(W) fixing the isotropic space W diag . The restriction
                         f ⊗W)
                         Sp(V
of an element of IndS      (χ), again considered as a function, to G(W)
via the natural embedding G(W) → f Sp(V ⊗ W) belongs to the space of the
   2Throughout, a bar over a vector space denotes the same space with the conjugate C-
action, and of course for L2 -spaces we have a linear isomorphism L2 → L2 given by Φ 7→ Φ̄.
22                             YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

                               G(W)
induced representation IndP     (χ|P ). Using normalized (unitary) induction
                                G(W)
now, which we will denote by IP       , it follows that the matrix coefficients
of ω, restricted to G2 ⊂ f
                         Sp(V ⊗W ) are restrictions via G2 → G2 ×1 ֒→ G(W)
of the normalized induced representation
                                   G(W)            −1
                                 IP        (χ|P · δP 2 )
of G(W), where δP denotes the modular character of P.
                                                                         −1
   We will now determine the growth of the character χδP 2 . It is more
convenient here to work with classical groups, so consider the quotient
P → ResE/F GLn , where ResE/F GLn is identified with the Levi quotient
of the Siegel parabolic of the classical group Sp(W), in such a way that the
canonical central cocharacter composed with the (left) adjoint action on the
unipotent radical is positive. Notice that the absolute value of the genuine
character χ factors through a character of ResE/F GLn – it is this character
that the following lemma is referring to.
                                                             −1
3.1.4. Lemma. The absolute value of the character χδP 2 , considered as a character
of ResE/F GLn as above, is:
                                      −1
                                 |χδP 2 | = | det |s0 ,                              (3.13)
where | · | denotes the absolute value of the field E, and
                                           m − d(n)
                                  s0 =              .                                (3.14)
                                              2
     Notice that s0 ≥ 0 according to our convention that m ≥ d(n).
Proof. This is well-known, and a fundamental fact for the theory of the
Siegel-Weil formula, but for convenience of the reader we verify it again:
by the explicit description of the Schrödinger model [RR93, Theorem 3.5],
                        f ⊗ W) acts on the functional ev0 by a character χ
the Siegel Levi S of Sp(V
                   1
with |χ| = | det | 2 . The map P → S corresponds to tensoring the standard
representation W of the Levi of P by V (and changing scalars from E to F ),
thus the determinant of the image is the m-th power of the determinant of
                                                        m                              d(n)
(the Levi of) P. This explains the factor | det | 2 , while the factor | det |− 2
arises by calculation of the modular character of P.                             
     Thus, to complete the proof of Proposition 3.1.1, up to the proof of Lemma
                                                   G(W)       −1
3.1.2, it suffices to show that for any f ∈ IP             (χδP 2 ), the function:
                                G2 ∋ g 7→ f ((g, 1)),
where g is embedded as above, lies in the Harish-Chandra Schwartz space.
This follows from the local theory of the doubling method, more precisely
from the following (or, rather, its proof):
                       HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                                 23

3.1.5. Lemma. For any tempered genuine representation π of G2 , any two smooth
                                                        G(W) ′
vectors v1 ∈ π, v2 ∈ π ∗ , and any smooth vector f ∈ IP        (χ ), the local zeta
integral:
                                    Z
               ZF (v1 , v2 , f ) :=    f ((g, 1))hπ(g)v1 , v2 idg            (3.15)
                                         G2 /C1

is absolutely convergent if |χ′ | = | det |s with s > − 21 .
Proof. See [GI14][Lemma 9.5].                                                               

   The proof of this lemma in loc.cit. actually shows that the function g 7→
f ((g, 1)) is in the Harish-Chandra space C (G2 ). By Lemma 3.1.4, and since
we are assuming that m ≥ d(n), this applies to the induced representation
 G(W)      −1
IP    (χδP 2 ), completing the proof of Proposition 3.1.1, except for Lemma
3.1.2 which will be proven in the next section.

3.2. Comparison of Schrödinger models. Suppose that Z is a symplectic
space (over our fixed local field which we keep omitting from the notation),
ω the oscillator representation of fSp(Z) determined by the additive charac-
ter ψ. If ℓ1 , ℓ2 are two Lagrangian subspaces, endowed with Haar measures
dx1 , dx2 , then ω can be realized on the spaces L2 (ℓ∗1 , dx1 ) and L2 (ℓ∗2 , dx2 ),
and there is a unique up to a scalar of absolute value 1 equivariant isome-
try:
                                                   ∼
                          Fℓ1 ,ℓ2 : L2 (ℓ∗1 , dx1 ) −
                                                    → L2 (ℓ∗2 , dx2 ).                  (3.16)
  Following [Tho08], we will now describe more canonical Schrödinger
models, replacing functions by half-densities valued appropriate line bundles,
and equipped with canonical isometries between them (see also [Li08] for a
nice presentation, and [LV80] for an earlier account of canonical intertwin-
ing operators).
   Namely, for a Lagrangian subspace ℓ, let Hℓ denote the space of L2 -half
densities3 on Z/ℓ valued in the hermitian line bundle whose sections are
functions on Z satisfying:
                                              
                                        hz, λi
                        f (λ + z) = ψ            f (z)                  (3.17)
                                           2
for all λ ∈ ℓ, z ∈ Z, where h , i denotes the symplectic pairing. We will see
below that there are canonical intertwiners between the spaces Hℓ for dif-
ferent choices of ℓ, so we will henceforth consider them as canonical models
for the oscillator representation.

   3I use “densities” for the sheaf of densities on our vector spaces, not just for the “Haar”
densities of loc.cit. Thus, our densities are functions on the vector spaces times the “Haar”
densities of loc.cit – when they are valued in the trivial line bundle their squares are (arbi-
trary) measures on the vector spaces, and when they are valued in a hermitian line bundle
the same is true for the squares of their absolute values.
24                               YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

  A choice of splitting of the quotient Z → Z/ℓ trivializes this line bundle,
and a choice of Haar measure dx on Z/ℓ = ℓ∗ (identified through the sym-
plectic pairing, z 7→ hz, ·i) whose positive square root is a half-density, turns
half-densities into functions, thus giving rise to a unitary isomorphism:
                                          ∼
                                        → L2 (ℓ∗ , dx).
                                     Hℓ −                                                  (3.18)
    Later, when we will return to this point for global purposes, there are
canonical Haar measures on the adelic points of these Lagrangians, and
any splitting of Z → Z/ℓ over the global field k will result in the same
trivialization of the aforementioned line bundle over the adelic points of
Z/ℓ (because ψ is automorphic), hence we can apply the present discussion
identifying functions with half-densities in a canonical way.
    Now, for two such Lagrangians ℓ1 , ℓ2 , there is a canonical (given the
character ψ) self-dual Haar measure µℓ1 ,ℓ2 on the symplectic space (ℓ1 +
ℓ2 )/(ℓ1 ∩ ℓ2 ). Using the canonical isomorphism:
               (ℓ1 + ℓ2 )/(ℓ1 ∩ ℓ2 ) ≃ ℓ1 /(ℓ1 ∩ ℓ2 ) ⊕ ℓ2 /(ℓ1 ∩ ℓ2 ),                    (3.19)
                  1
the square root µℓ21 ,ℓ2 is a half density on the space on the right. The formula:
                                Z                                          
                                                                   hx, yi         1
             Fℓ1 ,ℓ2 (φ)(y) =                      φ(x + y)ψ                    µℓ21 ,ℓ2   (3.20)
                                    x∈ℓ2 /ℓ1 ∩ℓ2                     2
defines the canonical intertwiner: Hℓ1 → Hℓ2 .
  Now we consider special cases that were encountered in the previous
subsection.
  First of all, there is a canonical isomorphism:
                                    ∼
                              → L2 (ℓ∗ , dx) ˆ
                         ˆ ω̄ −
                        ω⊗                  ⊗L2 (ℓ∗ , dx)
for any Lagrangian ℓ whose dual is endowed with a Haar measure dx, de-
termined by the condition that the unitary pairing between ω and ω̄ trans-
lates to the inner product on L2 (ℓ∗ , dx). This is (3.9).
   Secondly, if Z is a symplectic space and Z = Z ⊕ (−Z), and ℓ is the
diagonal of Z, there is a canonical splitting Z/ℓ → Z whose image is the first
copy of Z, and it is endowed with the self-dual Haar measure with respect
to the character ψ. This gives a canonical isomorphism of the oscillator
representation for Z with L2 (Z), which is (3.4).
   In the same setting, if Y is any Lagrangian of Z whose dual is endowed
with a Haar measure dx, then any choice of isotropic complement X to Y
in Z (giving rise to a complement X ⊕ X to Y ⊕ Y in Z) induces the same
isomorphism between the oscillator representation attached to Z and the
space:
                                L2 (Y ∗ ⊕ Y ∗ , dx × dx).
Indeed, a different choice of splitting for the quotient Z → Y ∗ = Z/Y
differs by a linear map κ : Y ∗ → Y . Hence, for a vector v ∈ HY ⊕Y , its
                         HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                                                                 25

images Φ, Φ′ under the two resulting isomorphisms:
                                             ∼
                                     → L2 (Y ∗ ⊕ Y ∗ , dx × dx)
                               HY ⊕Y −
satisfy:
                                                                       
                   ′                       hz, κ(z)i hz, κ(z)i
                  Φ (z) = ψ                         −                       Φ(z) = Φ(z),
                                               2         2
the minus sign in the bracket appearing because the symplectic forms on Z
and (−Z) are opposite. This establishes (3.10).
    Now we specialize to the setting of Lemma 3.1.2, except that we denote
our symplectic spaces by Z, Z instead of V ⊗ W , V ⊗ W. The oscillator
representation associated to Z will be denoted by ω, and that associated to
Z by ω̃. Take any Lagrangian Y ⊂ Z, and choose a Haar measure on Y ∗ .
Set ℓ1 = Y ⊕ Y , ℓ2 = Z diag .
    Choose a Lagrangian complement X of Y (identified with Y ∗ via the
symplectic pairing), and a Haar measure dx. As discussed before, this iden-
tifies ω̃ ≃ L2 (X ⊕ X, dx × dx). Moreover, we also saw that the first copy of
Z in Z identifies ω̃ with L2 (Z, dz), where dz is the self-dual measure with
respect to ψ. For φ1 ∈ Hℓ1 and φ2 = Fℓ1 ,ℓ2 φ1 ∈ Hℓ2 , the corresponding
functions Φ1 ∈ L2 (X ⊕ X, dx × dx), Φ2 ∈ L2 (Z, dz) are obtained by us-
ing Haar measures to turn half-densities into functions, and restricting to
X ⊕ X, resp. Z ⊕ 0. More precisely, splitting the self-dual Haar measure dz
on Z = X ⊕ Y as dx × dy, identifying the quotient ℓ2 /ℓ1 ∩ ℓ2 with X diag , and
                                                          1
applying formula (3.20) divided by the half-density dz 2 we get:
                                                      φ2                           (3.20)
                            Φ2 (x0 + y0 ) =                1   ((x0 + y0 , 0)) =====
                                                      dz   2

                                                                                               1
       Z                                                                            
                                                      h(x, x), (x0 + y0 , 0)i                µℓ21 ,ℓ2            (3.17)
             φ1 ((x + x0 + y0 , x))ψ                                                           1        1    =====
       x∈X                                                       2                             2
                                                                                            dx0 dy0     2


                                                                                                                              1
Z                                                                                                                 
                                   h(x + x0 , x), (y0 , 0)i                     h(x, x), (x0 + y0 , 0)i                     µℓ21 ,ℓ2
       φ1 ((x+x0 , x))ψ                                                 ψ                                                     1        1
 x∈X                                          2                                            2                              dx02 dy02
                                                                                                   1
                                   Z
                       hx0 , y0 i                                                             µℓ21 ,ℓ2
             =ψ                                  φ1 ((x + x0 , x))ψ (hx, y0 i)                  1        1   .
                          2                x∈X                                              dx02 dy02
                                   1              1             1
  Now, we can write µℓ21 ,ℓ2 = dx 2 ×dy02 , where we have identified ℓ2 /ℓ1 ∩ℓ2
with X diag as before, and ℓ1 /ℓ1 ∩ ℓ2 with Y ⊕ 0. Moreover, φ1 ((x + x0 , x)) =
                        1      1
Φ1 ((x + x0 , x))dx 2 dx02 . The last formula reads, then:
                                    Z
                          hx0 , y0 i
    Φ2 (x0 + y0 ) = ψ                       Φ1 ((x + x0 , x))ψ (hx, y0 i) dx.                                             (3.21)
                              2         x∈X
26                            YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

     In particular, for x0 = y0 = 0 we obtain:
                                     Z
                            Φ2 (0) =     Φ1 ((x, x))dx,
                                       x∈X
                                           ˆ ω̄ as in (3.11), we obtain the
and if Φ1 is in the image of a vector of ω ⊗
statement of Lemma 3.1.2.

3.3. Plancherel decomposition of the oscillator representation. We are
now ready to prove Theorem 3.0.2.
   We have seen in Proposition 3.1.1 that the matrix coefficients of ω ∞ lie
in the Harish-Chandra Schwartz space of G2 . The theorem will now fol-
low from the pointwise Plancherel decomposition for the Harish-Chandra
Schwartz space of the group G2 , provided that we can show that the her-
mitian forms JπPlanch of (3.2) are positive semi-definite. This has been proven
by Hongyu He [He03] under some additional assumptions. Notice that the
fact that the Plancherel measure for Ω is supported on the tempered dual
of G2 , given that the diagonal matrix coefficients of a dense subspace lie in
L2+ǫ (G), is a theorem of Cowling, Haagerup and Howe [CHH88, Theorem
1]. We will rely on and extend that theorem, using the Plancherel formula
for the Harish-Chandra Schwartz space:
3.3.1. Proposition. Let Ω be a unitary representation of (the points of) a reduc-
tive group G over a local field, and Ω0 a dense, invariant subspace of (necessar-
ily smooth) vectors whose matrix coefficients lie in the Harish-Chandra Schwartz
space C (G).
   For all tempered representations π consider the hermitian forms, depending on
the choice of a Haar measure on G:
                                XZ
                Jπ (Φ1 , Φ2 ) =      hΩ(g)Φ1 , Φ2 iΩ hπ(g)v, vi π dg,      (3.22)
                               v   G

the sum running over an orthonormal basis of π.
   Then Jπ is positive semi-definite for every tempered representation π of G, and
Ω admits the following Plancherel formula, pointwise defined on Ω0 :
                                      Z
                        hΦ1 , Φ2 iΩ =     Jπ (Φ1 , Φ2 )µG (π),               (3.23)
                                        b
                                        G
where µG denotes the Plancherel measure of G corresponding to the choice of Haar
measure in (3.22).
   The proposition immediately extends to genuine functions on G2 , and
the notion of Harish-Chandra space for those discussed after the statement
of Proposition 3.1.1. This is where we will apply it, but for notational sim-
plicity we present the proof for classical groups.

Proof. The formula (3.23) follows from the pointwise Plancherel decom-
position for the Harish-Chandra Schwartz space of the group G [HC76,
                   HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                        27

Wal03]: Any Harish-Chandra Schwartz function F on G has the pointwise
decomposition:                Z
                           F (g) =       Fπ (g)µG (π)                      (3.24)
                                     b
                                     G
with
                                     XZ
       Fπ (x) = tr(π̄(ρ(x)F dg)) =                F (gx)hπ(g)v, vi π dg,   (3.25)
                                     v    G(F )

where ρ denotes the right regular representation. In particular, when F is
the matrix coefficient F (g) = hΩ(g)Φ1 , Φ2 i, one has
                             Fπ (1) = Jπ (Φ1 , Φ2 ).
   We just need to explain why (3.23) is a Plancherel formula for our rep-
resentation Ω, which is equivalent to saying that the forms Jπ on Ω0 are
positive semi-definite; indeed, once this is established, the Hilbert spaces
of the abstract Plancherel formula (2.22) are obtained by completion.
   From [CHH88, Theorem 1], we know that Ω is a tempered representa-
tion. There are various equivalent characterizations of this property:
    (1) The support of Plancherel measure for Ω lies in the tempered dual
        Ĝtemp of G.
    (2) Every diagonal matrix coefficient of Ω can be approximated, uni-
        formly on compacta, by diagonal matrix coefficients of the right reg-
        ular representation ρ of G.
    (3) For every f ∈ L1 (G), we have an inequality of operator norms:
                            kΩ(f dg)k ≤ kρ(f dg)k.                         (3.26)
   For the equivalence, see [Fel60, Theorems 1.2 and 1.7] and [Eym64, Lemme
1.23].
   The algebra C (G)dg of Harish-Chandra Schwartz measures acts on every
tempered representation by convolution. I remind the reader an argument
for the convergence of the convolution operator Ω(hdg), for h ∈ C (G) and
Ω a tempered representation: Writing h ∈ C (G) as a limit of L1 -functions
fn , we see by (3.26) that the limit of the operators Ω(fn dg) exists, because
the same is true for the limit of the operators ρ(fn dg).
   We are interested in the action of a ring z(G) of “multipliers”, which lies
in the center of a certain completion of the algebra C (G)dg. This ring can
be identified with the algebra C (T ) of Schwartz functions which are sup-
ported on a finite number of connected components of the orbifold T of
tempered parameters. I outline the definitions: The tempered dual G        btemp
has a finite-to-one map onto the orbifold T whose points are G-conjugacy
classes of pairs (L, τ ), where L is a Levi subgroup and τ is the isomorphism
class of an irreducible, unitary, discrete-mod-center representation of L; the
fiber over (L, τ ) is the set of irreducible representations in the unitarily in-
duced representation IPG (τ ), where P is a parabolic with Levi subgroup L.
We let C (T ) be the space of Schwartz functions (i.e. smooth functions of
28                          YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

rapid decay) on this orbifold which are supported on a finite number of
connected components. (Of course, in the non-Archimedean case the no-
tion of rapid decay is irrelevant, since the components are compact. In this
case, the ring of multipliers z(G) that I am describing here is the restric-
tion to a finite number of spectral components of the “tempered Bernstein
center” of Schneider and Zink [SZ07]; cf. also [DHS].)
   There is a ring z(G) ≃ C (T ) (we will denote this isomorphism by z 7→ ẑ)
acting on any tempered representation Ω of G. Its action on K-finite vectors
(where K is some maximal compact subgroup) can be described in terms
of the Harish-Chandra Schwartz algebra, and it is then a simple exercise
on the Plancherel formula to show that this action extends to Ω (but we
will not use this extension). More precisely, let ẑ ∈ C (T ) be given. For
any fixed K-type τ , there is, by the Plancherel formula of [HC76, Wal03], a
unique element z τ ∈ C (G)dg which acts by the scalar ẑ(π) on the (K, τ )-
type vectors of π ∈ G  btemp , and annihilates all other types. (By abuse of
notation, we write ẑ(π) for the value of ẑ on the image of π in T .) The
formal sum:                            X
                                   z=      zτ                          (3.27)
                                      τ
over all K-types is a well-defined operator on the K-finite vectors of any
tempered representation Ω, and extends uniquely to an operator on Ω which
commutes with the action of G.
  Returning to the setting of the proposition, for any v, w ∈ Ω0 , h ∈ C (G)
and x ∈ G we have:
                            Z
        hΩ(x)Ω(hdg)v, wi =      h(g) hΩ(xg)v, wi dg = (ρ(hdg)F )(x),
                              G

where F (x) is the matrix coefficient hΩ(x)v, wi. In other words, the matrix
coefficient map from Ω ⊗ Ω̄ to functions on G intertwines the action of the
algebra C (G)dg on Ω with its right regular action on functions on G (which,
in particular, is convergent on the image of the matrix coefficient map).
   Since the right regular action of C (G)dg preserves the space C (G), we
may assume that the subspace Ω0 is stable under the action of C (G)dg (by
replacing it with its span under the action of this algebra).
   Now we return to (3.23), setting F (g) = hΩ(g)Φ, Φi. To prove that the
hermitian forms Jπ are positive semi-definite, it is enough to show it for
their restrictions to the set of K-finite vectors in Ω0 . Thus, assume that
Φ ∈ Ω0 is K-finite. If z ∈ z(G) we get:
                    0 ≤ hΩ(z)Φ, Ω(z)Φi = (ρ(z ∗ z)F )(1)
(where z ∗ denotes the adjoint operator, which for f dg ∈ C (G)dg is repre-
sented by f ∗ dg, with f ∗ (g) = f (g −1 ))
       Z
    =          |ẑ(π)|2 Fπ (1)µG (π) (by the Plancherel formula for C (G))
        btemp
        G
                    HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                         29
                            Z
                        =            |ẑ(π)|2 Jπ (Φ, Φ)µG (π).
                             btemp
                             G
   The Plancherel measure is concentrated on the set T 0 of elements of
btemp for which the map to T
G                                    is a bijection; indeed, in a family of repre-
sentations parabolically induced from discrete series, with the discrete se-
ries varying by unramified twists, generic elements are irreducible. Hence,
the above integral is really an integral over the orbifold T . Moreover,
the restriction of Fπ (1) = Jπ (Φ, Φ) to T 0 extends to a Schwartz function
t 7→ Jt (Φ, Φ) on this orbifold, again by the Plancherel formula for C (G). If
we had Jt (Φ, Φ) < 0 for some t ∈ T , and hence in some neighborhood of t,
we would get a contradiction by choosing ẑ with support in this neighbor-
hood. Thus, Jt (Φ, Φ) ≥ 0 for all t. This is enough to establish the Plancherel
formula, but we notice that it also implies that Jπ (Φ, Φ) ≥ 0 for every tem-
pered π: indeed, if the fiber over t ∈ T contains a finite number of elements
π1 , . . . , πk , and πi appears with multiplicity mi ≥ 1 in the corresponding
                                                                   P
induced representation, we have just shown that the sum ki=1 mi Jπi is a
positive semi-definite hermitian form, but since the representations πi are
inequivalent, each of the summands has to be positive semi-definite.
                                                                                
   Combining this with Proposition 3.1.1, Theorem 3.0.2 follows. We also
get as a corollary the following result, which generalizes a theorem of Hongyu
He [He03], answering a question of Jian-Shu Li [Li89] in the case where π2
is tempered:
3.3.2. Corollary. The hermitian forms JπPlanch of (3.2) are positive semi-definite,
for every tempered representation π2 of G2 .

                            4. E ULER FACTORIZATION
4.1. Global conjecture and theorem. With the spaces V and W defined
over a global field k (or its quadratic extension E, in the unitary case), and
the additive adele class character ψ, there is a central extension:
            1 → C1 → f
                     Sp(V ⊗ W )(Ak ) → Sp(V ⊗ W )(Ak ) → 1,                   (4.1)
equipped with a canonical splitting Sp(V ⊗ W )(k) ֒→ fSp(V ⊗ W )(Ak ), a
genuine, unitary representation ω and an automorphic (i.e. Sp(V ⊗ W )(k)-
invariant) functional:
                               I : ω ∞ → C.                         (4.2)
  Moreover, we may fix a restricted tensor product decomposition, as-
sumed unitary:
                                     O′
                                ∞
                              ω =       ω∞
                                         v ,                        (4.3)
                                            v
                                                              f
such that the factor ω v is the oscillator representation for Sp(V ⊗ W )(kv ),
the preimage of Sp(V ⊗ W )(kv ) in (4.1). Choosing a Lagrangian subspace
30                                  YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

Y ⊂ V ⊗ W , the representation ω admits a Schrödinger model with
                                     ω ∞ = S(Y ∗ (Ak )),
the canonical functional I being equal to the functional:
                                           X
                      S(Y ∗ (Ak )) ∋ Φ 7→       Φ(γ),                                       (4.4)
                                                           γ∈Y ∗ (k)

and the factorization (4.3) can be taken to be an analogous factorization for
the Schwartz space S(Y ∗ (Ak )), with ω v realized on its Schrödinger model
on S(Y ∗ (kv )). Measures on adelic vector spaces will always be taken to be
Tamagawa measures, and we fix Euler factorizations of those which on kv
or on the kv -points of a symplectic space are self-dual with respect to the
local factor ψv of the character ψ.
   We now restrict the global oscillator representation ω to the dual pair
G(Ak ) = G1 (Ak ) × G2 (Ak ), where by Gi (Ak ) we denote the C1 -cover ob-
tained by restricting (4.1) to the appropriate subgroup of Sp(V ⊗ W )(Ak ).
The canonical splitting of the cover over Sp(V ⊗ W )(k) induces a splitting
of Gi (Ak ) over the k-points of the corresponding classical group, and we
will denote the corresponding subgroup of Gi (Ak ) by Gi (k).
   Let [Gi ] = Gi (k)\Gi (Ak ). The space [Gi ]/C1 is the automorphic quotient
of a classical group, and we endow it with Tamagawa measure. We fix a
factorization of this measure into measures for the local groups Gi,v /C1 .
The notation L2 ([Gi ]) will denote the space of genuine functions on [Gi ],
endowed with the L2 -inner product obtained by integrating against Tama-
gawa measure on [Gi ]/C1 . Similarly, by “automorphic representation” for
Gi we will mean, throughout, a genuine automorphic representation.
   Let π1 , π2 be genuine, discrete automorphic representations of G1 , G2 ,
considered as subspaces of L2 ([Gi ]) (not just as abstract adelic representa-
tions) where [Gi ] = Gi (k)\Gi (Ak ). Set π = π1 ⊗ π2 , and define the theta
pairing:
                              PπAut : π̄ ∞ ⊗ ω ∞ → C                             (4.5)
by:
                                Z
  ∞     ∞
π̄ ⊗ω ∋ (ϕ1 ⊗ ϕ2 )⊗Φ 7→                          ϕ1 (g1 )ϕ2 (g2 )I(ω(g1 , g2 )Φ)d(g1 , g2 ),
                                     [G1 ]/C1 ×[G2 ]/C1
                                                                          (4.6)
whenever the integral above is absolutely convergent. This is of course
nothing else than the integral of ϕ1 against the theta lift of ϕ2 with respect
to Φ (or vice versa):
                           Z
       PπAut (ϕ1 ⊗ ϕ2 ) ⊗ Φ =                            ϕ1 (g1 )θ Aut (Φ, ϕ2 )(g1 )dg1 ,   (4.7)
                                              [G1 ]/C1

where                                     Z
                  Aut
              θ         (Φ, ϕ2 )(g1 ) =                  ϕ2 (g2 )I(ω(g1 , g2 )Φ)dg2 .       (4.8)
                                          [G2 ]/C1
                   HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                          31

(The image of the theta lift of elements of π2 will be denoted by θ Aut (π2 ),
for compatibility with the local notation.) We will eventually work with π2
cuspidal, in which case, as we will recall, θ Aut (Φ, ϕ2 )(g1 ) is in the discrete
automorphic spectrum of [G1 ] (possibly zero); in particular, the pairings
above are defined for every π1 , and non-zero iff π1 is not orthogonal to the
image of θ Aut .
   The pairing PπAut is the analog of the following “period” functional when
X is a quasi-affine homogeneous spherical variety for a group G over k:
                                           Z         X
              ∞
            π̄ ⊗ S(X(Ak )) ∋ ϕ ⊗ Φ 7→          ϕ(g)        Φ(γg)dg           (4.9)
                                               [G]      γ∈X(k)

which, when X(Ak ) = H(Ak )\G(Ak ) unfolds to the more familiar period
integrals of automorphic forms in π̄ over [H].
   The pairing PπAut is an element of the space HomG (π̄ ∞ ⊗ ω ∞ , C), which is
a restricted tensor product of the (at most one-dimensional) spaces HomG(kv ) (π̄v∞ ⊗
ω∞v , C), after we fix a unitary isomorphism with a restricted tensor product
of local unitary representations:
                                          ′
                                          O
                                  π∞ ≃         πv∞ .                         (4.10)
                                           v

  Our goal is to describe the Euler factorization of PπAut , or rather of the
square of its absolute value, in terms of the local Plancherel formula. It will
be more convenient to dualize. Hence, let:
                        JπAut : ω ∞ ⊗ ω̄ ∞ → π ⊗ π̄ → C                      (4.11)
be given by:
                                  X
             JπAut (Φ1 ⊗ Φ2 ) =       PπAut (ϕ̄ ⊗ Φ1 ) · PπAut (ϕ̄ ⊗ Φ2 ),   (4.12)
                                  ϕ

the sum ranging over an orthonormal basis of π. We will call this the global,
or automorphic relative character of Howe duality.
   For most of the groups that we are considering, the notion of global
Arthur parameters is meaningful, by the work of Arthur and others [Art13,
Mok15, KMSW]. In particular, we know that the discrete automorphic
specturm of G1 and G2 is partitioned in “packets” parametrized by “equiv-
alence classes of global Arthur parameters” which are symbolically written:
                             ψ : Lk × SL2 → L Gi ,                           (4.13)
(where Lk is supposed to denote the “global Langlands group” of the field,
an extension of the global Weil group) and whose real meaning is explained
in terms of automorphic representations of general linear groups in [Art13][§1].
We will assume this parametrization to be known in all cases, which is
work in progress, cf. [Li15], in order to formulate our global conjecture.
32                            YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

4.1.1. Remark. Of course, our groups are non-standard, and to identify them
with classical groups or double metaplectic covers thereof, we need to choose
idele class characters as in the local discussion of §2.2. It is clear that,
once the Arthur parametrization is known for the corresponding classi-
cal or metaplectic group, it gives rise in a canonical way to an analogous
parametrization of genuine automorphic representations for our C1 -covering
group in terms of parameters into its non-standard L-group that we at-
tached in §2.3. (For metaplectic double covers, we recall that this parametriza-
tion is only canonical given the choice of additive character ψ.)

   We will start by formulating a global conjecture, the analog of [SV][Con-
jecture 17.4.1]. We will restrict ourselves to the “most tempered” part of
the distinguished spectrum, which should correspond to discrete “global
Arthur parameters” of the form (2.25) (with the Weil-Deligne group re-
placed by Lk ). Thus, call a global Arthur parameter for G = G1 × G2
“ω-distinguished” if it is of the form:

                             φ×Id                   γ
                 Lk × SL2 −−−→ L Gω × SL2 −
                                          → L (G1 × G2 ),                   (4.14)
where the canonical map γ is that of (2.13), and φ is discrete (i.e. does not
“factor through a Levi subgroup” – again, this has to be understood as in
Arthur’s book).
   Attached to such a parameter, there is (by the aforementioned work of
Arthur and others, some in progress) a canonical subspace Aφ of L2 ([G]).
For the groups under consideration, this space is multiplicity-free, i.e. every
irreducible adelic representation in this space appears with multipliplicity
one. Notice that for the (disconnected) even orthogonal group this is not
explicitly stated in [Art13], but can be inferred from Theorem 1.5.2 in that
monograph. It has also been established by means of the theta correspon-
dence by Atobe-Gan [AGb].

4.1.2. Conjecture. Consider an ω-distinguished global Arthur parameter induced
from a discrete parameter φ : Lk → L G2 as above. Let π = π1 ⊗ π2 ⊂ Aφ , and as-
sume (as expected by the generalized Ramanujan conjecture) that π2 is tempered.
Then there is a rational number q such that:
                                          ∗
                                          Y
                              JπAut = q        JπPlanch
                                                  v
                                                        .                   (4.15)
                                           v

Here πv = π1,v ⊗ π2,v with π1,v the theta lift of π2,v , and JπPlanch
                                                                v
                                                                       denotes the
hermitian forms of the local Plancherel formula of Theorem 3.0.2 (possibly zero).
The regularized Euler product is understood as follows: For almost every place, the
Euler factor will be equal to a local unramified L-factor:

                                 Lv (s0 + 12 , πv )
                                                    ,                       (4.16)
                                     dv (s0 )
                    HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                            33


where dv (s) is an explicit product of Hecke L-factors and s0 = m−d(n)
                                                                  2    ≥ 0 as in
(3.14). We thus understand the Euler product as the partial L-value:
                                   LS (s0 + 21 , π)
                                                    ,                          (4.17)
                                       dS (s0 )
where S is a sufficiently large set finite set of places, times the above product over
v ∈ S.
4.1.3. Remark. The L-function appearing in the numerator is the “standard
L-function” for parameters into our non-standard L-groups of §2.3. It is
defined as in the “standard” case: When the L-group is a subgroup of
O(C) × Gal(k̄/k) or Sp(C) × Gal(k̄/k) (we omit the dimension from the no-
tation), the standard representation is the standard representation of O(C),
resp. Sp(C). In the unitary case, where the connected component of the
L-group is GL(C), the standard representation is obtained by base change
from k to E. The reader can easily see that our non-standard L-groups
spare us the need to include the character χV in formulas as in [GQT14].
The abelian L-factor dv (s0 ) appears in the evaluation of local zeta integrals,
cf. [GQT14, §11.6] and has been computed in [LR05, p.334, Remark 3]. I
leave it to the reader to explicate the precise meaning of the abelian factors
dv (s0 ) in our setting, since this is somewhat orthogonal to the goal of this
paper.
   Let Aφ,i be the projection of Aφ to L2 ([Gi ]). If we assume that the global
theta lift of an irreducible π2 ⊂ Aφ,2 lies in Aφ,1 , which is the global version
of Adams’ conjecture, and restrict our attention to the case where both π2
and θ Aut(π2 ) are (zero or) cuspidal, the conjecture above is a consequence
of the following:
4.1.4. Theorem. Assume that π = θ Aut(π2 ) ⊗ π2 is cuspidal (or zero), with π2
tempered. Exclude the case when W is symplectic of dimension n and V is split
orthogonal of dimension 2(n + 1). Then π = 0 if and only if the right hand side
of (4.15) is zero, and in any case formula (4.15) is true on the space of π, with
q = [E : k].
  The statement is just a reinterpretation of known versions of the Rallis
inner product formula, as we will see in the next section.
Remarks.     (1) The statement means that θ Aut (π2 ) is zero if and only if the
       partial L-function is zero at s0 , or some of the local factors JπPlanch
                                                                            v
       are zero.
   (2) Temperedness ensures that the local Euler factors JπPlanchv
                                                                      are well-
       defined. These factors also turn out to be meromorphic in the pa-
       rameters of the representation, and the formulas of [GQT14, Yam14]
       extend the above result off the tempered spectrum of G2 .
   (3) The condition that θ Aut (π2 ) is cuspidal is pretty restrictive: it only
       happens once in every Witt tower. It would be desirable to verify
34                             YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

          the conjecture also in the case where π2 is discrete but not cuspidal.
          I do not do this in this paper.
     The goal of the rest of this section will be to prove this theorem.

4.2. Reinterpretation of the Rallis inner product formula.

4.2.1. Different ranges for the theta correspondence. For the purposes of apply-
ing the Siegel-Weil theorem and obtaining the Rallis inner product formula,
one distinguishes the following cases for a dual pair (G1 , G2 ) as in Table
(2.1) – without, here, necessarily assuming that m ≥ d(n):
   First of all, let r denote the Witt index of V (the dimension of its maximal
isotropic subspace).
      • When r = 0 or m − r > d(n), we are in the convergent range.
          Assume now that this is not the case.
     • The case m < d(n) is the first term range.
     • The case m = d(n) is the boundary case.
     • The case d(n) < m ≤ 2d(n) is the second term range.
   Having assumed that m ≥ d(n) we are either in the boundary or second
term range, or in the convergent range. For the second term range, we also
need to impose an extra condition imposed by Kudla-Rallis:
                                      r ≤ n.                               (4.18)
The only case we are excluding by this condition is when ǫ = 1, m = 2d(n)
and V is split, i.e. the lift from G2 = Spn to the split G1 = O2(n+1) . It
is a technical condition that should not be necessary, but needs different
techniques, see the discussion in [GQT14, §3.5].

4.2.2. Statement of the Rallis inner product formula. Denote, as before, by W
the (−ǫ)-hermitian space W ⊕ (−W ), and by ω̃ the oscillator representation
of the adelic covering group f  Sp(V ⊗ W)(Ak ). By the isomorphism (3.8), any
pair of vectors Φ1 , Φ2 ∈ ω give rise to a vector in ω̃, which we will denote
just by Φ1 ⊗ Φ2 .
   Recall also the morphism (3.6), from the oscillator representation attached
to V ⊗ W to a degenerate principal series. This morphism was obtained
by realizing the local oscillator representation ω̃ v on the space L2 (ℓ∗ (kv )),
where ℓ was the Lagrangian subspace V ⊗W , embedded diagonally. In §3.2
we described ways to achieve this realization, by choosing a Haar measure
on ℓ∗ (kv ) and a splitting of the natural map V ⊗ W → V ⊗ W/ℓ = ℓ∗ ,
and we described canonical local choices for those data. These choices do
not matter globally (any global choice of splitting, together with Tamagawa
Haar measure, will produce the same functional), but we work with them
throughout in order to fix an identification of the local factors of ω̃ as in
(4.3) with L2 (ℓ∗ (kv )), and a factorization of the global functional ev0 with
the corresponding product of local functionals.
                      HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                                        35

                                                                              f ⊗W)(A )
                                                                              Sp(V
   We will denote the image of a vector Φ ∈ ω̃ ∞ by fΦ ∈ IndS(Ak )  k
                                                                      (χ),
and based on the isomorphisms just recalled it comes with an Euler factor-
ization, induced from (4.3):
                                    O
                               fΦ =     f Φv .                      (4.19)
                                                  v

4.2.3. Theorem. Suppose that m ≥ d(n) and r ≤ n.
   Let π2 be a cuspidal, genuine automorphic representation of G2 and consider
the global theta lift π1 = θ Aut (π2 ) to G1 . Then:
    (1) π1 , if non-zero, is discrete (i.e., it lies in L2 ([G1 ])). It is cuspidal if and
        only if V is anisotropic, or the global theta lift to G−2  1 is zero, where G1
                                                                                        −2

        is constructed like G1 , replacing V by an ǫ-hermitian space V ′ such that
        V is the orthogonal sum of V ′ and a split two-dimensional ǫ-hermitian
        subspace.
    (2) If π1 is cuspidal then for ϕ1 , ϕ2 ∈ π2 we have:
                                                            ∗
                                                            Y
    θ Aut (ϕ1 , Φ1 ), θ Aut (ϕ2 , Φ2 ) L2 [G1 ] = [E : k]       Zv (ϕ1,v , ϕ2,v , fΦ1,v ⊗Φ2,v )
                                                            v
                                                                                           (4.20)
        where s0 = m−d(n)
                     2    , and Zv is the local zeta integral (3.15) of the doubling
        method:
                                   Z
       Zv (ϕ1,v , ϕ2,v , fΦv ) =              fΦv (g, 1)hπv (g)ϕ1,v , ϕ2,v idg.            (4.21)
                                   G2,v /C1

Proof. For the discreteness statement, see [Ral84]; also [Yam14, Proposition
10.1] – notice that condition (4) of this proposition is satisfied because we
are assuming m ≥ d(n).
  Under the assumption that π1 is cuspidal, (4.20) is [GQT14, Theorem
11.4], except for the boundary case where I point the reader to [Yam14,
Lemma 10.1].                                                                
4.2.4. Reinterpretation in terms of the Plancherel formula. We will now reinter-
pret the Rallis inner product formula to prove Theorem 4.1.4.
   By Lemma 3.1.2, we have fΦ1,v ⊗Φ2,v (g, 1) = hω(g)Φ1,v , Φ2,v iω for g ∈
G2 (Ak ). Hence, the local zeta integral (4.21), for Φv = Φ1,v ⊗ Φ2,v can be
written:
                                   Z
 Zv (ϕ1,v , ϕ2,v , fΦ1,v ⊗Φ2,v ) =    hω(g)Φ1,v , Φ2,v iω hπv (g)ϕ1,v , ϕ2,v idg.
                                       G2,v /C1
                                                                            (4.22)
   By Theorem 3.0.2, these are the morphisms of the local Plancherel for-
mula with measure µG2,v , the Plancherel measure for G2,v . More precisely,
in the notation used here:
                                         X
             JπPlanch
                v
                      (Φ 1,v ⊗ Φ 2,v ) =   Zv (ϕ2,v , ϕ2,v , fΦ1,v ⊗Φ2,v ), (4.23)
                                             ϕ2,v
36                                      YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

the sum ranging over an orthonormal basis for π2,v .
  Thus,
                              X
           JπAut (Φ1 ⊗ Φ2 ) =   PπAut (ϕ̄ ⊗ Φ1 ) · PπAut (ϕ̄ ⊗ Φ2 )
                                            ϕ

(sum over ϕ = ϕ1 ⊗ ϕ2 in an orthonormal basis of π = π1 ⊗ π2 )
   X Z                                          Z
=              ϕ1 (g1 )θ Aut(Φ1 , ϕ2 )(g1 )dg1 ·  ϕ1 (g1 )θ Aut (Φ2 , ϕ2 )(g1 )dg1 , =
     ϕ1 ⊗ϕ2   [G1 ]/C1                                      [G1 ]/C1
                             X
                         =         θ Aut (ϕ2 , Φ1 ), θ Aut (ϕ2 , Φ2 ) L2 [G1 ] =
                             ϕ2
                         ∗ X
                         Y
          = [E : k]               Zv (ϕ2,v , ϕ2,v , fΦ1,v ⊗Φ2,v )   (by Theorem 4.2.3)
                         v ϕ2,v
                                   ∗
                                   Y
                     = [E : k]          JπPlanch
                                           v
                                                 (Φ1,v ⊗ Φ2,v ) (by (4.23)),
                                    v
as asserted in Theorem 4.1.4.

                                            R EFERENCES
[AB95]        Jeffrey Adams and Dan Barbasch. Reductive dual pair cor-
              respondence for complex groups. J. Funct. Anal.,                      132(1):1–42,
              1995.        URL:        http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jfan.1995.1099,
              doi:10.1006/jfan.1995.1099.
[Ada89]       J. Adams. L-functoriality for dual pairs. Astérisque, (171-172):85–129, 1989. Or-
              bites unipotentes et représentations, II.
[Art13]       James Arthur. The endoscopic classification of representations, volume 61 of
              American Mathematical Society Colloquium Publications. American Mathemati-
              cal Society, Providence, RI, 2013. Orthogonal and symplectic groups. URL:
              http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/coll/061, doi:10.1090/coll/061.
[AGa]         Hiraku Atobe and Wee Teck Gan. Local theta correspondence of tempered rep-
              resentations and Langlands parameters. Preprint. arXiv:1602.01299.
[AGb]         Hiraku Atobe and Wee Teck Gan. On the local Langlands correspondence and
              Arthur conjecture for even orthogonal groups. Preprint. arXiv:1602.01297.
[Ato]         Hiraku Atobe. The local theta correspondence and the local Gan-Gross-Prasad
              conjecture for the symplectic-metaplectic case. Preprint. arXiv:1502.03528.
[Ber88]       Joseph     N.    Bernstein.    On      the    support    of    Plancherel    mea-
              sure.    J.     Geom.     Phys.,      5(4):663–710     (1989),     1988.     URL:
              http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0393-0440(88)90024-1,
              doi:10.1016/0393-0440(88)90024-1.
[BD01]        Jean-Luc Brylinski and Pierre Deligne. Central extensions of reduc-
              tive groups by K2 . Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci., (94):5–85,
              2001.     URL:       http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10240-001-8192-2,
              doi:10.1007/s10240-001-8192-2.
[CHH88]       M. Cowling, U. Haagerup, and R. Howe. Almost L2 matrix coefficients. J. Reine
              Angew. Math., 387:97–110, 1988.
[DHS]         Patrick Delorme, Pascale Harinck, and Yiannis Sakellaridis. Paley-Wiener theo-
              rems for a p-adic spherical variety. Preprint. arXiv:1410.2279.
                     HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                                   37

[Eym64]   Pierre Eymard. L’algèbre de Fourier d’un groupe localement compact. Bull. Soc.
          Math. France, 92:181–236, 1964.
[Fel60]   J. M. G. Fell. The dual spaces of C ∗ -algebras. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 94:365–403,
          1960.
[GN10]    Dennis Gaitsgory and David Nadler. Spherical varieties and Langlands duality.
          Mosc. Math. J., 10(1):65–137, 271, 2010.
[GG14]    Wee Teck Gan and Raul Gomez. A conjecture of Sakellaridis-
          Venkatesh on the unitary spectrum of spherical varieties. In Sym-
          metry:      representation theory and its applications, volume 257 of
          Progr. Math., pages 185–226. Birkhäuser/Springer, New York, 2014.
          URL:               http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-1590-3_7,
          doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-1590-3_7.
[GGP12]   Wee Teck Gan, Benedict H. Gross, and Dipendra Prasad. Symplectic local root
          numbers, central critical L values, and restriction problems in the representation
          theory of classical groups. Astérisque, (346):1–109, 2012. Sur les conjectures de
          Gross et Prasad. I.
[GI14]    Wee Teck Gan and Atsushi Ichino. Formal degrees and lo-
          cal    theta     correspondence. Invent.         Math.,    195(3):509–672,      2014.
          URL:                  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00222-013-0460-5,
          doi:10.1007/s00222-013-0460-5.
[GI16]    Wee Teck Gan and Atsushi Ichino. The Gross-Prasad conjecture and local theta
          correspondence. Invent. Math., 2016. doi:10.1007/s00222-016-0662-8.
[GQT14]   Wee Teck Gan, Yannan Qiu, and Shuichiro Takeda. The regular-
          ized Siegel-Weil formula (the second term identity) and the Ral-
          lis inner product formula. Invent. Math.,                   198(3):739–831,     2014.
          URL:                  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00222-014-0509-0,
          doi:10.1007/s00222-014-0509-0.
[GS12]    Wee       Teck      Gan     and      Gordan        Savin.     Representations      of
          metaplectic       groups    I:    epsilon     dichotomy       and     local    Lang-
          lands      correspondence.     Compos.       Math.,      148(6):1655–1694,      2012.
          URL:                  http://dx.doi.org/10.1112/S0010437X12000486,
          doi:10.1112/S0010437X12000486.
[GT11]    Wee Teck Gan and Shuichiro Takeda. On the regularized Siegel-
          Weil formula (the second term identity) and non-vanishing of theta
          lifts from orthogonal groups. J. Reine Angew. Math., 659:175–244,
          2011.        URL:        http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/CRELLE.2011.076,
          doi:10.1515/CRELLE.2011.076.
[GT16]    Wee Teck Gan and Shuichiro Takeda. A proof of the Howe du-
          ality conjecture. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 29(2):473–493, 2016. URL:
          http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/jams/839, doi:10.1090/jams/839.
[Gel76]   Stephen S. Gelbart. Weil’s representation and the spectrum of the metaplectic group.
          Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 530. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1976.
[HC76]    Harish-Chandra. Harmonic analysis on real reductive groups. III. The Maass-
          Selberg relations and the Plancherel formula. Ann. of Math. (2), 104(1):117–201,
          1976.
[He03]    Hongyu He. Unitary representations and theta correspondence
          for type I classical groups. J. Funct. Anal., 199(1):92–121, 2003.
          URL:            http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022-1236(02)00170-2,
          doi:10.1016/S0022-1236(02)00170-2.
[HII08]   Kaoru Hiraga, Atsushi Ichino, and Tamotsu Ikeda. Formal de-
          grees and adjoint γ-factors. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 21(1):283–304, 2008.
          URL:            http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/S0894-0347-07-00567-X,
          doi:10.1090/S0894-0347-07-00567-X.
38                                YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

[How79]   Roger     Howe.        On      some        results    of    Strichartz      and  Rallis
          and     Schiffman.      J.     Funct.      Anal.,     32(3):297–303,       1979. URL:
          http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0022-1236(79)90041-7,
          doi:10.1016/0022-1236(79)90041-7.
[How89]   Roger Howe. Transcending classical invariant theory. J. Amer. Math. Soc.,
          2(3):535–552,      1989. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1990942,
          doi:10.2307/1990942.
[Ich01]   Atsushi Ichino. On the regularized Siegel-Weil formula. J. Reine Angew. Math.,
          539:201–234, 2001. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/crll.2001.076,
          doi:10.1515/crll.2001.076.
[Ich04]   Atsushi       Ichino.       A       regularized        Siegel-Weil       formula   for
          unitary      groups.        Math.        Z.,       247(2):241–277,        2004.  URL:
          http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00209-003-0580-5,
          doi:10.1007/s00209-003-0580-5.
[Ich07]   Atsushi      Ichino.       On        the      Siegel-Weil        formula     for  uni-
          tary      groups.       Math.          Z.,       255(4):721–729,         2007.   URL:
          http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00209-006-0045-8,
          doi:10.1007/s00209-006-0045-8.
[II10]    Atsushi Ichino and Tamutsu Ikeda. On the periods of automorphic forms on
          special orthogonal groups and the Gross-Prasad conjecture. Geom. Funct. Anal.,
          19(5):1378–1425, 2010. doi:10.1007/s00039-009-0040-4.
[JS07]    Dihua Jiang and David Soudry. On the genericity of cuspidal au-
          tomorphic forms of SO(2n + 1). II. Compos. Math., 143(3):721–748,
          2007.      URL:        http://dx.doi.org/10.1112/S0010437X07002795,
          doi:10.1112/S0010437X07002795.
[KMSW]    Tasho Kaletha, Alberto Minguez, Sug Woo Shin, and Paul-James White. Endo-
          scopic classification of representations: Inner forms of unitary groups. Preprint.
          arXiv:1409.3731.
[KR88a]   Stephen      S.     Kudla        and       Stephen       Rallis.     On     the  Weil-
          Siegel     formula.      J.     Reine        Angew.      Math.,       387:1–68,  1988.
          URL:                    http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/crll.1988.391.65,
          doi:10.1515/crll.1988.391.65.
[KR88b]   Stephen S. Kudla and Stephen Rallis. On the Weil-Siegel formula.
          II. The isotropic convergent case. J. Reine Angew. Math., 391:65–84,
          1988.       URL:        http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/crll.1988.391.65,
          doi:10.1515/crll.1988.391.65.
[KR94]    Stephen S. Kudla and Stephen Rallis. A regularized Siegel-Weil for-
          mula: the first term identity. Ann. of Math. (2), 140(1):1–80, 1994. URL:
          http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2118540, doi:10.2307/2118540.
[Kud94]   Stephen      S.     Kudla.        Splitting      metaplectic        covers    of  dual
          reductive       pairs.      Israel      J.     Math.,       87(1-3):361–401,     1994.
          URL:                               http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02773003,
          doi:10.1007/BF02773003.
[Kud96]   Stephen S. Kudla. Notes on the local theta correspondence. Notes from 10 lec-
          tures given at the European School on Group Theory in September 1996, 1996.
          URL: http://www.math.toronto.edu/skudla/castle.pdf.
[LR05]    Erez M. Lapid and Stephen Rallis. On the local factors of rep-
          resentations of classical groups. In Automorphic representations, L-
          functions and applications:         progress and prospects, volume 11 of Ohio
          State Univ. Math. Res. Inst. Publ., pages 309–359. de Gruyter, Berlin,
          2005.      URL:        http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/9783110892703.309,
          doi:10.1515/9783110892703.309.
                      HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                                39

[Li89]   Jian-Shu Li. Singular unitary representations of classical groups. Invent. Math.,
         97(2):237–255, 1989. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01389041,
         doi:10.1007/BF01389041.
[Li92]   Jian-Shu Li. Nonvanishing theorems for the cohomology of cer-
         tain arithmetic quotients. J. Reine Angew. Math., 428:177–217, 1992.
         URL:                   http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/crll.1992.428.177,
         doi:10.1515/crll.1992.428.177.
[Li08]   Wen-Wei Li. The Weil representation and its character. Mas-
         ters     Thesis,       Mathematisch       Instituut   Leiden,      2008.      URL:
         http://www.wwli.url.tw/downloads/scriptie-master.pdf.
[Li15]   Wen-Wei Li. La formule des traces stable pour le groupe
         métaplectique:      les termes elliptiques. Invent. Math., 202(2):743–838,
         2015.       URL:      http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00222-015-0577-9,
         doi:10.1007/s00222-015-0577-9.
[LV80]   Gérard Lion and Michèle Vergne. The Weil representation, Maslov index and theta
         series, volume 6 of Progress in Mathematics. Birkhäuser, Boston, Mass., 1980.
[Mœg89] C. Mœglin. Correspondance de Howe pour les paires reductives duales:
         quelques calculs dans le cas archimédien. J. Funct. Anal., 85(1):1–85,
         1989. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0022-1236(89)90046-3,
         doi:10.1016/0022-1236(89)90046-3.
[Mœg97] Colette Mœglin. Non nullité de certains relêvements par séries théta. J. Lie The-
         ory, 7(2):201–229, 1997.
[Mœg11a] C. Mœglin. Multiplicité 1 dans les paquets d’Arthur aux places p-adiques. In On
         certain L-functions, volume 13 of Clay Math. Proc., pages 333–374. Amer. Math.
         Soc., Providence, RI, 2011.
[Mœg11b] Colette Mœglin. Conjecture d’Adams pour la correspondance de Howe et filtra-
         tion de Kudla. In Arithmetic geometry and automorphic forms, volume 19 of Adv.
         Lect. Math. (ALM), pages 445–503. Int. Press, Somerville, MA, 2011.
[Mok15] Chung Pang Mok. Endoscopic classification of representations of quasi-
         split unitary groups. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 235(1108):vi+248, 2015. URL:
         http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/memo/1108, doi:10.1090/memo/1108.
[Mui04]  Goran Muić. Howe correspondence for discrete series represen-
         tations; the case of (Sp(n), O(V )). J. Reine Angew. Math., 567:99–
         150,      2004.     URL:     http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/crll.2004.014,
         doi:10.1515/crll.2004.014.
[Mui06]  Goran Muić. On the structure of the full lift for the Howe correspondence
         of (Sp(n), O(V )) for rank-one reducibilities. Canad. Math. Bull., 49(4):578–
         591,     2006. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.4153/CMB-2006-054-3,
         doi:10.4153/CMB-2006-054-3.
[Mui08a] Goran Muić. On the structure of theta lifts of discrete series
         for dual pairs (Sp(n), O(V )). Israel J. Math., 164:87–124, 2008.
         URL:                  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11856-008-0022-5,
         doi:10.1007/s11856-008-0022-5.
[Mui08b] Goran Muić. Theta lifts of tempered representations for dual
         pairs      (Sp2n , O(V )).    Canad.   J.    Math.,     60(6):1306–1335,       2008.
         URL:                        http://dx.doi.org/10.4153/CJM-2008-056-6,
         doi:10.4153/CJM-2008-056-6.
[ØZ95]   B. Ørsted and G. Zhang. L2 -versions of the Howe correspondence. II. J. Math.
         Pures Appl. (9), 74(2):165–183, 1995.
[ØZ97]   Bent Ørsted and Genkai Zhang. L2 -versions of the Howe correspondence. I.
         Math. Scand., 80(1):125–160, 1997.
[Pau98]  Annegret         Paul.       Howe      correspondence        for     real       uni-
         tary       groups.       J.     Funct.      Anal.,     159(2):384–431,         1998.
40                                 YIANNIS SAKELLARIDIS

          URL:                         http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jfan.1998.3330,
          doi:10.1006/jfan.1998.3330.
[Pau00]   Annegret Paul. Howe correspondence for real unitary groups.
          II.    Proc.      Amer.     Math.    Soc.,     128(10):3129–3136,          2000.     URL:
          http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/S0002-9939-00-05359-4,
          doi:10.1090/S0002-9939-00-05359-4.
[Pau05]   Annegret Paul. On the Howe correspondence for symplectic-
          orthogonal dual pairs. J. Funct. Anal.,                         228(2):270–310,      2005.
          URL:                    http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfa.2005.03.015,
          doi:10.1016/j.jfa.2005.03.015.
[Ral84]   S. Rallis. On the Howe duality conjecture. Compositio Math., 51(3):333–399, 1984.
          URL: http://www.numdam.org/item?id=CM_1984__51_3_333_0.
[Ral87]   Stephen Rallis. L-functions and the oscillator representation, volume 1245 of Lecture
          Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1987.
[RS77]    S. Rallis and G. Schiffmann. Discrete spectrum of the Weil representation. Bull.
          Amer. Math. Soc., 83(2):267–270, 1977.
[RR93]    R. Ranga Rao. On some explicit formulas in the theory of
          Weil representation. Pacific J. Math., 157(2):335–371,                      1993. URL:
          http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.pjm/1102634748.
[SV]      Yiannis Sakellaridis and Akshay Venkatesh. Periods and harmonic analysis on
          spherical varieties. Preprint. arXiv:1203.0039.
[SZ07]    Peter Schneider and Ernst-Wilhelm Zink. The algebraic theory
          of tempered representations of p-adic groups. I. Parabolic in-
          duction and restriction. J. Inst. Math. Jussieu, 6(4):639–688, 2007.
          URL:                    http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1474748007000047,
          doi:10.1017/S1474748007000047.
[Tho08]   Teruji Thomas. The character of the Weil representation. J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2),
          77(1):221–239, 2008. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1112/jlms/jdm098,
          doi:10.1112/jlms/jdm098.
[Wal80]   J.-L. Waldspurger. Correspondance de Shimura. J. Math. Pures Appl. (9), 59(1):1–
          132, 1980.
[Wal85]   J.-L. Waldspurger. Sur les valeurs de certaines fonctions L automorphes
          en leur centre de symétrie. Compositio Math., 54(2):173–242, 1985. URL:
          http://www.numdam.org/item?id=CM_1985__54_2_173_0.
[Wal90]   J.-L. Waldspurger. Démonstration d’une conjecture de dualité de Howe dans le
          cas p-adique, p 6= 2. In Festschrift in honor of I. I. Piatetski-Shapiro on the occasion of
          his sixtieth birthday, Part I (Ramat Aviv, 1989), volume 2 of Israel Math. Conf. Proc.,
          pages 267–324. Weizmann, Jerusalem, 1990.
[Wal03]   J.-L. Waldspurger. La formule de Plancherel pour les groupes p-
          adiques (d’après Harish-Chandra). J. Inst. Math. Jussieu, 2(2):235–333,
          2003.       URL:        http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1474748003000082,
          doi:10.1017/S1474748003000082.
[Wei64]   André Weil. Sur certains groupes d’opérateurs unitaires. Acta Math., 111:143–
          211, 1964.
[Wei]     Martin H. Weissman. L-groups and parameters for covering groups. Preprint.
          arXiv:1501.06169.
[Wei14]   Martin       H.     Weissman.       Split     metaplectic        groups      and      their
          L-groups.        J.   Reine     Angew.     Math.,        696:89–141,       2014.     URL:
          http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/crelle-2012-0111,
          doi:10.1515/crelle-2012-0111.
[Yam11]   Shunsuke        Yamana.       On    the     Siegel-Weil formula:               the     case
          of     singular      forms.      Compos.      Math.,        147(4):1003–1021,        2011.
                    HOWE DUALITY AND EULER FACTORIZATION                         41

            URL:                http://dx.doi.org/10.1112/S0010437X11005379,
            doi:10.1112/S0010437X11005379.
[Yam14] Shunsuke            Yamana.    L-functions  and   theta     correspondence
            for     classical  groups.    Invent.  Math., 196(3):651–732,     2014.
            URL:                http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00222-013-0476-x,
            doi:10.1007/s00222-013-0476-x.
   E-mail address: sakellar@rutgers.edu

   D EPARTMENT OF M ATHEMATICS AND C OMPUTER S CIENCE , R UTGERS U NIVERSITY –
N EWARK , 101 WARREN S TREET, S MITH H ALL 216, N EWARK , NJ 07102, USA.
AND

D EPARTMENT OF M ATHEMATICS , S CHOOL OF A PPLIED M ATHEMATICAL AND P HYSICAL
S CIENCES , N ATIONAL T ECHNICAL U NIVERSITY OF ATHENS , H EROON P OLYTECHNEIOU
9, Z OGRAFOU 15780, G REECE .
