                                                                      Unparticle Physics

                                                                         Howard Georgi,∗
                                                      Center for the Fundamental Laws of Nature




arXiv:hep-ph/0703260v3 20 May 2007
                                                             Jefferson Physical Laboratory
                                                                   Harvard University
                                                                 Cambridge, MA 02138

                                                                                Abstract
                                         I discuss some simple aspects of the low-energy physics of a nontrivial scale invariant
                                         sector of an effective field theory — physics that cannot be described in terms of
                                         particles. I argue that it is important to take seriously the possibility that the unpar-
                                         ticle stuff described by such a theory might actually exist in our world. I suggest a
                                         scenario in which some details of the production of unparticle stuff can be calculated.
                                         I find that in the appropriate low energy limit, unparticle stuff with scale dimension
                                         dU looks like a non-integral number dU of invisible particles. Thus dramatic evidence
                                         for a nontrivial scale invariant sector could show up experimentally in missing energy
                                         distributions.




                                     ∗
                                         georgi@physics.harvard.edu
     Stuff with nontrivial scale invariance in the infrared (IR) [1] would be very unlike anything
we have seen in our world. Our quantum mechanical world seems to be well-described
in terms of particles. We have a common-sense notion of what a particle is. Classical
particles have definite mass and therefore carry energy and momentum in a definite relation
E 2 = p2 c2 + m2 c4 . In quantum mechanics, this relation becomes the dispersion relation
for the corresponding quantum waves with the mass fixing the low-frequency cut-off, ω 2 =
c2 k 2 + m2 c4 /~2 .
     Scale invariant stuff cannot have a definite mass unless that mass is zero. A scale transfor-
mation multiplies all dimensional quantities by a rescaling factor raised to the mass dimension
so a nonzero mass is not scale invariant. A free massless particle is a simple example of scale
invariant stuff because the zero mass is unaffected by rescaling. But quantum field theorists
have long realized that there are more interesting possibilities — theories in which there are
fields that get multiplied by fractional powers of the rescaling parameter.1 The standard
model does not have the property of scale invariance. Many of our particles have definite
nonzero masses.2 But there could be a sector of the theory, as yet unseen, that is exactly
scale invariant and very weakly interacting with the rest of the standard model.3 In such
an interacting scale invariant sector in four space-time dimensions, there are no particles
because there can be no particle states with a definite nonzero mass. Scale invariant stuff,
if it exists, is made of unparticles.
     But what does this mean? It is clear what scale invariance is in the quantum field
theory. Fields can scale with fractional dimensions. Indeed, much beautiful theory is devoted
working out the structure of these theories.4 But what would scale invariant unparticle stuff
actually look like in the laboratory? In spite of all we know about the correlation functions
of conformal fields in Euclidean space, it is a little hard to even talk about the physics of
something so different from our familiar particle theories. It does not seem a priori very
likely that such different stuff should exist and have remained hidden. But this is no reason to
assume that it is impossible. We should determine experimentally whether such unparticle
stuff actually exists. But how will we know if it we see it? That is one of the questions I
address in this note.
     I discuss a simple scenario in which we can say something simple and unambiguous about
what unparticles look like. The tool I use to say something quantitative about unparticle
physics is effective field theory (see for example [7]). The idea is that while the detailed
physics of a theory with a nontrivial scale invariant infrared fixed point is thoroughly nonlin-
ear and complicated, the low energy effective field theory, while very strange, is very simple
because of the scale invariance. We can use this to understand what the interactions of
unparticles with ordinary matter look like in an appropriate limit. Parts of what I have to
   1
     See for example [2].
   2
     It could be that the high energy is scale invariant, but that the scale invariance is broken at or above
the electroweak scale. That is not what I am discussing. It leads to ordinary particles.
   3
     I will make this precise below.
   4
     The huge literature intersects with supersymmetry (for a review see [3]), with string theory (for a review
see [4]) and particularly with the AdS/CFT conjecture (for a review see [5]).



                                                      2
say are well understood by many experts in scale invariant field theories.5 I hope to make
it common knowledge among phenomenologists and experimenters. My goal here is not to
do serious phenomenology myself, but rather to describe very clearly a physical situation
in which phenomenology is possible in spite of the essential strangeness of unparticle theo-
ries. And while my motivation is primarily just theoretical curiosity, the scheme I discuss
could very well be a component of the physics above the TeV scale that will show up at
the LHC. To my mind, this would be a much more striking discovery than the more talked
about possibilities of SUSY or extra dimensions. SUSY is more new particles. From our
4-dimensional point of view until we see black holes or otherwise manipulate gravity, finite
extra dimensions are just a metaphor.6 Again what we see is just more new particles. We
would be overjoyed and fascinated to see these new particles and eventually patterns might
emerge that show the beautiful theoretical structures they portend. But I will argue that
unparticle stuff with nontrivial scaling would astonish us immediately.
    Here is the scheme. The very high energy theory contains the fields of the standard
model and the fields of a theory with a nontrivial IR fixed point, which we will call BZ
(for Banks-Zaks) fields. The two sets interact through the exchange of particles with a large
mass scale MU . Below the scale MU , there are nonrenormalizable couplings involving both
standard model fields and Banks-Zaks fields suppressed by powers of MU . These have the
generic form
                                          1
                                             Osm OBZ                                      (1)
                                         MUk
where Osm is an operator with mass dimension dsm built out of standard model fields and OBZ
is an operator with mass dimension dBZ built out of BZ fields. The renormalizable couplings
of the BZ fields then cause dimensional transmutation as scale-invariance in the BZ sector
emerges at an energy scale ΛU . In the effective theory below the scale ΛU the BZ operators
match onto unparticle operators, and the interactions of (1) match onto interactions of the
form
                                     CU ΛdUBZ −dU
                                                  Osm OU                                 (2)
                                         MUk
where dU is the scaling dimension of the unparticle operator OU .7 The constant CU is a
coefficient function. We are interested in the operators of the lowest possible dimension,
which have the largest effect in the low energy theory, so we will assume that OU is one
such. The effective field theory interaction (2) is a good starting point in our search for
unparticle stuff, for two reasons. Because the BZ fields decouple from ordinary matter at
low energies, the interaction (1) should not effect the IR scale invariance of the unparticle.
And (1) seems likely to be allowed experimentally for sufficiently large MU . If MU is large
enough, the unparticle stuff just doesn’t couple strongly enough to ordinary stuff to have
   5
     See, for example, [4]. But note that one reason that it is difficult to extract unparticle physics from the
beautiful formal works on conformal theory is that these papers often have in mind the scheme described in
footnote 2.
   6
     Infinite extra dimensions, however, can have unparticle-like behavior. See [6].
   7
     For now we assume for simplicity of presentation that OU is a Lorentz scalar. See (22).


                                                       3
been seen. What happens as we lower MU or raise our machine energy and this peculiar
stuff can be produced by interactions of ordinary particles?
    If the IR fixed point is perturbative, we may be able to calculate the dU s and CU s. But
typically the matching from the BZ physics to the unparticle physics will be a complicated
strong interaction problem, like the matching from the physics of high-energy QCD onto the
physics of the low-energy hadron states. In that case, we should be able to estimate these
constants very roughly by including the appropriate geometrical factors (powers of 4π and
that sort of thing - we will return to this below), but detailed calculation will be impossible.
    Now we can ask what physics this produces in the low energy theory below ΛU . We expect
that the virtual effects of fields with nontrivial scaling will produce odd forces. But here
I consider what it looks like to actually produce the unparticle stuff. The most important
effects will be those that involve only one factor (in the amplitude) of the small parameter
in (2),
                                           CU ΛdUBZ −dU
                                                                                             (3)
                                               MUk
from a single insertion of the interaction (2) in some standard model process. The result will
be the production of unparticle stuff, which will contribute to missing energy and momentum.
To calculate the probability distribution for such a process, we need to know the density of
final states for unparticle stuff. In the low energy theory described above, this is constrained
by the scale invariance. Consider the vacuum matrix element
                                                                             d4 P
                                          Z
                              †
                  h0| OU (x) OU (0) |0i =    e−ipx |h0| OU (0) |P i|2 ρ P 2                  (4)
                                                                              (2π)4
where |P i is the unparticle state with 4-momentum P µ produced from the vacuum by OU .
Because of scale invariance, the matrix element (4) scales with dimension 2dU , which requires
that                                                                d −2
                    |h0| OU (0) |P i|2 ρ P 2 = AdU θ P 0 θ P 2 P 2 U
                                                              
                                                                                           (5)
This is the appropriate phase space for unparticle stuff. (5) should remind you of the phase
space for n massless particles,8
                        n
                              ! n
                       X         Y                d 4 pj           0       2     2 n−2
         (2π)4 δ 4 P −               δ p2j θ p0j
                                                                                
                           pj                              = An θ P     θ P     P        (6)
                       j=1       j=1
                                                   (2π)  3


where
                                              16π 5/2 Γ(n + 1/2)
                                       An =                                                         (7)
                                              (2π)2n Γ(n − 1) Γ(2n)
The zero in An for n = 1 together with the pole in P 2 reproduce the δ(P 2 ) in 1-particle
phase space if the limit n → 1 is approached from above
                                                 ǫ θ(x)
                                              lim       = δ(x)                                      (8)
                                             ǫ→0+ x1−ǫ

  8
      The left hand side has an extra (2π)4 compared to the definition in the particle date book.

                                                      4
   Thus we can describe the situation concisely as follows:
                Unparticle stuff with scale dimension dU looks like a
                                                                                           (9)
                non-integral number dU of invisible particles.

In fact, we may as well identify the A in (5) with the A in (7), and thus adopt (7) for
non-integral n as the normalization for AdU . This is purely conventional because a different
definition could be absorbed in the coefficient function CU in (2), but this choice fixes the
normalization of the field OU in a way that incorporates the geometrical factors that go with
dimensional analysis, although the combinatoric factors may be wildly wrong.
    To illustrate the procedure in a realistic situation consider the decay t → u + U of a t
quark into a u quark plus unparticles of scale dimension dU from the coupling9
                                    λ
                               i       u γµ (1 − γ5 ) t ∂ µ OU + h.c.                     (10)
                                   ΛdU
where the constant λ
                                              CU ΛdUBZ
                                           λ=                                             (11)
                                                MUk
(which in this particular case is dimensionless) contains most of the factors from the matching
onto the low energy theory. We can ignore the mass of the u quark, so the final state densities
are
                                   dΦu (pu ) = 2π θ p0u δ p2u
                                                             
                                                                                           (12)
                                                                d −2
                            dΦU (pU ) = AdU θ p0U θ p2U p2U U
                                                        
                                                                                           (13)
The way the phase space factors compose in my normalization is
                                                   !
                                                                d 4 pj
                             Z              X        Y
                   dΦ(P ) = (2π)4 δ 4 P −       pj     dΦ(pj )                            (14)
                                             j       j
                                                               (2π)4

and the differential decay rate is

                                             |M|2
                                        dΓ =      dΦ(P )                                  (15)
                                              2M
where M is the invariant matrix element. Suitably averaged over initial spin and summed
over final spin this gives

                           dΓ  Ad m2 E 2 |λ|2   θ (mt − 2Eu )
                              = U t 2du U                    2−d
                                                                                          (16)
                          dEu    2π 2 ΛU      (m2t − 2mt Eu ) U

We are primarily interested in the shape as a function of Eu , so we will plot d ln Γ/dEu which
has the simple form
                       1 dΓ
                             = 4 dU (d2U − 1) (1 − 2Eu /mt )dU −2 Eu2 /m2t                (17)
                       Γ dEu

                                                  5
                            10


                             8


                      ↑     6
                     d ln Γ                                                     dU = 2
                  mt
                      dEu 4

                             2


                                        0.1          0.2          0.3     0.4   0.5
                                                         Eu /mt →

Figure 1: d ln Γ/dEu versus Eu in units of mt with dU = j/3 for j = 4 to 9. The dashes get longer
as j increases.

The result is shown in figure 1. As dU → 1 from above, d ln(Γ)/dEu becomes more peaked
at Eu = mt /2, matching smoothly unto the kinematics of a 2-particle decay in the limit,
as expected from the general principle (9). Obviously, for higher dU the shape depends
sensitively on du , but at least for dU in this range, the calculation appears to make sense.
The kind of peculiar distributions of missing energy that we see in figure 1 may allow us to
discover unparticles experimentally! The particular operator (10) is flavor changing, and thus
may be suppressed by small and unknown flavor factors. But a similar analysis applies to
scattering processes due to flavor conserving operators. The most interesting straightforward
things to look at I believe are the collider phenomenology of
                                  q+q →G+U              and q + G → q + U                   (18)
from the operators
                                    CU Λk+1−d U
                                         U
                                                q γµ q OUµ                                  (19)
                                        MUk
where q is a left- or right-handed quark, and the LEP constraints on the operators
                                        CU Λk+1−dU
                                            U
                                                   e γµ (1 ± γ5 ) e OUµ                     (20)
                                           MUk
where the unparticle operator is hermitian and transverse,
                                                     ∂µ OUµ = 0                             (21)
The calculation of matrix elements goes the same way except for the tensor structure. For
example
                                                                                      d −2
   h0| OUµ (0) |P i hP | OUν (0) |0 i ρ P 2 = AdU θ P 0 θ P 2 −g µν + P µ P ν /P 2 P 2 U
                                                                               

                                                                                          (22)
   9
       Chosen for simplicity rather than interest!

                                                           6
Also amusing is
                                      G+G→G+U                                            (23)
from the gluon operators

                    CU Λk−dU
                                                   CU Λk−dU
                        U
                        k
                             Gµν Gµν OU     and        U
                                                       k
                                                            Gµλ Gν λ OUµν                (24)
                      MU                             MU

    I have argued in this brief note that unparticle stuff with nontrivial scaling dimension
might exist in our world, and that up to constants associated with the binding of massless
matter into unparticles, we can predict interesting features of unparticle production that
serve as experimental tests of this crazy possibility. Let me close with some remarks.

   • Many remarkable things are known about the scale and conformal invariant theories
     in 2 dimensions (see for example [8]). It is not clear to me what 2D results translate
     into 4D because the phase space in 2D is so constrained. But there are certainly
     consequences for condensed matter physics, where conformal structures do exist (see
     for example [9]).

   • The connection between operator scaling dimension in a cft and missing energy distri-
     butions was made for ordinary particles with integral scaling dimension in [10].

   • The effective field theory picture above assumes that the unparticle fields do not carry
     the standard model gauge interactions. It would be interesting to try to relax this, but
     I have no idea whether it is possible.

   • In (2), (19), (20) and (24), we assumed that the unparticle operator is a bosonic field.
     Fermionic fields are possible if the standard model fields include fermions and bosons
     with the same gauge couplings, as in SUSY, or if one can makes sense of unparticle
     fields with standard model gauge quantum numbers.

   • If unparticles exist, their cosmological consequences should be investigated. It should
     be possible to use effective field theory to understand how low energy unparticles
     behave in the universe today. But additional tools may be required to understand how
     they got there from the hot big bang.

   • I had hoped briefly to make sense of unparticles with dU < 1. However, in the calcu-
     lation leading to figure 1 the differential decay rate into unparticles with dU < 1 has a
     non-integrable singularity as EU → 0, suggesting that the vacuum might be unstable.
     This is in accord with the general theorem in [11] that such fields are not possible in a
     unitary theory (one of many important contributions by this author to the subject of
     conformal field theory).

   Note Added: While this paper was being reviewed, a number of papers have appeared
applying its ideas. [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20] Several of these discuss an extension


                                              7
of the ideas discussed in this paper to the interference between virtual unparticles in the
s-channel and standard model amplitudes.
    Acknowledgments: I am grateful to Nima Arkani-Hamed, Tom Banks, Spencer Chang,
Ann Nelson, Lisa Randall and Edward Witten for comments on the manuscript. This re-
search is supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grant PHY-0244821.


References
 [1] T. Banks and A. Zaks, “On the phase structure of vector - like gauge theories with
     massless fermions,” Nucl. Phys. B196 (1982) 189.

 [2] K. G. Wilson, “Operator product expansions and anomalous dimensions in the
     thirring model,” Phys. Rev. D2 (1970) 1473.

 [3] K. A. Intriligator and N. Seiberg, “Lectures on supersymmetric gauge theories and
     electric- magnetic duality,” Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 45BC (1996) 1–28,
     hep-th/9509066.

 [4] O. Aharony, S. S. Gubser, J. M. Maldacena, H. Ooguri, and Y. Oz, “Large n field
     theories, string theory and gravity,” Phys. Rept. 323 (2000) 183–386, hep-th/9905111.

 [5] J. M. Maldacena, “Lectures on ads/cft,” hep-th/0309246.

 [6] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, “An alternative to compactification,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 83
     (1999) 4690–4693, hep-th/9906064.

 [7] H. Georgi, “Effective field theory,” Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 43 (1993) 209–252.

 [8] P. H. Ginsparg, “Applied conformal field theory,” hep-th/9108028.

 [9] J. L. Cardy, “Conformal invariance in percolation, self-avoiding walks, and related
     problems,” Annales Henri Poincare 4 (2003) S371–S384.

[10] N. Arkani-Hamed, M. Porrati, and L. Randall, “Holography and phenomenology,”
     JHEP 08 (2001) 017, hep-th/0012148.

[11] G. Mack, “All unitary ray representations of the conformal group su(2,2) with positive
     energy,” Commun. Math. Phys. 55 (1977) 1.

[12] H. Georgi, “Another odd thing about unparticle physics,”
     arXiv:0704.2457 [hep-ph].

[13] K. Cheung, W.-Y. Keung, and T.-C. Yuan, “Novel signals in unparticle physics,”
     arXiv:0704.2588 [hep-ph].

[14] M. Luo and G. Zhu, “Some phenomenologies of unparticle physics,”
     arXiv:0704.3532 [hep-ph].

                                             8
[15] C.-H. Chen and C.-Q. Geng, “Unparticle physics on cp violation,”
     arXiv:0705.0689 [hep-ph].

[16] G.-J. Ding and M.-L. Yan, “Unparticle physics in dis,” arXiv:0705.0794 [hep-ph].

[17] Y. Liao, “Bounds on unparticles couplings to electrons: From electron g-2 to
     positronium decays,” arXiv:0705.0837 [hep-ph].

[18] T. M. Aliev, A. S. Cornell, and N. Gaur, “Lepton flavour violation in unparticle
     physics,” arXiv:0705.1326 [hep-ph].

[19] S. Catterall and F. Sannino, “Minimal walking on the lattice,”
     arXiv:0705.1664 [hep-lat].

[20] X.-Q. Li and Z.-T. Wei, “Unparticle physics effects on d-anti-d mixing,”
     arXiv:0705.1821 [hep-ph].




                                             9
