                                                 On the analogy between real reductive groups and Cartan
                                                     motion groups. I: The Mackey-Higson bijection
                                                                                             Alexandre Afgoustidis*


                                                                                                        Abstract




arXiv:1510.02650v5 [math.RT] 18 Oct 2021
                                                      George Mackey suggested in 1975 that there should be analogies between the irreducible unitary repre-
                                                  sentations of a noncompact reductive Lie group G and those of its Cartan motion group G0 − the semidirect
                                                  product of a maximal compact subgroup of G and a vector space. He conjectured the existence of a natu-
                                                  ral one-to-one correspondence between “most” irreducible (tempered) representations of G and “most” irre-
                                                  ducible (unitary) representations of G0 . We here describe a simple and natural bijection between the tempered
                                                  duals of both groups, and an extension to a one-to-one correspondence between the admissible duals.


                                                                                                  1.    Introduction

                                           1.1. Contractions of Lie groups and a conjecture of Mackey

                                           When G is a Lie group and K is a closed subgroup, one can use the linear action of K on the vector space
                                           V = Lie(G)/Lie(K) to define a new Lie group: the semidirect product G0 = K ⋉ V , known as the contraction
                                           of G with respect to K. The notion first arose in mathematical physics (see Segal [37], İnönü and Wigner [21],
                                           Saletan [36] and the lecture by Dyson [14]): the Poincaré group of special relativity admits as a contraction
                                           the Galilei group of classical inertial changes, and it is itself a contraction of the de Sitter group of general
                                           relativity.
                                               It is a classical problem to try to determine whether there is a relationship between the representation the-
                                           ories of G and G0 : for instance, the unitary (irreducible) representations of the Poincaré group famously yield
                                           spaces of quantum states for (elementary) particles [50], and it is quite natural to wonder about the existence
                                           of “nonrelativistic” analogues in the representation theory of the Galilei group [20]. In many cases of physical
                                           interest, the observation that the contraction G0 can be seen as the special point of a one-parameter family
                                           (Gt )t∈R of Lie groups (where the parameter t usually has some physical significance, and Gt is isomorphic with
                                           G for all t 6= 0) has led to attempts to exhibit some representations of G0 as “limiting cases” of representations
                                           of G; early examples include [20], [17], [32], [31].
                                               For most Lie groups, unitary representations do not behave well under the contraction. The parameters
                                           needed to identify an irreducible representation of G are often visibly different from those determining an
                                           irreducible representation of G0 , and some of the differences are important for physics − a consequence of
                                           the bad behaviour in the case of the Poincaré group is that the notion of (rest) mass has different meanings in
                                           special and Galilean relativity.
                                               Now, suppose G is a reductive Lie group and K is a maximal compact subgroup. The contraction G0 is
                                           known in that case as the Cartan motion group of G, probably as a tribute to Élie Cartan’s study of symmetric
                                           spaces: the group G acts by isometries on the negatively curved G/K, while G0 acts by Euclidean rigid motions
                                           on the (flat) tangent space to G/K at the identity coset.
                                               The algebraic structures of G and G0 and their representation theories are quite different. Denote the unitary
                                           dual of a Lie group Γ by b  Γ; then George Mackey’s early work on semidirect products [28, 29] describes G   c0 in

                                             * CNRS, Institut Élie Cartan de Lorraine, Nancy & Metz, France.

                                           Mathematics Subject Classification (2020): 22E50, 22E46


                                                                                                                1
very simple and concrete terms, but describing G  b remains to this day an extremely deep problem. A complete
understanding of the tempered dual G   b temp (the support of the Plancherel measure) was attained in the early
1980s, crowning tremendous efforts of Harish-Chandra and others that had begun in 1945.
   In 1975, however, Mackey noticed surprising analogies, for several simple examples of reductive groups
G, between his accessible description of G    c0 and Harish-Chandra’s subtle parametrization of G btemp . In the
                                                    c
examples studied by Mackey, “large” subsets of G0 and G     btemp could be described using the same parameters,
and the classical constructions for some of the corresponding representations were reminiscent of one another.
Quantum-mechanical considerations led him to believe that there was more to this than chance, and he went on
                                                                                                  c0 and G
to conjecture that there should be a natural one-to-one correspondence between “large” subsets of G        btemp
[30]:

The physical interpretation suggests that there ought to exist a “natural” one-to-one correspondence between
almost all the unitary representations of G0 and almost all the unitary representations of G − in spite of the
rather different algebraic structure of these groups.

   Mackey’s idea seems to have been widely considered overenthusiastic at the time. It is true that in the
years immediately following his proposal, studying the relationship between G-invariant harmonic analysis
on G/K and G0 -invariant analysis on G0 /K became a flourishing subject (see e.g. [16, 34]), with beautiful
ramifications for all Lie groups [12, 22], and the close relationship between the two kinds of harmonic analysis
does call to mind Mackey’s observations on the principal series. But few of the authors who pursued this subject
explicitly referred to Mackey’s suggestion. Exceptions include Dooley and Rice [11], who established in 1985
that the operators for (minimal) principal series representations of G do weakly converge, as the contraction
is performed, to operators for a generic representation of G0 ; and Weinstein [49], who wrote down a Poisson
correspondence relating coadjoint orbits of G attached to (minimal) principal series representations and generic
coadjoint orbits for G0 .
   But as one moves away from the principal series of G to the other parts of the tempered dual, it must have
seemed difficult in the 1970s to imagine that anything general could be extracted from Mackey’s suggestions.
The geometrical construction of representations in the deeper parts of G  btemp , for instance that of the discrete
                                                                              c0 look somewhat trivial. Mackey
series, was then a burning subject; in contrast, the most degenerate parts of G
had of course noticed the absence, for these deeper parts, of any clear geometrical relationship:

Above all [the conjectured analogy] is a mere coincidence of parametrizations, with no evident relationship
between the constructions of corresponding representations.

1.2. Connection with the Connes–Kasparov isomorphism; Higson’s work

In the late 1980s and in the 1990s, Mackey’s conjecture found an echo in the study of group C⋆ -algebras. The
Baum–Connes conjecture, in its “Lie group” version due to Connes and Kasparov, describes the K-theory of
the reduced C⋆ -algebra Cr⋆ (G) of a connected Lie group G in terms of the representation ring of a maximal
compact subgroup and Dirac induction. For real reductive groups, the conjecture was first established by
A. Wassermann [48]; a later proof would follow from V. Lafforgue’s work [27]. Viewing the operator K-theory
of Cr⋆ (G) as a noncommutative-geometry version of the topological K-theory of the tempered dual G   btemp , Paul
Baum, Alain Connes and Nigel Higson pointed out in the 1990s that the Connes–Kasparov isomorphism can be
                                  btemp and G
reinterpreted as a statement that G         c0 share algebraic-topological invariants: see [5, §4]. The Baum–
Connes–Kasparov isomorphism can thus be viewed as a cohomological reflection of Mackey’s conjectured
analogy.
   Nigel Higson later remarked that Mackey had in mind a measure-theoretic correspondence (which may have
been defined only for “almost every” representation), but that the interplay with the Connes–Kasparov isomor-
phism brought the topologies of G  btemp and G
                                             c0 into the game, albeit at the level of cohomology. Because the
relationship between the Fell topologies and the Plancherel measure is nontrivial, he noted [18, 19] that the


                                                        2
simplest way to reconcile both points of view was to guess that there might exist a natural one-to-one corre-
spondence between every irreducible tempered representation of G and every unitary irreducible representation
of G0 .
   After the turn of the century, Higson took up the issue in more detail and examined the case of complex
semisimple groups, in which the tempered dual G      btemp is completely described by the principal series. He
constructed in 2008 a natural bijection between G b temp and Gc0 in the complex case [18], and used it to analyze
the structures of Cr⋆ (G) and Cr⋆ (G0 ) − discovering building blocks for the two C⋆ -algebras that fit together
rigidly in the deformation from Cr⋆ (G) to Cr⋆ (G0 ). With the help of tools crafted for the purpose in the early
1990s by Connes and himself (see [9] and [8, §II.10.δ ]), he was led to a new proof of the Connes–Kasparov
isomorphism for complex semisimple groups that is both natural from the point of view of representation theory
and elementary from the point of view of K-theory.

1.3. Contents of this paper

    We here construct a simple and natural bijection between G btemp and Gc0 , for any real reductive group G (more
precisely, whenever G is the group of real points of a connected reductive algebraic group defined over R. The
construction may work for a wider class of reductive groups, as we will see).
    David Vogan’s notion of lowest K-types will play a crucial part: we shall imitate Mackey’s classical parametriza-
        c0 (recalled in §2) and build a Mackey-like parametrization of G
tion of G                                                                  btemp using Vogan’s work on tempered
irreducible representations with real infinitesimal character (see §3.1).
    Our bijection will turn out (see §4) to preserve lowest K-types and be compatible with a natural notion
of variation of continuous parameters in the representation theories of both groups. As we shall see (in §5),
the Langlands classification of admissible representations provides an immediate extension to a one-to-one
correspondence between the admissible duals of both groups.
    This paper’s main result, Theorem 3.5, can of course be viewed a classification theorem for irreducible
tempered representations. Its overall form may seem particularly simple in view of the equivalent classifications
of Knapp–Zuckerman or Vogan–Zuckerman. One should not forget, though, that our proofs entirely rely on
results extracted from these very deep classifications.
    With Mackey’s conjecture established at the level of parameters, we shall turn elsewhere to the deformation
(Gt )t∈R to try to better understand the reasons for, and implications of, the existence of the correspondence. A
first companion paper [4] gives a geometrical realization for the Mackey–Higson bijection, describing a natural
deformation (at the level of representation spaces) of every irreducible tempered representation π of G onto the
corresponding representation of G0 . A second companion [3] focuses on the topologies on G         btemp and G
                                                                                                             c0 and
                                                                                                    ⋆
the behavior of matrix coefficients, establishing rigidity properties of the deformation at the C -algebraic level
and deducing a new proof of the Connes–Kasparov isomorphism.
    Together, these companion papers lead to a somewhat different perspective on the bijection’s definition,
which we may summarize in elementary terms as follows (I thank a referee for this formulation). The ir-
reducible tempered representations with a given lowest K-type can be parametrized by a real vector space
(modulo a finite group). Moving along a ray in one of these vector spaces towards infinity, and inspecting the
matrix coefficient functions attached to lowest K-type vectors in a representation π of G, one can see that these
functions actually converge, after a simple rescaling along the deformation (Gt )t∈R , to certain matrix coeffi-
cients for a representation of G0 . This is the one corresponding to π . Unlike the short algebraic construction of
this paper, the more geometrical approach does not provide a proof for the bijection; but it is very relevant to
the existing applications.
    These further developments are hopefully clear signs that there may be much more to the Mackey–Higson
bijection than the unexpected “coincidence of parametrizations” to be established here.




                                                        3
Acknowledgements

   Daniel Bennequin encouraged my interest for this subject and offered extremely kind and helpful advice.
Several conversations with Michel Duflo, Nigel Higson and Michèle Vergne were very useful and important
to me. François Rouvière and David Vogan read the manuscript of my thesis [2] very carefully; the present
version owes much to their suggestions and corrections. Jeremy Daniel heard preliminary (and false) versions
of many of my ideas. I am very much indebted to all of them.
   During my time as a PhD student, in which many of the results of this paper were obtained, I benefited from
excellent working conditions at Université Paris-7 and the Institut de Mathématiques de Jussieu–Paris Rive
Gauche. This work was completed later, at Université Paris-Dauphine: I am very grateful to my colleagues at
CEREMADE for their support.

                                 2. Representations of the Cartan motion group

2.1. Notation

   Let G be the group of real points of a connected reductive algebraic group defined over R (see for instance
[1], §3), and let g be its Lie algebra. (All Lie algebras in this paper are real, unless they come with a subscript
C.)
   Fix a maximal compact subgroup K of G, write θ for the Cartan involution of G with fixed-point-set K, and
form the corresponding Cartan decomposition g = k ⊕ p of G. Here k is the Lie algebra of K and p is a linear
subspace of g which, although not a Lie subalgebra, is stable under the adjoint action Ad : K → End(g).
   Recall that the semidirect product K ⋉ p is the group whose underlying set is the Cartesian product K × p,
equipped with the product law

                    (k1 , v1 ) ·0 (k2 , v2 ) := (k1 k2 , v1 + Ad(k1 )v2 )   (k1 , k2 ∈ K,   v1 , v2 ∈ p).

We will denote that group by G0 and call it the Cartan motion group of G.
    Writing V ⋆ for the space of linear functionals on a vector space V and viewing p⋆ as the space of linear
functionals on g which vanish on k, note that in the coadjoint action Ad⋆ : G → End(g⋆ ), the subspace p⋆ ⊂ g⋆
is Ad⋆ (K)-invariant.
    We fix once and for all an abelian subalgebra a of g that is contained in p and is maximal among the abelian
subalgebras of g contained in p. We write A for expG (a).
    When Γ is a Lie group, we will write Γb for its unitary dual and Γ
                                                                     badm for its admissible dual (see for instance
[42, §0.3] or [47, §3.3]). For the motion group G0 , which is amenable, the support of the Plancherel measure
          c0 . For our reductive group G, the support of the Plancherel measure is the tempered dual G
is all of G                                                                                              btemp : the
set of representations π ∈ G b whose K-finite matrix elements lie in L (G/ZG ) for every ε > 0. (See [10];
                                                                         2+ ε

here ZG is the center of G.) If G/ZG is noncompact, then the trivial representation of G is not tempered, and so
Gbtemp 6= G.
          b


2.2. Mackey parameters

When χ is an element of p⋆ , we write Kχ for its stabilizer in the coadjoint action of K on p; this compact group
is usually disconnected. In physics, it is known as the “little group at χ ”.
    We define a Mackey parameter (or: Mackey datum) to be any pair δ = (χ , µ ) where χ is an element of p⋆
and µ is an irreducible representation of Kχ .
    We say that two Mackey parameters (χ , µ ) and (χ ′ , µ ′ ) are equivalent when there exists an element k in K
such that
     • χ = Ad⋆ (k) · χ ′ , and
     • µ is equivalent, as an irreducible representation of Kχ , with the representation u → µ ′ (k−1 uk).
This defines an equivalence relation on the set of Mackey data; we will write D for the set of equivalence


                                                                4
classes.
   It may be useful to mention two elementary facts from structure theory (see [23], sections V.2 and V.3):
   (i) Every Mackey datum is equivalent to a Mackey datum (χ , µ ) in which χ lies in a⋆ ; furthermore, if χ and
        χ ′ are two elements of a⋆ , and if µ and µ ′ are irreducible representations of Kχ and Kχ ′ , then the Mackey
        data (χ , µ ) and (χ ′ , µ ′ ) are equivalent if and only if there is an element of the Weyl group W = W (g, a)
        which sends χ to χ ′ and µ to µ ′ .
   (ii) The dimension of the Ad⋆ (K)-orbit of χ in p⋆ is maximal (among all possible dimensions of Ad⋆ (K)-
        orbits in p⋆ ) if and only if χ is regular. All regular elements in a⋆ have the same Ad⋆ (K)-stabilizer, viz.
        the centralizer M = ZK (a) of a in K.

2.3. Unitary dual of the motion group

We recall the usual way to build a unitary representation of G0 from a Mackey parameter δ = (χ , µ ).
                               χ
   Consider the centralizer L0 of χ in G0 (for the coadjoint action). It is Kχ ⋉ p, where Kχ is the little group of
§2.2.
   Out of δ and χ , build an irreducible representation of this centralizer: fix a (finite-dimensional) carrier space
V for µ , and define an action of L0χ on V , where (κ , v) ∈ Kχ ⋉ p acts through eihχ ,vi µ (k). Write σ = µ ⊗ eiχ for
this representation of L0χ .
   Now, observe the induced representation

                                                   G             G             
                                      M0 (δ ) = IndL00 (σ ) = IndKχ0 ⋉p µ ⊗ eiχ .                                (2.1)
                                                      χ


Theorem 2.1 (Mackey [28]).
(a) For every Mackey parameter δ , the representation M0 (δ ) is irreducible.
(b) Suppose δ and δ ′ are two Mackey parameters. Then the representations M0 (δ ) and M0 (δ ′ ) are unitarily
    equivalent if and only if δ and δ ′ are equivalent as Mackey parameters.
                                                                                 c0 , one obtains a bijection
(c) By associating to any Mackey parameter δ the equivalence class of M0 (δ ) in G
                    c
    between D and G0 .

Remark 2.2. If χ is zero, then Kχ equals K and the representation of M0 (χ , µ ) of G0 is the trivial extension of
                                                 c0 a family of finite-dimensional representations; every member
µ where p acts by the identity. There is thus in G
                                                   b
of the family is equal to M0 (0, µ ) for some µ in K.
Remark 2.3. In §4, we will need information about the K-module structure of M0 (χ , µ ). Recall that M0 (χ , µ )
can be realized by fixing a µ (K)-invariant inner product on V , then equipping the Hilbert space
                            
                         H = f ∈ L2 (K,V ) / ∀m ∈ Kχ , ∀k ∈ K, f (km) = µ (m−1 ) f (k)

with the G0 -action in which
                                                                 h          ⋆
                                                                                               i
                        g0 = (k, v) acts through π0 (k, v) : f 7→ u 7→ eihAd (u)χ ,vi f (k−1 u) ;

the restriction to K of that action is a classical picture for IndKKχ (µ ).

2.4. Admissible dual of the motion group

We now outline Champetier and Delorme’s description of the admissible dual of G   c0 adm (see [6]; see also Rader
[33]). Recall that the action Ad⋆ of K on p⋆ induces an action on the complexified space p⋆C , in which K acts
separately on the real and imaginary parts. We will still write Ad⋆ for it.
   We define an admissible Mackey parameter to be any pair (χ , µ ) in which χ lies in a⋆C and µ is an irreducible
representation of Kχ . In contrast to the previous section, we require from the outset that χ lie in a⋆C : it is no

                                                            5
longer true that Ad⋆ (K) · a⋆C coincides with p⋆C .
   We define on the set of admissible Mackey parameters the same equivalence relation as described in §2.2
and write D adm for the set of equivalence classes of admissible Mackey data.
                                                                                                    G
   When δ = (χ , µ ) is an admissible Mackey datum, we write M0 (δ ) for the representation IndKχ0 ⋉p (µ ⊗ eχ ) of
G0 . This is an admissible representation of G0 (for details on admissible representations of G0 , and equivalences
between them, see [6]). This representation is unitary if and only if the real part of χ is zero; in that case it
coincides with the representation defined in §2.3 using the imaginary part of χ .

Theorem 2.4 ([6], Théorème A).
(a) For every admissible Mackey parameter δ , the representation M0 (δ ) is irreducible.
(b) Suppose δ and δ ′ are two admissible Mackey parameters. Then the admissible representations M0 (δ ) and
    M0 (δ ′ ) are equivalent if and only if δ and δ ′ are equivalent as admissible Mackey parameters.
(c) By associating to any admissible Mackey parameter δ the equivalence class of M0 (δ ) in G  badm , one obtains
                                       adm
                                  c0
    a bijection between D adm and G          .

                      3. The Mackey–Higson bijection for tempered representations

In this section, we introduce a natural one-to-one correspondence between G   c0 and G btemp .
   The key step is to determine the subset of Gbtemp that should correspond to the “discrete part” of G c0 encoun-
tered in Remark 2.2, which is a copy of Kb in Gc0 .
   For some reductive groups, there is a natural candidate for that subset of G btemp : the discrete series. If G is
a reductive group with nonempty discrete series, it is well-known from the work of Harish-Chandra, Blattner,
Hecht–Schmid (see [15]) that every discrete series representation π comes with a distinguished element of K,     b
the minimal K-type of π (see for example [13, §1.5]); furthermore, inequivalent discrete series representations
of G have inequivalent minimal K-types.
   There are at least two obvious reasons not to use the discrete series for our construction, however:
  (i) there are reductive groups with no discrete series representations;
                                                                        b which cannot be realized as the
 (ii) even when G has a nonempty discrete series, there are elements of K
      minimal K-type of any discrete series representation.
                                                                                   btemp to the copy of K
To define a natural candidate for the class of representations to be associated in G                         c0 ,
                                                                                                        b in G
we turn to David Vogan’s work on lowest K-types for other representations.

3.1. Real-infinitesimal-character representations and a theorem of Vogan

Fix a reductive group G and a maximal compact subgroup K. Given a Cartan subalgebra t of k and and a choice
of positive root system ∆+c for the pair (kC , tC ), Vogan defines ([40]) a positive-valued function µ → kµ kKb on
b                                      b                        +
K: starting from an irreducible µ in K, one can consider its ∆c -highest weight µ̃ and the half-sum ρc of positive
roots in ∆+                                ⋆
          c ; these are two elements of tC , and that space comes with a Euclidean norm k·kt⋆C ; one then defines
kµ kKb = kµ̃ + 2ρc kt⋆ .
                      C
   When π is an admissible (but not necessarily irreducible) representation of G, the lowest K-types of π are the
elements of K b that appear in the restriction of π to K and have the smallest possible norm among the elements
   b
of K that appear in π|K . Every admissible representation has a finite number of lowest K-types, and these do
not depend on the choice of T and ∆+   c.
   Given an irreducible tempered representation π of G, we say π has real infinitesimal character when there
exists a cuspidal parabolic subgroup P of G, with Langlands decomposition P = MAN, and a discrete series
representation σ of M, so that π is equivalent with one of the irreducible factors of IndG   P (σ ⊗ 1). We will not
need to explain the link with the notion of infinitesimal character and refer the reader to [45].




                                                         6
   We write G bRIC for the subset of Gbtemp whose elements are the equivalence classes of irreducible tempered
representations of G with real infinitesimal character. I thank Michel Duflo for calling my attention to that
subset.
   Vogan discovered ([42], see also [41]) that if π is an irreducible tempered representations of G with real
infinitesimal character, then π has a unique lowest K-type. He went on to prove that every K-type is the lowest
K-type of exactly one representation in G bRIC :

Theorem 3.1 (Vogan [42]; see [46], Theorem 1.2). The map from G      bRIC to Kb which, to an irreducible tempered
representation π of G with real infinitesimal character, associates the lowest K-type of π , is a bijection.

   When µ is (the class of) an irreducible representation of K, we will write VG (µ ) for the real-infinitesimal-
character irreducible tempered representation of G with lowest K-type µ .
Remark 3.2. We shall need to use Theorem 3.1 for groups G that are not quite the group of real points of a
connected reductive algebraic group; therefore let us note that Theorem 3.1 is also valid when G is a linear
reductive group in Harish-Chandra’s class and has all its Cartan subgroups abelian (see §0.1 in [42]).
Remark 3.3. Still assuming that G is a linear reductive group in Harish-Chandra’s class with abelian Cartan
subgroups, Vogan proved that if π is an irreducible admissible representation, then the lowest K-types of π all
occur with multiplicity one in π |K (see [42, §6.5], and for comments, [1, §6]).
Remark 3.4. The relationship between the highest weight of µ and the infinitesimal character of VG (µ ) is an
important ingredient of the results in [42]. An improved approach, using Carmona’s observation that the subtle
part of the relationship can be interpreted as a convex cone projection, is explained in [35], which also contains
a summary of the lowest-K-type approach to the classification of representations in [41, 42].

3.2. Construction of the bijection

We first proceed to build tempered representations of G by following as closely as possible the procedure
described in §2.3 to build representations of G0 from Mackey parameters.
   Fix a Mackey parameter (χ , µ ).
   Consider, as we did in §2.3, the centralizer Lχ of χ in G for the coadjoint action. This is the group of
real points of a connected reductive algebraic group. Furthermore, the “little group” Kχ is a maximal compact
subgroup of Lχ . Applying Vogan’s Theorem 3.1, we can build, out of the irreducible representation µ of Kχ , a
tempered irreducible representation of Lχ : the representation VLχ (µ ).
   The centralizer Lχ is the θ -stable Levi factor of a real parabolic subgroup of G (see [45, Lemma 3.4(4)]).
Write Lχ = Mχ Aχ for its Langlands decomposition − a direct product decomposition in which Aχ is abelian
and contained in expG (p), so that χ defines an abelian character of Lχ .
   From our Mackey datum (χ , µ ), we can thus build as in §2.3 a tempered irreducible representation σ =
VLχ (µ ) ⊗ eiχ of the centralizer Lχ .
   In order to obtain a tempered irreducible representation of G, it is however not reasonable to keep imitating
the previous construction and induce without further precaution from Lχ to G. Indeed, our centralizer Lχ =
ZG (χ ) in G is a poor geometric analogue of the centralizer L0χ = ZG0 (χ ): these two groups usually do not
have the same dimension and the contraction of Lχ with respect to Kχ is usually not isomorphic with L0χ . The
induced representation IndG  Lχ (σ ) is also likely to be very reducible.
   But we recalled that there exists at least one parabolic subgroup Pχ = Lχ Nχ of G whose θ -stable Levi factor
is Lχ . The parabolic subgroups with θ -stable Levi factor Lχ are all contained in a single associate class of
parabolic subgroups.
   Now, the subgroup Pχ is closer to being a good geometric analogue in G of the centralizer L0χ : these two
groups have the same dimension, and whenever Pχ′ is a parabolic subgroup of G with θ -stable Levi factor Lχ ,
the contraction of Pχ′ with respect to Kχ is none other than L0χ .
   It seems, then, that the representation obtained by extending σ to Pχ is the simplest possible analogue of the



                                                        7
representation of L0χ used in §2.3. This makes it natural to form the induced representation

                                                                              iχ
                                M(δ ) = IndPχ (σ ) = IndG
                                                        Mχ Aχ Nχ (VMχ (µ ) ⊗ e ⊗ 1).                                 (3.1)

This is a tempered representation. For the last equality in (3.1), we note that Mχ satisfies the hypothesis of Re-
mark 3.2 (see [42, page 142]), so that Theorem 3.1 does apply to Mχ as well as Lχ ; and that VLχ (µ ) coincides
                                                                                                     RIC
with the representation of Lχ obtained by extending VM (µ ) to Lχ , because both belong to (L    d χ)    and have
                                                                χ
the same lowest Kχ -type.

   We can now state our main result.

Theorem 3.5.
(a) For every Mackey parameter δ , the representation M(δ ) is irreducible and tempered.
(b) Suppose δ and δ ′ are two Mackey parameters. Then the representations M(δ ) and M(δ ′ ) are unitarily
    equivalent if and only if δ and δ ′ are equivalent as Mackey parameters.
                                                                             btemp , one obtains a bijection
(c) By associating to a Mackey parameter δ the equivalence class of M(δ ) in G
    between D and G  btemp .
                                         c0 in §2.3, this yields a bijection
   Combined with Mackey’s description of G
                                                         ∼ btemp
                                                     c0 −→
                                                  M :G     G     .                                                   (3.2)

We will refer to it as the Mackey–Higson bijection.

Proof of Theorem 3.5. Our result is a simple and straightforward consequence of the classification of tempered
irreducible representations of G. In other words, it is a simple and straightforward consequence of an immense
body of work (the bulk of which is due to Harish-Chandra).
    We first remark that given Remark 2.2.(i) and the properties of unitary induction, we may assume without
losing generality that χ lies in a⋆ .
    In that case, Mχ is a reductive subgroup of G that contains the compact subgroup M = ZK (a) mentioned in
§2.2, point (ii); in addition, Aχ is contained in A, it is related with its own Lie algebra aχ through Aχ = expG (a χ ),
and the group Mχ centralizes Aχ . We recall that Lχ is generated by M and the root subgroups for those roots of
(gC , aC ) whose scalar product with χ is zero; in the Langlands decomposition, the subgroup Aχ is by definition
the intersection of the kernels of these roots (viewed as abelian characters of A).
    In order to choose a precise Nχ , fix an ordering on a⋆ : with it comes a notion of positive weight for (g, aχ );
the sum of root subspaces corresponding to positive weights yields a subalgebra nχ , and we set Nχ = expG (nχ ).
But of course another choice for Nχ and Pχ in (3.1) would yield an equivalent representation of G.
    Recall that an element in a⋆ is called a χ -regular when its scalar product with every root for the pair (gC , a χ ,C )
is nonzero. We now call in a theorem due to Harish-Chandra, although Harish-Chandra never published it
himself; see [26, Theorem 4.11] for semisimple G, [23, Theorem 14.93] for linear connected reductive G, and
[45, Lemma 3.2(5)] (with proofs in [39]) for the current class of reductive groups:
    If β ∈ a⋆ is aχ -regular and if η is an irreducible tempered representation of Mχ with real infinitesimal
character, then IndG                     iβ
                          Mχ Aχ Nχ (η ⊗ e ) is irreducible.
    To show that χ is aχ -regular, consider a root γ of (gC , aC ) whose scalar product with χ is zero. Then γ is a
root for (lχ ,C , a χ ,C ) (see the remarks on the structure of Lχ above), so that a χ is contained in the kernel of γ (see
the same remarks). Thus, the restriction of γ to a χ must be zero, and γ cannot be a root of (gC , aχ ,C ), because
the latter are precisely the roots which do not vanish on a χ .
    Using Harish-Chandra’s theorem above, we obtain part (a) in Theorem 3.5. Part (b) then follows from the
usual criteria for equivalence between parabolically induced representations (see for instance [26, Theorem
4.11(i))]: if M1 A1 N1 and M2 A2 N2 are two parabolic subgroups containing a parabolic subgroup MAN, if β1 and


                                                            8
β2 are elements of a⋆1 and a⋆2 which are respectively a1 and a2 -regular, and if η1 and η2 are two real-infinitesimal-
character irreducible tempered representations of M1 and M2 , then the representations IndG                     iβ1
                                                                                                M1 A1 N1 (η1 ⊗ e ) and
IndG                iβ2
    M2 A2 N2 (η2 ⊗ e ) are equivalent if and only if there is an element in W = W (gC , aC ) that sends β1 to β2 and
η1 to η2 .
   We now turn to (c), which is a simple consequence of the Knapp–Zuckerman classification of irreducible
tempered representations [24, 25]. Suppose π is an arbitrary irreducible tempered representation of G; then
there exists a parabolic subgroup P = MP AP NP of G, a tempered irreducible representation σ of MP with real
infinitesimal character, and an element ν of (aP )⋆ , so that

                                                                  iν
                                                                       
                                                IndG
                                                   MP AP NP σ ⊗ e


is irreducible and equivalent with π . See [45, Theorem 3.3]; for proofs, see of course [24, 25] in the connected
compact-center case, and [38, §5.4], for disconnected groups in the present class (see also the comments in [7]).
    We need to prove that such a representation is equal to M(δ ) for some Mackey parameter δ . We first remark
that P is associate to a parabolic subgroup contained in Pν : since ν lies in (aP )⋆ , the centralizer LP = MP AP of
a⋆P for the coadjoint action is contained in Lν ; given the above remarks on the Langlands decomposition and
the construction of parabolic subgroups, we deduce that LP is contained in Lν , so that Mν contains MP and that
Aν is contained in AP , and finally that Nν is conjugate to a subgroup N ′ contained in NP . So P is associate to
MP AP N ′ , which is contained in Pν .
    Write Ã and Ñ for the subgroups of G whose Lie algebras are the orthogonal complements of aν and n′ in aP
and nP , respectively. Then AP = Aν Ã and NP = ÑN ′ ; from the fact that mν is orthogonal to aν ⊕ n′, we deduce
that Ã and Ñ are contained in Mν . Since AP is abelian and NP normalizes A, we obain

                                             iν
                                                                          0      iν
                                                                                     
                            IndG                       G
                               MP AP NP τ ⊗ e ⊗ 1 ≃ Ind(M ÃÑ)A N ′ (τ ⊗ e ) ⊗ e      .
                                                               P       ν


Now, P̃ = MP ÃÑ is a subgroup of Mν and MP Ã is the centralizer of Ã in Mν , so P̃ is a parabolic subgroup of
                                   Mν
Mν . Finally, we note that σ̃ = IndM ÃÑ
                                          (σ ⊗ e0 ) is a tempered representation of Mν , that it has real infinitesimal
character (by induction in stages from the definition of real infinitesimal character), and that it is irreducible
(otherwise π would not be). By induction in stages, we conclude that
                                                                                 
                                            iν
                              IndG
                                 Pν σ̃ ⊗ e       ≃ IndG              Mν
                                                        Mν Aν N ′ IndP̃ σ ⊗ e0 ⊗ eiν :

thus π is equivalent with M(ν , µ ), where µ is the lowest Kν -type of the representation IndP̃Mν (σ ⊗ e0 ). This
concludes the proof.

Remark 3.6. It seems likely that Theorem 3.5 and its proof are valid in a wider class than used here. Presumably
they hold as soon as G satisfies Theorem 3.1, the Harish-Chandra irreducibility criterion above, and the Knapp–
Zuckerman classification. Concerning Theorem 3.1, some care is definitely needed: I am not aware of any
reference for nonlinear groups, and there are nonlinear groups in Harish-Chandra’s class which do not satisfy
the (additional) multiplicity-one property. For G in Harish-Chandra’s class, the irreducibility criterion is stated
in [45, Lemma 3.2], and a version of the Knapp–Zuckerman classification is stated in [43, Theorem 2.9].

                                       4. First properties of the bijection

In our construction of the Mackey–Higson bijection in §3.2, the notion of lowest K-type for admissible repre-
sentations of G was of critical importance. Since K is also a maximal compact subgroup in G0 , the notion of
lowest K-type for admissible representations of G0 can similarly be brought in, and every irreducible admissible
representation of G0 has a finite number of lowest K-types.
   We now prove that the Mackey–Higson bijection M : G    c0 → G btemp preserves lowest K-types.




                                                          9
Proposition 4.1. Suppose π0 is a unitary irreducible representation of G0 . Then the representation π0 of G0
and the representation M (π0 ) of G have the same lowest K-types.

Proof. We recall that π0 is equivalent with M0 (χ , µ ) for some Mackey datum (χ , µ ). From Remark 2.3, we
know that as a K-module, M0 (χ , µ ) is isomorphic with IndKKχ (µ ). So we need to show that the lowest K-types
of the G-representation M(χ , µ ) are exactly the irreducible K-submodules of IndKKχ (µ ) with minimal norm.
                                                                                                             
   Now, the definition of parabolic induction shows that as K-modules, M(χ , µ ) and IndKKχ V(µ )|Kχ are
isomorphic (see the “compact picture” description of M(χ , µ ) in [23, §VII.1]). Of course the latter K-module
contains IndKKχ (µ ).
                                                                 
   Suppose then that α is a lowest K-type in IndKKχ V(µ )|Kχ , but is not a lowest K-type in IndKKχ ( µ ). Then
there is an element µ1 of Kcχ , distinct from µ , such that α is a lowest K-type in IndKK (µ1 ), and since α must
                                                                                        χ
appear with multiplicity one in IndKKχ V(µ )|Kχ (see Remark 3.3), µ1 must appear with multiplicity one in
V(µ )|Kχ . Because the latter has only one lowest Kχ -type, we know that kµ1 kKcχ must be greater than kµ kKcχ .
                                                                                                               
   If α were a lowest K-type in IndKKχ V(µ1 )|Kχ , the representations IndKKχ V(µ )|Kχ and IndKKχ V(µ1 )|Kχ
would have a lowest K-type in common; but that cannot happen, because of the following reformulation of a
result by Vogan:
Lemma 4.2. Suppose MAN is a cuspidal parabolic subgroup of G, and µ1 , µ2 are inequivalent irreducible K ∩
M-modules. Then the representations IndKK∩M (V(µ1 )) and IndKK∩M (V(µ2 )) have no lowest K-type in common.

Proof. When V(µ1 ) and V(µ2 ) are in the discrete series of M, this follows from Theorem 3.6 in [44] (see also
Theorem 1 in the announcement [40], and of course [41]). In the other cases, this actually follows from the
same result, but we need to give some details.
   Assume that both V(µ1 ) and V(µ2 ) are either in the discrete series or nondegenerate limits of discrete series.
Then both IndG                          G
                 MAN (V(µ1 )) and IndMAN (V(µ2 )) are irreducible constituents of some representations induced
from discrete series, from larger parabolic subgroups if need be: see [24, Theorem 8.7]. If IndG       M∗ A∗ N ∗ (δ1 ) (with
δ1 in the discrete series of M ⋆ ) contains IndG  MAN  (V( µ 1 )) as an irreducible  constituent, it must contain it with
                                                                G
multiplicity one, and the set of lowest K-types are IndM∗ A∗ N ∗ (δ1 ) is the disjoint union of the sets of lowest
K-types of its irreducible constituents (which are finite in number): see [23, Theorem 15.9]. If IndG        MAN (V(µ1 ))
          G
and IndMAN (V(µ2 )) are constituents of the same representation induced from discrete series, then the desired
conclusion follows; if that is not the case we are now in a position to apply Vogan’s result to the two repre-
sentations induced from discrete series under consideration (Vogan’s disjointness-of-K-types theorem is true of
reducible induced-from-discrete-series representations).
   Now, if V(µ1 ), in spite of its real infinitesimal character, is neither in the discrete series of M nor a non-
degenerate limit of discrete series, then there is a smaller parabolic subgroup M⋆ A⋆ N⋆ and a discrete series
or nondegenerate limit of discrete series representation ε1 of M⋆ such that IndKK∩M (V(µ1 )) = IndKK∩M⋆ (ε1 ). If
necessary, we can rewrite IndKK∩M (V(µ2 )) in an analogous way; then we can use Vogan’s result again, after
some embeddings in reducible representations induced from discrete series as above if necessary. This proves
Lemma 4.2.
                                                                                                                          
   Coming back to the proof of Proposition 4.1, we now know that if α is a lowest K-type in IndKKχ V(µ )|Kχ ,
                                                                                                                         
then it cannot be a lowest K-type in IndKKχ V(µ1 )|Kχ . Let then α1 in K     b be a lowest K-type in IndKK V(µ1 )|Kχ ;
                                                                                                           χ    
we note that kα1 kKb < kα kKb . If α1 were to appear in IndKKχ (µ1 ), it would appear in IndKKχ V(µ )|Kχ , and that
cannot be the case because α is already a lowest K-type there.
   We conclude that there exists α1 in K    b and µ1 in Kcχ such that
   — kα1 kKb < kα kKb and kµ1 kKcχ > kµ kKcχ
                                                     
   — α1 is a lowest K-type in IndKKχ V(µ1 )|Kχ , but it is not a lowest K-type in IndKKχ (µ1 ).
   This seems to trigger an infinite recursion, because the same argument can be used again, beginning with
(α1 , µ1 ) instead of (α , µ ); however, there are not infinitely many K-types which are strictly lower than α . Thus
our hypothesis that the lowest K-type α in M(χ , µ ) is not a lowest K-type in IndKKχ (µ ) leads to a contradiction.


                                                            10
  To complete the proof, notice (from the compatibility of induction with direct sums) the equality of K-
modules
                                                        
                             M(χ , µ ) = IndKKχ V(µ )|Kχ = IndKKχ ( µ ) ⊕ M̃,                        (4.1)

with M̃ induced from a (quite reducible) Kχ -module.
   We already proved that every lowest K-type in M(χ , µ ) must occur in as a lowest K-type in IndKKχ (µ ).
Conversely, every lowest K-type in IndKKχ (µ ) does occur as a lowest K-type in M(χ , µ ): from (4.1) we know
that it must occur there, and from the above argument we already know that it is lower than every K-type
occuring in M̃, so that it is a lowest K-type in IndKKχ ( µ ). This proves Proposition 4.1.

   We should mention that the above proof establishes, in a somewhat roundabout way, the following property
of unitary representations of G0 :

Corollary 4.3. In every unitary irreducible representation of G0 , each lowest K-type occurs with multiplicity
one.

Proof. Suppose π0 is a unitary irreducible representation of G0 ; choose a Mackey parameter (χ , µ ) for π0 ;
recall that M0 (χ , µ ) is equivalent, as a K-module, with IndKKχ (µ ). In (4.1) we see that the multiplicity of every
lowest K-type in π0 is lower than its multiplicity in M(χ , µ ); every lowest K-type occurs at least once in π0 and
exactly once in M(χ , µ ); the corollary follows.

   The Mackey–Higson bijection is compatible with other natural features of Gbtemp and G
                                                                                       c0 . We mention an
elementary one, related to the existence in each dual of a natural notion of renormalization of continuous
parameters for irreducible representations:
    • On the G0 -side, there is for every α > 0 a natural bijection

                                                             c0 → G
                                                      RGα0 : G    c0

      obtained from Mackey’s description of G  c0 in §2.3 by sending a representation π0 ≃ M0 (χ , µ ) of G0 to
                                    χ
      the equivalence class of M0 ( α , µ ).
    • On the G-side, there is also for every α > 0 a natural bijection

                                                         btemp → G
                                                   RGα : G       btemp

       obtained from the Knapp–Zuckerman classification (see the proof of Theorem 3.5) as follows.
                                                                                                                    
       Starting with π in G  btemp , we know that π is equivalent with some representation IndG                   iν ,
                                                                                                   MP AP NP σ ⊗ e
       where MP A P NP , σν and ν are as in the proof of Theorem 3.5. The tempered          representation π α =
                                                                                         
                                                                                       iν , so it is irreducible. We
       IndG
          MP AP NP σ ⊗ e
                          iα
                                has the same R-group ([24, §10]) as IndGMP AP NP σ ⊗ e
        define RGα (π ) as the equivalence class of π α .
   It is immediate from the construction in §3.2 that the Mackey–Higson bijection is compatible with these
renormalization maps:

Proposition 4.4. For every α > 0, we have RGα ◦ M = M ◦ RGα0 .

   Together Propositions 4.1 and 4.4 may shed some light on our construction of the correspondence: any
bijection
                                            B:G c0 → Gbtemp

must, if it is to satisfy Proposition 4.4, induce a bijection between the fixed-point-sets
                   n                                    o     n                                o
                     π0 ∈ Gc0 : ∀α > 0, RGα (π0 ) = π0 and π ∈ G   btemp : ∀α > 0, RGα (π ) = π .
                                             0


                                                                                   bRIC discussed in §3.1. So B
The first class is the copy of Kb discussed in Remark 2.2; the second is the class G


                                                         11
must send any K-type µ to an element of G bRIC ; if B is to satisfy Proposition 4.1, it must send µ to VG (µ ), like
our correspondence M .
   Now, observing the Knapp–Zuckerman classification, Lemma 4.2 and Proposition 4.1, and inserting the
above remark, we note that if π0 ≃ M(χ , µ ) is a unitary irreducible representation of G with nonzero χ , any
representation of G having the same set of lowest K-types as π0 must read
                                                                          
                                             IndMχ Aχ Nχ VMχ (µ ) ⊗ eiν

for some ν in a⋆χ . We may view our correspondence M as that obtained by choosing ν = χ .

                                     5. Extension to the admissible duals

                                                                                  c0 → G
We now come back to the setting of §3.2 and exend the Mackey–Higson bijection M : G    btemp to a natural
                                          adm       adm
                                       c0
bijection between the admissible duals G          c .
                                              and G
    Let us first describe a way to build, out of an admissible Mackey datum δ = (χ , µ ), an admissible represen-
tation of G (here χ ∈ a⋆C , µ ∈ Kcχ , see §2.4).
    Write χ = α + iβ , where α and β lie in a⋆ . Consider the centralizer Lχ of χ for the coadjoint action: Lχ
is the intersection Lα ∩ Lβ . Notice that in the notations of the proof of Theorem 3.5, Lχ is the centralizer of
aα + aβ ; thus Lχ appears as the θ -stable Levi factor of a real parabolic subgroup Pχ = Mχ Aχ Lχ of G, in which
Kχ is a maximal compact subgroup. In slight contrast with the construction of §3.2, we require from the outset
that Pχ be chosen in a specific way: we fix an ordering of a⋆ making α (the “real part” of χ ) nonnegative, and
choose Pχ accordingly. See the proof of Theorem 3.5.
    As before, we can build from δ the representation VMχ (µ ) ⊗ eχ of Pχ ; we define

                                                                             χ
                              M̃(δ ) = IndG            G
                                          Pχ (σ ) = IndMχ Aχ Nχ (VMχ (µ ) ⊗ e ⊗ 1),


an admissible representation of G.

Theorem 5.1.
(a) For every admissible Mackey parameter δ , the representation M̃(δ ) has a unique irreducible quotient
    Madm (δ ).
(b) Suppose δ and δ ′ are two admissible Mackey parameters. Then Madm (δ ) and Madm (δ ′ ) are equivalent if
    and only if δ and δ ′ are equivalent as admissible Mackey parameters.
(c) By associating to any admissible Mackey parameter δ the equivalence class of Madm (δ ) in G  badm , one
    obtains a bijection between D adm and G badm .

                                    c0 adm in §2.4, this yields a natural bijection
   Combined with the description of G

                                                      c0 adm −→
                                              M adm : G
                                                              ∼ badm
                                                                G                                             (5.1)

                     c0 is the Mackey–Higson bijection (3.2) between tempered representations.
whose restriction to G


Proof of Theorem 5.1. We use the Langlands classification to reduce the description of the irreducible admissi-
ble representations of G to that of the irreducible tempered representations of reductive subgroups of G.
   We will write (aα )o for the set of linear functionals on a whose restriction to aα is zero. Decompose

                      χ = α + i(β1 + β2 ),     where     α ∈ a⋆ ,   β1 ∈ a⋆α and β2 ∈ (aα )o .

Consider the parabolic subgroup Pα = Mα Aα Nα attached to α . We point out that it is possible to view (β1 , µ )
as a (tempered) Mackey parameter for the reductive group Mα : indeed, Mα admits Kα as a maximal compact

                                                         12
subgroup, and if we view β1 as a linear functional on mα ∩ p (where mα is the Lie algebra of Mα ), then the
stabilizer of β1 for the action of Kα on (mα ∩ p)⋆ is Kα ∩ Kβ1 = Kχ (since Kα is contained in Kβ2 ). Besides,
the group Mα satisfies the hypothesis of Remark 3.2: we can therefore construct, as in §3.2, the tempered
representation MMα (β1 , µ ).
   We now remark that                                                            
                                                                           α +iβ2
                                   M̃(χ , µ ) ≃ IndG
                                                   Pα   MMα (β 1 , µ ) ⊗ e          .                   (5.2)

To see this, recall that MMα (β , µ ) is built using the centralizer

                      ZMα (β1 ) = {g ∈ Mα , Ad⋆ (g)β1 = β1 } = Mα ∩ Lβ1 = Mχ (Aχ ∩ Mα ) ;

thus, it is induced from a parabolic subgroup P of Mα , which reads P = Mχ (Aχ ∩ Mα )Ñ − here Ñ normalizes
ZMα (β1 ) and its Lie algebra is a sum of positive root spaces for the given ordering. The right-hand side of (5.2)
can thus be rewritten as
                                         h                                           i
                                                                        iβ1
                             IndG            Mα
                                 Mα Aα Nα IndM (A ∩M )Ñ VMχ (µ ) ⊗ e         ⊗ eα +iβ2 ,
                                                χ   χ    α


which, by induction in stages, can in turn be written with only one parabolic induction as
                                                                                      
                                                                                 α +iβ
                                 IndGMχ [(Aχ ∩Mα )(Aα )](ÑNα )
                                                                  V Mχ ( µ ) ⊗ e         .

Since (Aχ ∩ Mα )(Aα ) is none other than Aχ , the parabolic subgroup that appears in the final expression is equal
to Pχ . This proves (5.2).
    From (5.2) we see that M̃(χ , µ ) is induced from a tempered representation; furthermore, in (5.2) we know
from the proof of Theorem 3.5 that α is aα -regular. It also has a positive scalar product with every positive root
of (g, aα ) in the ordering used to define Pα . Therefore M̃(χ , µ ) meets the usual criterion for the existence of a
unique irreducible quotient: see [23, Theorem 8.54]. This proves part (a) in Theorem 5.1; part (b) then follows
from the usual criteria for equivalence between Langlands quotients (implicit in [23, Theorem 8.54]).
    To prove part (c), recall from the Langlands classification that when π is an admissible irreducible represen-
tation of G, there exists a parabolic subgroup P = MP AP NP of G such that AP ⊂ A, there exists an aP -regular
element α in a⋆P , and there exists an element β1 in a⋆P , as well as an irreducible tempered representation σ of
                                                                                          
                                                                                    α +iβ1 . Since α is a -regular,
MP , so that π is equivalent with the unique irreducible quotient of IndG   P σ ⊗e                         P
the subgroups Pα and P are associate. Applying Theorem 3.5 to Mα , we know that the tempered representation
σ of MP is equivalent with MMα (β2 , µ ) − for some linear functional β2 on a ∩ (mα ∩ p) and some irreducible
representation µ of Kα ∩ZMα (β2 ) = Kα +iβ1 +iβ2 . (The group Mα does not necessarily satisfy the “real points of a
connected complex algebraic group” hypothesis of §3.2, but the centralizer Lα does, and it is the direct product
between Mα and the abelian vector group Aα ; thus Theorem 3.5 does hold for Mα ). We note that β2 ∈ (aα )o ,
and conclude that π is equivalent with a representation of the kind that appears in the right-hand side of (5.2).
This proves (c) and Theorem 5.1.

                                                        References

 [1] Jeffrey D. Adams, Marc A. A. van Leeuwen, Peter E. Trapa, and David A. Vogan, Jr., Unitary represen-
     tations of real reductive groups, Astérisque (2020), no. 417, viii + 188. MR4146144
 [2] Alexandre Afgoustidis, Représentations de groupes de lie et fonctionnement géométrique du cerveau,
     Ph.D. thesis, Université Paris-7, July 2016.
 [3]          , On the analogy between real reductive groups and Cartan motion groups: a proof of the Connes-
       Kasparov isomorphism, J. Funct. Anal. 277 (2019), no. 7, 2237–2258. MR3989145
 [4]           , On the analogy between real reductive groups and Cartan motion groups: contraction of irre-
       ducible tempered representations, Duke Math. J. 169 (2020), no. 5, 897–960. MR4079418

                                                             13
 [5] Paul Baum, Alain Connes, and Nigel Higson, Classifying space for proper actions and K-theory of group
     C∗ -algebras, C∗ -algebras: 1943–1993 (San Antonio, TX, 1993), Contemp. Math., vol. 167, Amer. Math.
     Soc., Providence, RI, 1994, pp. 240–291. MR1292018
 [6] Calixte Champetier and Patrick Delorme, Sur les représentations des groupes de déplacements de Cartan,
     J. Funct. Anal. 43 (1981), no. 2, 258–279. MR633979
 [7] Laurent Clozel and Patrick Delorme, Le théorème de Paley-Wiener invariant pour les groupes de Lie
     réductifs. II, Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4) 23 (1990), no. 2, 193–228. MR1046496
 [8] Alain Connes, Noncommutative geometry, Academic Press, Inc., San Diego, CA, 1994. MR1303779
 [9] Alain Connes and Nigel Higson, Déformations, morphismes asymptotiques et K-théorie bivariante, C. R.
     Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. I Math. 311 (1990), no. 2, 101–106. MR1065438
[10] Michael Cowling, Uffe Haagerup, and Roger Howe, Almost L2 matrix coefficients, J. Reine Angew. Math.
     387 (1988), 97–110. MR946351
[11] Anthony H. Dooley and John W. Rice, On contractions of semisimple Lie groups, Trans. Amer. Math.
     Soc. 289 (1985), no. 1, 185–202. MR779059
[12] Michel Duflo, Opérateurs différentiels bi-invariants sur un groupe de Lie, Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4)
     10 (1977), no. 2, 265–288. MR0444841
[13]           , Représentations de carré intégrable des groupes semi-simples réels, Séminaire Bourbaki, 30e
       année (1977/78), Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 710, Springer, Berlin, 1979, pp. Exp. No. 508, pp. 22–40.
       MR554213
[14] Freeman J. Dyson, Missed opportunities, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 78 (1972), 635–652. MR0522147
[15] Henryk Hecht and Wilfried Schmid, A proof of Blattner’s conjecture, Invent. Math. 31 (1975), no. 2,
     129–154. MR0396855
[16] Sigurdur Helgason, A duality for symmetric spaces with applications to group representations. III. Tangent
     space analysis, Adv. in Math. 36 (1980), no. 3, 297–323. MR577307
[17] Robert Hermann, The Gell-Mann formula for representations of semisimple groups, Comm. Math. Phys.
     2 (1966), 155–164. MR0206151
[18] Nigel Higson, The Mackey analogy and K-theory, Group representations, ergodic theory, and mathemat-
     ical physics: a tribute to George W. Mackey, Contemp. Math., vol. 449, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence,
     RI, 2008, pp. 149–172. MR2391803
[19]          , On the analogy between complex semisimple groups and their Cartan motion groups, Noncom-
       mutative geometry and global analysis, Contemp. Math., vol. 546, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI,
       2011, pp. 137–170. MR2815133
[20] Erdal İnönü and Eugene P. Wigner, Representations of the Galilei group, Nuovo Cimento (9) 9 (1952),
     705–718. MR0050594
[21]         , On the contraction of groups and their representations, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 39 (1953),
       510–524. MR0055352
[22] Masaki Kashiwara and Michèle Vergne, The Campbell-Hausdorff formula and invariant hyperfunctions,
     Invent. Math. 47 (1978), no. 3, 249–272. MR0492078
[23] Anthony W. Knapp, Representation theory of semisimple groups, Princeton Landmarks in Mathematics,
     Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2001, An overview based on examples, Reprint of the 1986
     original. MR1880691
[24] Anthony W. Knapp and Gregg J. Zuckerman, Classification of irreducible tempered representations of
     semisimple groups, Ann. of Math. (2) 116 (1982), no. 2, 389–455. MR672840
[25]           , Classification of irreducible tempered representations of semisimple groups. II, Ann. of Math.
       (2) 116 (1982), no. 3, 457–501. MR678478

                                                       14
[26] Johan A. C. Kolk and Veeravali S. Varadarajan, On the transverse symbol of vectorial distributions and
     some applications to harmonic analysis, Indag. Math. (N.S.) 7 (1996), no. 1, 67–96. MR1621372
[27] Vincent Lafforgue, K-théorie bivariante pour les algèbres de Banach et conjecture de Baum-Connes,
     Inventiones Mathematicae 149 (2002), no. 1, 1–95.
[28] George W. Mackey, Imprimitivity for representations of locally compact groups. I, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
     U. S. A. 35 (1949), 537–545. MR0031489
[29]           , Unitary representations of group extensions. I, Acta Math. 99 (1958), 265–311. MR0098328
[30]          , On the analogy between semisimple Lie groups and certain related semi-direct product groups,
       Lie groups and their representations (Proc. Summer School, Bolyai János Math. Soc., Budapest, 1971),
       Halsted, New York, 1975, pp. 339–363. MR0409726
[31] Jouko Mickelsson and Jiřı́ Niederle, Contractions of representations of de Sitter groups, Comm. Math.
     Phys. 27 (1972), 167–180. MR0309502
[32] Narasimhaiengar Mukunda, Expansions of Lie groups and representations of SL(3, C), J. Mathematical
     Phys. 10 (1969), 897–911. MR0246583
[33] Cary Rader, Spherical functions on Cartan motion groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 310 (1988), no. 1,
     1–45. MR965746
[34] François Rouvière, Symmetric spaces and the Kashiwara-Vergne method, Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
     vol. 2115, Springer, Cham, 2014. MR3307324
[35] Susana A. Salamanca-Riba and David A. Vogan, Jr., On the classification of unitary representations of
     reductive Lie groups, Ann. of Math. (2) 148 (1998), no. 3, 1067–1133. MR1670073
[36] Eugene J. Saletan, Contraction of Lie groups, J. Mathematical Phys. 2 (1961), 1–21. MR0127213
[37] Irving E. Segal, A class of operator algebras which are determined by groups, Duke Math. J. 18 (1951),
     221–265. MR0045133
[38] Diana Shelstad, L-indistinguishability for real groups, Math. Ann. 259 (1982), no. 3, 385–430.
     MR661206
[39] Birgit Speh and David A. Vogan, Jr., Reducibility of generalized principal series representations, Acta
     Math. 145 (1980), no. 3-4, 227–299. MR590291
[40] David A. Vogan, Jr., Classification of the irreducible representations of semisimple Lie groups, Proc. Nat.
     Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 74 (1977), no. 7, 2649–2650. MR0453930
[41]           , The algebraic structure of the representation of semisimple Lie groups. I, Ann. of Math. (2) 109
       (1979), no. 1, 1–60. MR519352
[42]          , Representations of real reductive Lie groups, Progress in Mathematics, vol. 15, Birkhäuser,
       Boston, Mass., 1981. MR632407
[43]        , Unitarizability of certain series of representations, Ann. of Math. (2) 120 (1984), no. 1, 141–187.
       MR750719
[44]          , Classifying representations by lowest K-types, Applications of group theory in physics and math-
       ematical physics (Chicago, 1982), Lectures in Appl. Math., vol. 21, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI,
       1985, pp. 269–288. MR789294
[45]           , A Langlands classification for unitary representations, Analysis on homogeneous spaces and
       representation theory of Lie groups, Okayama–Kyoto (1997), Adv. Stud. Pure Math., vol. 26, Math. Soc.
       Japan, Tokyo, 2000, pp. 299–324. MR1770725
[46]           , Branching to a maximal compact subgroup, Harmonic analysis, group representations, automor-
       phic forms and invariant theory, Lect. Notes Ser. Inst. Math. Sci. Natl. Univ. Singap., vol. 12, World Sci.
       Publ., Hackensack, NJ, 2007, pp. 321–401. MR2401817


                                                        15
[47] Nolan R. Wallach, Real reductive groups. I, Pure and Applied Mathematics, vol. 132, Academic Press,
     Inc., Boston, MA, 1988. MR929683
[48] Antony Wassermann, Une démonstration de la conjecture de Connes-Kasparov pour les groupes de Lie
     linéaires connexes réductifs, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. I Math. 304 (1987), no. 18, 559–562. MR894996
[49] Alan Weinstein, Poisson geometry of the principal series and nonlinearizable structures, J. Differential
     Geom. 25 (1987), no. 1, 55–73. MR873455
[50] Eugene Wigner, On unitary representations of the inhomogeneous Lorentz group, Ann. of Math. (2) 40
     (1939), no. 1, 149–204. MR1503456




                                                      16
