                                            Light-meson leptonic decay rates in lattice QCD+QED

                                                                        M. Di Carlo and G. Martinelli
                                                       Dipartimento di Fisica and INFN Sezione di Roma La Sapienza,
                                                                   Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Roma, Italy


                                                                           D. Giusti and V. Lubicz
                                             Dip. di Matematica e Fisica, Università Roma Tre and INFN, Sezione di Roma Tre,
                                                                Via della Vasca Navale 84, I-00146 Rome, Italy




arXiv:1904.08731v2 [hep-lat] 24 Oct 2019
                                                                                 C.T. Sachrajda
                                                      Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton,
                                                                          Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK


                                                                         F. Sanfilippo and S. Simula
                                                          Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Roma Tre,
                                                                Via della Vasca Navale 84, I-00146 Rome, Italy


                                                                                    N. Tantalo
                                                    Dipartimento di Fisica and INFN, Università di Roma “Tor Vergata”,
                                                              Via della Ricerca Scientifica 1, I-00133 Roma, Italy

                                             The leading electromagnetic (e.m.) and strong isospin-breaking corrections to the π + →
                                           µ+ ν[γ] and K + → µ+ ν[γ] leptonic decay rates are evaluated for the first time on the lattice.
                                           The results are obtained using gauge ensembles produced by the European Twisted Mass
                                           Collaboration with Nf = 2 + 1 + 1 dynamical quarks. The relative leading-order e.m. and
                                           strong isospin-breaking corrections to the decay rates are 1.53(19)% for πµ2 decays and
                                           0.24(10)% for Kµ2 decays. Using the experimental values of the πµ2 and Kµ2 decay rates
                                           and updated lattice QCD results for the pion and kaon decay constants in isosymmetric
                                           QCD, we find that the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa matrix element |Vus | = 0.22538(46),
                                           reducing by a factor of about 1.8 the corresponding uncertainty in the Particle Data Group
                                           review. Our calculation of |Vus | allows also an accurate determination of the first-row CKM
                                           unitarity relation |Vud |2 + |Vus |2 + |Vub |2 = 0.99988(46). Theoretical developments in this
                                           paper include a detailed discussion of how QCD can be defined in the full QCD+QED
                                           theory and an improved renormalisation procedure in which the bare lattice operators are
                                           renormalised non-perturbatively into the (modified) Regularization Independent Momentum
                                           subtraction scheme and subsequently matched perturbatively at O(αem αs (MW )) into the W-
                                           regularisation scheme appropriate for these calculations.
                                                       2


PACS numbers: 11.15.Ha, 12.15.Lk, 12.38.Gc, 13.20.-v
                                                                                                   3


                                      I.   INTRODUCTION


   In flavour physics the determination of the elements of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM)
matrix [1], which contains just 4 parameters, from a wide range of weak processes represents a
crucial test of the limits of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. Inconsistencies with
theoretical expectations would indeed signal the existence of new physics beyond the SM and sub-
sequently a detailed comparison of experimental measurements and theoretical predictions would
provide a guide towards uncovering the underlying theory beyond the SM. For this to be possible
non-perturbative hadronic effects need to be evaluated as precisely as possible and in this paper
we report on progress in improving the precision of lattice computations of leptonic decay rates by
including radiative corrections and strong isospin-breaking (IB) effects. A summary of our results
has been presented in Ref. [2]; here we expand on the details of the calculation and include several
improvements, most notably the renormalisation of the four-fermion weak operators in the com-
bined QCD+QED theory (see Sec. IV). We also discuss in some detail how one might define the
QCD component of the full (QCD+QED) theory (see Sec. II). Although such a separate definition
of QCD is not required in order to obtain results computed in the full theory, it is necessary if one
wishes to talk about radiative (and strong IB) “corrections” to results obtained in QCD. For this
we need to specify what we mean by QCD.

   The extraction of the CKM elements from experimental data requires an accurate knowledge
of a number of hadronic quantities and the main goal of large-scale QCD simulations on the
lattice is the ab initio evaluation of the nonperturbative QCD effects in physical processes. For
several quantities relevant for flavour physics phenomenology, lattice QCD has recently reached
the impressive level of precision of O(1%) or even better . Important examples are the ratio fK /fπ
of kaon and pion leptonic decay constants and the K`3 vector form factor f+ (0) [3], which play the
central role in the accurate determination of the CKM entries |Vus /Vud | and |Vus |, respectively.
Such lattice computations are typically performed in the isospin symmetric limit of QCD, in which
the up and down quarks are mass degenerate (mu = md ) and electromagnetic (e.m.) effects are
neglected (αem = 0).

   Isospin breaking effects arise because of radiative corrections and because mu 6= md ; the latter
contributions are usually referred to as strong isospin breaking effects. Since both αem and (md −
mu )/ΛQCD are of O(1%), IB effects need to be included in lattice simulations to make further
progress in flavour physics phenomenology, beyond the currently impressive precision obtained in
isosymmetric QCD.
                                                                                                      4


   Since the electric charges of the up and down quarks are different, the presence of electro-
magnetism itself induces a difference in their masses, in addition to any explicit difference in the
bare masses input into the action being simulated. The separation of IB effects into strong and
e.m. components therefore requires a convention. We discuss this in detail in Sec. II, where we pro-
pose and advocate the use of hadronic schemes, based on taking a set of hadronic quantities, such
as particle masses, which are computed with excellent precision in lattice simulations, to define
QCD in the presence of electromagnetism.
   In recent years precise lattice results including e.m. and strong IB effects have been obtained for
the hadron spectrum; in particular for the mass splittings between charged and neutral pseudoscalar
(P) mesons and baryons (see for example, Refs. [4, 5]). The QED effects were included in lattice
QCD simulations using the following two methods:

    • QED is added directly to the action and QED+QCD simulations are performed at a few
      values of the electric charge and the results extrapolated to the physical value of αem (see,
      e.g., Refs. [5–7]);

    • the lattice path-integral is expanded in powers of the two small parameters αem and (md −
      mu )/ΛQCD . This is the RM123 approach of Refs. [4, 8, 9] which we follow in this paper.

   In practice, for all the relevant phenomenological applications it is currently sufficient to work
at first order in the small parameters αem and (md − mu )/ΛQCD . The attractive feature of the
RM123 method is that it allows one naturally to work at first order in isospin breaking, computing
the coefficients of the two small parameters directly. Moreover, these coefficients can be determined
from simulations of isosymmetric QCD.
   The calculation of e.m. and strong IB effects in the hadron spectrum has a very significant
simplification in that there are no infrared (IR) divergences. The same is not true when computing
hadronic amplitudes, where e.m. IR divergences are present and only cancel in well-defined, mea-
surable physical quantities by summing diagrams containing real and virtual photons [10]. This is
the case, for instance, for the leptonic π`2 and K`2 and semileptonic K`3 decay rates. The presence
of IR divergences requires a new strategy beyond those developed for the calculation of IB effects
in the hadron spectrum. Such a new strategy was proposed in Ref. [11], where the determination
of the inclusive decay rate of a charged P meson into either a final `± ν` pair or a final `± ν` γ state
was addressed.
   The e.m. corrections due to the exchange of a virtual photon and to the emission of a real
one can be computed non-perturbatively, by numerical simulations, on a finite lattice with the
                                                                                                  5


corresponding uncertainties. The exchange of a virtual photon depends on the structure of the
decaying meson, since all momentum modes are included, and the corresponding amplitude must
therefore be computed non-perturbatively. On the other hand, the non-perturbative evaluation of
the emission of a real photon is not strictly necessary [11]. Indeed, it is possible to compute the
real emission amplitudes in perturbation theory by limiting the maximum energy of the emitted
photon in the meson rest-frame, ∆Eγ , to a value small enough so that the internal structure of
the decaying meson is not resolved. The IR divergences in the non-perturbative calculation of the
corrections due to the exchange of a virtual photon are cancelled by the corrections due to the
real photon emission even when the latter is computed perturbatively, because of the universality
of the IR behaviour of the theory (i.e., the IR divergences do not depend on the structure of the
decaying hadron). Such a strategy, which requires an experimental cut on the energy of the real
photon, makes the extraction of the relevant CKM element(s) cleaner.
   In the intermediate steps of the calculation it is necessary to introduce an IR regulator. In
order to work with quantities that are finite when the IR regulator is removed, the inclusive rate
Γ(P + → `+ ν` [γ]) is written as [11]

          Γ(P ± → `± ν` [γ]) = Γ0 + Γpt
                                      1 (∆Eγ )
                                    h               i       h                              i
                             = lim Γ0 (L) − Γpt0 (L)  + lim  Γ pt
                                                               0  (µγ ) + Γ pt
                                                                            1  (∆Eγ , µγ )   ,   (1)
                                L→∞                       µγ →0

where the subscripts 0, 1 indicate the number of photons in the final state, while the superscript
pt denotes the point-like approximation of the decaying meson and µγ is an IR regulator. In the

first term on the r.h.s. of Eq. (1) the quantities Γ0 (L) and Γpt
                                                               0 (L) are evaluated on the lattice.

Both have the same IR divergences which therefore cancel in the difference. We use the lattice
size L as the intermediate IR regulator by working in the QEDL [12] formulation of QED on a
finite volume (for a recent review on QED simulations in a finite box see Ref. [13]). The difference
h          i
  Γ0 − Γpt
         0   is independent of the regulator as this is removed [14]. As already pointed out, since
all momentum modes contribute to it, Γ0 (L) depends on the structure of the decaying meson and
must be computed non-perturbatively. The numerical determination of Γ0 (L) for several lattice
spacings, physical volumes and quark masses is indeed the focus of the present study.
   In the second term on the r.h.s. of Eq. (1) P is a point-like meson and both Γpt
                                                                                 0 (µγ ) and

Γpt
 1 (∆Eγ , µγ ) can be calculated directly in infinite volume in perturbation theory, using a pho-

ton mass µγ as the IR regulator. Each term is IR divergent, but the sum is convergent [10] and
independent of the IR regulator. In Refs. [11] and [14] the explicit perturbative calculations of
h                  i
  Γpt
   0  + Γ pt
          1  (∆Eγ )  and Γpt
                          0 (L) have been performed with a small photon mass µγ or by using the
                                                                                                   6


finite volume respectively, as the IR cutoffs.


   In Ref. [2] we have calculated the e.m. and IB corrections to the ratio of Kµ2 and πµ2 decay
rates of charged pions and kaons into muons [2], using gauge ensembles generated by the European
Twisted Mass Collaboration (ETMC) with Nf = 2+1+1 dynamical quarks [15, 16] in the quenched
QED (qQED) approximation in which the charges of the sea quarks are set to 0. The ratio is less
sensitive to various sources of uncertainty than the IB corrections to πµ2 and Kµ2 decay rates
separately. In this paper, in addition to providing more details of the calculation than was possible
in Ref. [2], we do evaluate the e.m. and strong IB corrections to the decay processes πµ2 and Kµ2
separately. Since the corresponding experimental rates are fully inclusive in the real photon energy,
structure-dependent (SD) contributions to the real photon emission should be included, however
according to the Chiral Perturbation Theory (ChPT) predictions of Ref. [17] these SD contributions
are negligible for both kaon and pion decays into muons. The same is not true to the same extent
for decays into final-state electrons (see Ref. [11]) and so in this paper we focus on decays into
muons. The SD contributions to Γ1 are being investigated in an ongoing dedicated lattice study
of light and heavy P-meson leptonic decays.


   An important improvement presented in this paper is in the renormalisation of the effective weak
Hamiltonian. To exploit the matching of the effective theory to the Standard Model performed in
Ref. [18] it is particularly convenient to renormalise the weak Hamiltonian in the W-regularisation
scheme. The renormalisation is performed in two steps. First of all, the lattice operators are
renormalised non-perturbatively in the (modified) Regularization Independent Momentum sub-
traction (RI0 -MOM) scheme at O(αem ) and to all orders in the strong coupling αs . Because of the
breaking of chiral symmetry in the twisted mass formulation we have adopted in our study, this
renormalisation includes the mixing with other four-fermion operators of different chirality. In the
second step we perform the matching from the RI0 -MOM scheme to the W-regularisation scheme
perturbatively. By calculating and including the two-loop anomalous dimension at O(αem αs ), the
residual truncation error of this matching is of O(αem αs (MW )), reduced from O(αem αs (1/a)) in
our earlier work [11].


   The main results of the calculation are presented in Sec. VI together with a detailed discussion
of their implications. Here, we anticipate some key results: After extrapolation of the data to
the physical pion mass, and to the continuum and infinite-volume limits, the isospin-breaking
                                                                                                  7


corrections to the leptonic decay rates can be written in the form:

                      Γ(π ± → µ± ν` [γ]) = (1.0153 ± 0.0019) Γ(0) (π ± → µ± ν` ),                (2)

                     Γ(K ± → µ± ν` [γ]) = (1.0024 ± 0.0010)Γ(0) (K ± → µ± ν` ) ,                 (3)

where Γ(0) is the leptonic decay rate at tree level in the Gasser-Rusetsky-Scimemi (GRS) scheme
which is a particular definition of QCD [19] (see Sec. II B 2 below). The corrections are about 1.5%
for the pion decays and 0.2% for the kaon decay, in line with naı̈ve expectations. Taking the
experimental value of the rate for the Kµ2 decay, Eq. (3) together with Γ(0) (K ± → µ± ν` ) obtained
using the lattice determination of the kaon decay constant we obtain |Vus | = 0.22567(42), in
agreement with the latest estimate |Vus | = 0.2253(7), recently updated by the Particle Data Group
(PDG) [20] but with better precision. Alternatively, by taking the ratio of Kµ2 and πµ2 decay rates
and the updated value |Vud | = 0.97420 (21) from super-allowed nuclear beta decays [21], we obtain
|Vus | = 0.22538(46). The unitarity of the first row of the CKM matrix is satisfied at the per-mille
level; e.g. taking the value of Vus from the ratio of decay rates and |Vub | = 0.00413(49) [20], we
obtain |Vud |2 + |Vus |2 + |Vub |2 = 0.99988(46). See Sec. VI for a more detailed discussion of our
results and their implications.
   The plan for the remainder of this paper is as follows. A discussion of the relation between the
“full” QCD+QED theory, including e.m. and strong IB effects, and isosymmetric QCD without
electromagnetism is given in Sec. II. We discuss possible definitions of QCD in the full QCD+QED
theory, and in particular we define and advocate hadronic schemes as well as the GRS scheme
which is conventionally used [19]. In Sec. III we present the calculation of the relevant amplitudes
using the RM123 approach. The renormalisation of the bare lattice operators necessary to obtain
the effective weak Hamiltonian in the W -regularization scheme is performed in Sec. IV, while the
subtraction of the universal IR-divergent finite volume effects (FVEs) is described in Sec. V. The
lattice data for the e.m. and strong IB corrections to the leptonic decay rates of pions and kaons
are extrapolated to the physical pion mass, to the continuum and infinite volume limits in Sec. VI.
Finally, Sec. VII contains our conclusions. There are four appendices. The lattice framework and
details of the simulation are presented in Appendix A. Appendix B contains a detailed discussion
of the relation between observables in the full theory and in QCD, expanding on the material in
Sec. II. An expanded discussion of the renormalisation of the effective weak Hamiltonian, including
electromagnetic corrections, is presented in Appendices C, which contains a general discussion of
the non-perturbative renormalisation in the RI'-MOM scheme and D in which issues specific to the
twisted mass formulation are discussed.
                                                                                                     8


                II.   DEFINING QCD IN THE FULL THEORY (QCD+QED)


   Before presenting the detailed description of our calculation of leptonic decay rates, we believe
that it is useful to discuss the relation between the “full ” QCD+QED theory, that includes explicit
e.m. and strong isospin breaking effects, and QCD without electromagnetism (denoted in the
following as the full theory and QCD, respectively).
   The action of the full theory can be schematically written as

                          1 YM          Xn               o Xn                o
               S full =       S + S A
                                      +   Sf
                                            kin
                                                + mf Sf
                                                       m
                                                          +  S kin
                                                               `   + m ` S m
                                                                           `   .                   (4)
                          gs2
                                         f                       `


Here gs is the strong coupling constant, S YM is a discretisation of the gluon action, S A is the pre-
ferred discretisation of the Maxwell action of the photon, Sfkin is the kinetic term for the quark with
flavour f , including the interaction with the gluon and photon fields, mf Sfm = mf x q f (x)qf (x)
                                                                                         P

is the mass term, S`kin and S`m are respectively the kinetic and mass terms for the lepton ` (for
details see Appendix B). For fermion actions which break chiral symmetry, such as the Wilson
action, a counterterm is needed to remove the critical mass and mf Sfm has to be replaced with
mf Sfm + mcr cr
          f Sf . A mass counterterm is in principle needed also in the case of the lepton, but at

leading order in αem the lepton critical mass can be ignored.
   At the level of precision to which we are currently working it is only the full theory, as defined
in Eq. (4), which is expected to reproduce physical results and that is therefore unambiguous.
Nevertheless, a frequently asked question is what is the difference between the results for a physical
quantity computed in the full theory and in pure QCD, and how big are the strong isospin-breaking
effects compared to the e.m. corrections. We particularly wish to underline that in order to properly
formulate such questions it is necessary to carefully define what is meant by QCD. It is naturally
to be expected that in QCD alone physical quantities will not be reproduced with a precision of
better than O(αem ) ≃ 1% and this of course is the motivation for including QED. In order to define
what is meant by QCD at this level of precision it is necessary to state the conditions which are
used to determine the quark masses and the lattice spacing. The separation of the full theory into
QCD and the rest is therefore prescription dependent.
   In Ref. [4] the subtle issue of a precise definition of QCD has been discussed by using the scheme
originally proposed in Ref. [19], which we refer to as the GRS scheme and which has been widely
used [2, 4, 8]. In the following and in Appendix B we present an extended and detailed discussion by
introducing the hadronic schemes. Indeed, in light of the fact that hadron masses can nowadays be
computed very precisely, we strongly suggest using hadronic schemes in future lattice calculations
                                                                                                                    9


of QED radiative corrections. At the end of this section we discuss the connection with the GRS
scheme that we had adopted at the time in which this calculation was started and that, for this
reason, has been used in this work. A summary of the ideas discussed here has already been
presented in Ref. [22].


                                   A.    Renormalisation of the full theory


     The main difference in the steps required to renormalise the full theory compared to the pro-
cedure in QCD is the presence of a massless photon and the corresponding finite-volume (FV)
corrections which appear as inverse powers of L, where L is the spatial extent of the lattice and
the volume V = L3 . By contrast, in QCD for leptonic and semileptonic decays the FV corrections
are exponentially small in the volume. In the discussion below, if necessary, we imagine that the
chiral Ward identities have been imposed to determine the critical masses mcr
                                                                           f [23].

     A possible strategy in principle is the following:

     1. Fix the number of lattice points N , e.g. T = 2aN and L = aN , where T and L are the
         temporal and spatial extents of the lattice and the lattice spacing a will be determined later.
         (The specific choice T = 2L is convenient for illustration but not necessary for the following
         argument.)

     2. Using a four-flavour theory for illustration, we now need to determine the four physical
         bare quark masses, the bare electric charge and the lattice spacing. To this end we need to
         compute six quantities, e.g. the five dimensionless ratios1

                                                       aMπ+
                                 R1 (aN ; gs , e, m) =       (aN ; gs , e, m) ,
                                                       aMΩ
                                                       aMK 0
                                 R2 (aN ; gs , e, m) =       (aN ; gs , e, m)
                                                       aMΩ
                                                       aMDs
                                 R3 (aN ; gs , e, m) =       (aN ; gs , e, m) ,
                                                       aMΩ
                                                       aMK + − aMK 0
                                 R4 (aN ; gs , e, m) =                   (aN ; gs , e, m) ,
                                                           aMΩ
                                                       aMD0 − aMD+
                                 R5 (aN ; gs , e, m) =                   (aN ; gs , e, m) ,                       (5)
                                                           aMΩ

         as well as a dimensionful quantity, e.g. the mass of the Ω baryon, computed in lattice units,
         from which the lattice spacing can be determined after extrapolation to the infinite volume
1
    An alternative procedure to determine the bare electric charge would be the evaluation of the hadronic corrections
    to a leptonic observable.
                                                                                                     10


   limit (see below):

                                                          aMΩ (aN ; gs , e, m)
                                  R0 (aN ; gs , e, m) =                            ,                (6)
                                                                  MΩphys

   where MΩphys = 1.672 GeV is the physical value of the mass of the Ω baryon. For illustration
   we are considering the masses of QCD+QED stable pseudoscalar mesons in the numerators
   of the dimensionless ratios (5) and using MΩphys to determine the lattice spacing, but of course
   other quantities can be used instead. For example, in the four flavour theory that we are
   considering here one can in principle avoid potentially very noisy baryon observables by using
   one of the charmed mesons masses already considered above to set the scale. The choice
   of setting the scale with a charmed-meson observable could however, generate significant
   cutoff effects and reduce the sensitivity to the charm mass. In Eqs. (5) - (6) we have used
   aN instead of L to highlight that the infinite-volume limit should be taken at fixed lattice
   spacing (see Eq. (7) below). The quantity m represents the vector of bare quark masses
   m ≡ {mu , md , ms , mc }. Note that in the RM123 strategy, since one works at first order in
   αem , it is not necessary to impose a renormalisation condition to fix the e.m. coupling [4, 8]. In
                                                                                      p
   this case the electric charge can simply be fixed to the Thomson limit, i.e. e = 4π/137.036,
   and R5 becomes a predictable quantity. For the remainder of this section, we assume that
   we are working to O(αem ) and only consider the four ratios Ri (i=1,2,3,4) as well as R0 when
   discussing the calibration of the lattices. Notice also that at first order in αem the π 0 cannot
   decay in two photons, so that it can also be used in the calibration procedure (see section III
   below).

3. Up to this point the procedure is the standard one used in QCD simulations. The differ-
   ence here is in the FV effects which behave as inverse powers of L. We therefore envisage
   extrapolating the ratios Ri to the infinite-volume limit:

                     Ri (gs , e, m) ≡ lim Ri (aN ; gs , e, m) ,            i = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 .   (7)
                                        N →∞


4. For a given discretisation and choice of gs , the physical bare quark masses, mphys (gs ), and
   the electric charge, ephys (gs ), are defined by requiring that the five ratios R1,2,3,4,5 take their
   physical values

                        Ri (gs , ephys (gs ), mphys (gs )) = Riphys ,      i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 .      (8)

   In practice, of course, depending on the specific choice of the ratios Ri , this will require some
                                                                                                       11


      extrapolations of results obtained at different values of the bare quark masses and electric
      charge.

   5. The lattice spacing a at this value of gs can now be defined to be

                                        a(gs ) = R0 (gs , ephys (gs ), mphys (gs )) .                  (9)

      Note that with such a procedure the bare parameters and the lattice spacing a do not depend
      on the lattice volume.

   6. At first order in isospin breaking, i.e. O(αem , md − mu ), the renormalisation of the lepton
      masses is performed perturbatively, by requiring that the on-shell masses correspond to the
      physical ones. If one wishes to go beyond first order, when hadronic effects first enter, then
      the physical lepton masses should be added to the quantities used in the non-perturbative
      calibration. The bare lepton masses, together with the other parameters, should be chosen
      such that, in addition to satisfying the conditions in Eq. (5), the lepton-lepton correlators
      decay in time as e−m` t , where m` is the physical mass of the lepton `.

   In Eq. (7) we have taken the infinite-volume limit of the computed hadron masses. By working
in the QEDL finite-volume formulation of QED, if for each hadron H the FV corrections of order
O(e2 /(MH L)3 , e4 ) can be neglected, then the extrapolation to the infinite-volume limit can be
avoided by making use of the formula [5, 12] (similar formulae also exist for other finite-volume
formulations of the theory [24])
                                                                                             
            aMH (L; gs , e, m)                                  1                1
                               = 1 − κ αem e2H                            + 2 2                   ,   (10)
             aMH (gs , e, m)                             2L MH (gs , e, m) L MH (gs , e, m)
where eH is the charge of the hadron H and κ = 2.837297 (1) is a known universal constant
(independent of the structure of the hadron H). Equation (10) can be used to determine the infinite-
volume mass of the hadron H from the value measured on the finite-volume L3 , up to corrections
of order of O(e2 /(mH L)3 , e4 ). (In any case, even if one wishes to study the behaviour with L by
performing simulations at different volumes, the subtraction of the universal O(e2 /(MH L)) and
O(e2 /(MH L)2 ) terms using Eq. (10) is a useful starting point; the residual leading behaviour of
hadronic masses is then of O(e2 /(MH L)3 , e4 ).)


                                   B.     Defining observables in QCD


   The procedure discussed in section II A provides a full framework with which to perform lattice
simulations of QCD together with isospin-breaking effects including radiative corrections. Nev-
                                                                                                  12


ertheless, one may wish to ask how different are the results for some physical quantities in the
full theory (QCD+QED) and in QCD alone. We stress again that, under the assumption that
isospin breaking effects are not negligible, QCD by itself is an unphysical theory and requires a
definition. Different prescriptions are possible and, of course, lead to different results in QCD. In
this section we propose and advocate hadronic schemes, based on the nonperturbative evaluation
of a set of hadronic masses in lattice simulations and contrast this with schemes based on equating
the renormalised strong coupling and masses in some renormalisation scheme and at a particular
renormalisation scale which have been used previously.
   We recall that the QCD action is given by

                                         1 YM X n kin             o
                              S QCD =        S + S f,0 + mf,0 S m
                                                                f   ,                           (11)
                                         g02
                                                  f

where the kinetic term only includes the gluon links and the subscripts 0 indicate that the bare
coupling and masses are different from those in the full theory of Eq. (4). Indeed the two theories
have different dynamics that, in turn, generate a different pattern of ultraviolet divergences. The
difference in the bare parameters of the two theories, for all schemes used to define QCD, can
in fact be ascribed to the necessity of reabsorbing the different ultraviolet singularities. In what
follows we present two different approaches to making the choice of the parameters g0 and mf,0 .
Explicit details of the lattice action, discretised using the Wilson formulation for the fermions for
illustration, are presented in Appendix B 1.


                         1.    Defining observables in QCD: hadronic schemes


   In hadronic schemes we choose a value of g0 and determine the bare quark masses mphys
                                                                                    0    and
the lattice spacing a0 imposing the same conditions as for the full theory for the ratios R0,...,4
evaluated at vanishing electric charge, i.e. following steps 1 - 5 in Sec. II A without imposing any
constraint on the ratio R5 . We repeat that, for illustration we define the bare quark masses and
lattice spacing using the five ratios Ri , but other hadronic quantities could be used instead, both
in the full theory and in QCD. These parameters differ by terms of order O(αem ) from those in the
full theory. For this discussion, we make the natural and convenient choice g0 = gs . (In order to
make the perturbative expansion in Eq. (B11) the difference gs − g0 should be less than O(αem ).)
With this choice, the lattice spacings in QCD (a0 ) and in the full theory (a) are therefore given by

                              ha0 MΩ iQCD             haMΩ ifull
                      a0 =                  and a =                ≡ a0 (1 + δa) .              (12)
                                MΩphys                  MΩphys
                                                                                                   13


   To illustrate the procedure imagine that we wish to calculate an observable O of mass dimension
1, for example the mass of a hadron which has not been used for the calibration. The generalisation
to other cases is straightforward and presented in Appendix B. At a fixed value of gs = g0 , we
denote the best estimate of the observable O, which is the one obtained in the full theory, by Ophys ,
and that obtained in QCD as defined above by OQCD :

                                     haOifull                  ha0 OiQCD
                           Ophys ≡               and OQCD ≡              .                       (13)
                                        a                          a0

We define the difference of the two as being due to QED effects, δOQED ≡ Ophys − OQCD . There
are 3 contributions to δOQED :

   1. The first contribution comes from the fact that the covariant derivatives in the kinetic terms
      in (4) and Eq. (11) are different. This generates the diagrams in the correlation functions
      which contain the explicit exchange of virtual photons.

   2. The second contribution comes from the fact that the bare quark masses appearing in Eq. (4)
      and Eq. (11) are different. The corresponding quark-mass counterterms must therefore be
      inserted into the correlation functions used to determine Ophys . We stress that the need
      to include quark-mass counterterms is generic and arises from the requirement that the
      conditions being used to determine the quark masses must be satisfied both in the full
      theory and in QCD (for the hadronic scheme being used for illustration we impose that the
      conditions in Eq. (8) are satisfied in both theories).

   3. Finally we must account for the difference in the lattice spacings δa = a − a0 in the full
      theory and QCD.

Combining these contributions we arrive at

                                                ha0 δOiQCD δa
                          Ophys = OQCD +                  − 2 ha0 OiQCD ,                        (14)
                                                     a0    a0

where we have combined the contributions to the correlation functions from the exchange of virtual
photons and from the insertion of the mass counterterms into ha0 δOiQCD .
   The detailed derivation of Eq. (14) is presented in Appendix B but some further comments may
be helpful here. The first term on the right-hand side is one that can be calculated within QCD
alone. It has a well defined continuum limit as does the sum of all the terms in Eq. (14). This term
allows us to define what is the difference between QCD (defined as above) and the full theory in
the hadronic scheme: δOQED = Ophys − OQCD .
                                                                                                     14


   An important feature of the RM123 approach which we follow in the numerical study presented
below, is that the O(αem ) terms are computed explicitly and so we do not have to take the difference
between numerical calculations performed in the full theory and in QCD. Each of the terms on
the right-hand side of Eq. (14) is calculated directly. We now explain the procedure in some more
                                          2 ) are negligible (the extension to higher orders in
detail by assuming that terms of order O(αem
αem is straightforward).

   1. Correlation functions corresponding to diagrams with the exchange of a virtual photon and
      to the insertion of the mass counterterms are already of O(αem ) and are calculated directly
      in QCD. The term proportional to the time separation in the correlation functions gives us
      the mass shift δMHi (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) and δMΩ for the five masses (or mass differences) in the
      ratios Ri (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) in Eq. (5);

   2. In the hadronic scheme being used for illustration, we impose the condition that the four
      ratios Ri = mHi /mΩ are the same in QCD and in the full theory. This corresponds to
      requiring that

                                    δMHi   δMΩ
                                         −     =0          (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) .                      (15)
                                    MH i   MΩ

      The QED contribution to the left-hand side is different from zero (and also ultraviolet diver-
      gent) and we require the terms proportional to the counterterms to cancel this contribution.
      We therefore (in principle) scan the values of the four mass counterterms δmf = mf − mf,0
      (f = u, d, s, c) until the four conditions (15) are satisfied. Also in this case no subtraction of
      results obtained in the full theory and in QCD is necessary.

   3. Finally we determine the difference δa ≡ a − a0 in the lattice spacing. Having determined
      the bare masses using item 2, we can calculate the shift in the Ω mass, δMΩ due to both
      QED and the mass counterterms and use Eq. (12). Since aδMΩ is calculated directly, there
      is again no subtraction.

   We have devoted a considerable discussion to the definition of the isospin-breaking effects due
to electromagnetism, δOQED . Having done this, the subsequent definition of the strong isospin
breaking effects is straightforward. To do this however, we need to define the isosymmetric theory
(labelled by “ISO”) by imposing appropriate conditions to determine the bare quark masses and
the lattice spacing. Since mu = md , in the Nf = 2 + 1 + 1 theory we need to determine only three
quark masses and hence we only need three conditions, e.g. we can use the ratios R1,2,3 in Eq. (5)
                                                                                                 15


to determine the physical bare quark masses. For the determination of the lattice spacing we have
two options. The simplest one is to work in a mass–independent scheme and set the lattice spacing
in the isosymmetric theory, aISO                                               ISO = a . Notice
                             0 , equal to the one of QCD with mu 6= md , i.e. a0      0

that this choice is fully consistent with renormalisation because the ultraviolet divergences of the
theories that we are considering do not depend on the quark masses. Note however, that they do
depend instead on the electric charge. The other option is that we set the lattice spacing in the
isosymmetric theory by using R0 in Eq. (9). The difference between the two options is due to cutoff
effects that disappear once the continuum limit is taken consistently. The strong isospin breaking
correction δOSIB to the observable O can now be defined by


                                        δOSIB = OQCD − OISO ,                                  (16)

                haISO OiISO
where OISO =      0
                    aISO
                            is the value of the observable obtained in isosymmetric QCD. With these
                     0

definitions we have the natural relation Ophys = OISO +δOQED +δOSIB . We underline however that
δOSIB depends on the quantities used for calibration, both in 4-flavour QCD and in isosymmetric
QCD.



                                   2.   Defining QCD: the GRS scheme


   A different prescription, called the GRS scheme, was proposed in Ref. [19] to relate the bare
quark masses and bare coupling of QCD (mf,0 and g0 ) to those in the full theory (mf and gs ). This
prescription has been adopted in Refs. [2, 4, 8]. In the GRS approach, instead of determining the
bare parameters of QCD by requiring that the chosen hadronic masses in QCD are equal to their
physical values, one imposes that the renormalised parameters in a given short–distance scheme
(e.g. the MS scheme) and at a given scale are equal in the full and QCD theories.
   A consistent procedure is the following:


   1. The full theory is renormalised by using a physical hadronic scheme as discussed in subsection
       II A. This means that for each chosen value of gs we know the corresponding physical value
       of the bare electric charge ephys (gs ) and of the lattice spacing a(gs ).


   2. The renormalisation constants (RCs) of the strong coupling constant and of the quark masses
       are computed in a short–distance mass–independent scheme both in the full theory and in
       the theory at vanishing electric charge.
                                                                                                          16


   3. In order to set the bare parameters of QCD at a given value of the lattice spacing we now
      chose a matching scale µ and impose that the renormalised strong coupling constant and the
      renormalised quark masses are the same as in the full theory. In practice we might want to
      simulate QCD at the same values of the lattice spacing used in the full theory simulations.
      In this case the matching conditions are

             g(µ) = Zg (0, g0 , a(gs )µ)g0 = Zg (ephys (gs ), gs , a(gs )µ)gs = gb(µ)

           mf (µ) = Zmf (0, g0 , a(gs )µ)mf,0 (g0 ) = Zmf (ephys (gs ), gs , a(gs )µ)mf (gs ) = b
                                                                                                mf (µ) , (17)

      where b indicates quantities in the QCD+QED theory. Notice that quarks with the same
      electric charge have the same RC, e.g. Zmu (e, gs , µ) = Zmc (e, gs , µ), and that the quark mass
      RC at vanishing electric charge is flavour independent, Zmf (0, g0 , µ) = Zm (g0 , µ).

   4. In order to define isosymmetric QCD by using this approach, the bare up–down quark mass
      is determined from
                                                                  m
                                                                  b u (µ) + b
                                                                            md (µ)
                                Zm (g0 , a(gs )µ) mud,0 (g0 ) =                    .                    (18)
                                                                          2

   Some remarks are in order at this point. The GRS scheme is a short–distance matching proce-
dure that can also be used to match the theories at unphysical values of the renormalised electric
charge and/or quark masses with the physical theory.
   By following the procedure outlined above one can perform lattice simulations of the full theory
and of (isosymmetric) QCD at the same value of the lattice spacing but, consequently, at different
values of the bare strong coupling constant. This is different from the strategy outlined in the
previous subsection where, by using hadronic schemes, it was more natural to chose the same value
of the bare strong coupling at the price of having two different lattice spacings. The absence of
the lattice spacing counterterm (see Eq. (14) above) in the GRS scheme is compensated from the
presence of the counterterm (1/g02 − 1/gs2 )S YM originating from the difference of the bare strong
coupling constants in the two theories.
   A remark of some practical relevance concerns the possibility of implementing hadronically the
GRS scheme. To this end, note that in the GRS scheme the dimensionless ratios Ri will not be
equal to the corresponding physical values and the difference can be parametrized as follows

                                     RiQCD-GRS = Riphys (1 + GRS
                                                              i   ),                                    (19)

where the GRS
           i   are order O(αem ) and depend on the chosen matching scheme and also on the
chosen matching scale. Once the GRS
                                 i   (and hence the RiQCD-GRS ) are known, for example from
                                                                                                   17


a particularly accurate lattice simulation, then they can be used in other lattice computations.
The bare quark masses are then determined by requiring that the Ri in (isosymmetric) QCD
reproduce RiQCD-GRS as given by Eq.(19), and, at this stage, the GRS scheme can be considered to
be a hadronic one as it is defined in terms of non-perturbatively computed quantities (in this case
meson masses). We stress however that this requires prior knowledge of the GRS
                                                                            i   .
   Of course other schemes are also possible. In general, the i provide a unifying language to
discuss the different schemes for the definition of (isosymmetric) QCD in the presence of electro-
magnetism; in physical hadronic schemes the i = 0 while in the GRS and other schemes they are
of order O(αem ). For later use, we make the simple observation that two schemes can be consid-
ered to be equivalent in practice if the i in the two schemes are equal within the precision of the
computations.
   Although the GRS scheme is perfectly legitimate, we advocate the use of physical hadronic
schemes in future lattice calculations.         For lattice simulations of physical quantities, a non-
perturbative calibration of the lattice is necessary in general, but the renormalisation required
for the GRS conditions in Eq. (17) is not generally necessary (except perhaps for the determi-
nation of the renormalised coupling and quark masses themselves). Now that hadronic masses
are calculated with excellent precision in lattice simulations and their values are well known from
experimental measurements, it is natural to use hadronic schemes. By contrast, the renormalised
couplings and masses are derived quantities which are not measured directly in experiments. In
spite of this, as explained above, at the time that our computation was started we chose to use the
GRS scheme. Of course the physical results in the full theory do not depend on this choice.



                             III.   EVALUATION OF THE AMPLITUDES


   At first order in αem and (md − mu )/ΛQCD the inclusive decay rate (1) can be written as


             Γ(P ± → `± ν̄` [γ]) = ΓQCD · 1 + δRP + O αem
                                                      2
                                                          , (md − mu )2 , αem (md − mu ) ,
                                                                                      
                                                                                                  (20)


where ΓQCD is the tree-level decay rate given by
                                                                       !2
                              QCD    G2                        m2`           (0) 2    (0)
                             Γ      = F |Vq1 q2 |2 m2`   1−    (0) 2
                                                                            fP       MP ,         (21)
                                     8π                       MP

       (0)          (0)
and MP        and fP      are the mass and decay constant of the charged P-meson mass defined in
isosymmetric QCD in the chosen scheme.
                                                                                                              18


                                                     s                          ℓ+

                                         K+
                                                     u                          νℓ

FIG. 1: Feynman diagram for the process K + → `+ ν` . In the effective theory the interaction is given by a local
four-fermion operator denoted by the two full dots in the figure.


                             (0)                                                                              (0)
   The decay constant fP is defined in terms of the matrix element of the QCD axial current AP
(in the continuum) as

                                           (0)                            (0)    (0)
                                         AP ≡ h0|q̄2 γ0 γ5 q1 |P (0) i ≡ fP MP ,                            (22)

where the initial state meson P (0) is at rest. The decay rate is obtained from the insertion of the
lowest-order effective Hamiltonian

                        GF             GF
                   HW = √ Vq∗1 q2 O1 = √ Vq∗1 q2 q¯2 γµ (1 − γ5 )q1 ν̄` γ µ (1 − γ5 )` ,
                                                                                     
                                                                                                            (23)
                         2              2

as depicted in the Feynman diagram of Fig. 1, where the decay of a charged kaon is shown as an
example. At lowest order in αem the two full dots in the figure represent the two currents in the
bare four-fermion operator

                                                                   ν̄` γ µ (1 − γ5 )` ,
                                                                                    
                                     O1 = q¯2 γµ (1 − γ5 )q1                                                (24)

whereas at order αem they will denote the insertion of the renormalised operator in the W-
regularisation as defined in Sec. IV.
   In order to compare our results for the e.m. and strong IB corrections to those obtained in
Ref. [25] and adopted by the PDG [20, 26] however, we will use a modified expression:

             Γ(P ± → `± ν̄` [γ]) = Γ(0) · [1 + δRP ] + O αem
                                                         2
                                                             , (md − mu )2 , αem (md − mu ) ,
                                                                                           
                                                                                                            (25)

where Γ(0) is given by
                                                                   2 h
                                           G2F                 m2`
                                                            
                                                                         (0) 2
                                                                            i
                                   (0)                  2 2
                               Γ         =     |Vq1 q2 | m` 1 − 2       fP     MP ,                         (26)
                                           8π                  MP

and MP is the physical mass of the charged P-meson including both e.m. and leading-order strong
IB corrections.
   The quantity δRP encodes both the e.m. and the strong IB leading-order corrections to the
tree-level decay rate. Its value depends on the prescription used for the separation between the
                                                                                                        19


QED and QCD corrections, while the quantity

                                     Γ(P ± → `± ν̄` [γ])       h
                                                                  (0) 2
                                                                     i
                     FP2 ≡                                   =  fP      (1 + δRP )                    (27)
                               G2F                  m2` 2
                                                      
                                           2 2
                               8π |Vq1 q2 | m` 1 − M 2 P
                                                          MP

is prescription independent [27] to all orders in both αem and (md − mu ).
   The quantity Fπ may be used to set the lattice scale instead of the Ω baryon mass. The physical
value Fπphys can be obtained by taking the experimental pion decay rate Γ(π − → µ− ν̄µ [γ]) =
3.8408(7) · 107 s−1 from the PDG [20] and the result for |Vud | = 0.97420(21) determined accurately
from super-allowed β-decays in Ref. [21]. Consequently, one may replace MΩ with Fπ (as the
denominator of the ratios R1,...,4 in Eqs. (5)), Mπ+ with Mπ0 in the ratio R1 (when working at
leading order in αem ) and set the electron charge directly to its Thomson’s limit (instead of using
the ratio R5 ), namely

                                                 aMπ0
                           R1 (aN ; gs , e, m) =      (aN ; gs , e, m) ,
                                                  aFπ
                                                 aMK 0
                           R2 (aN ; gs , e, m) =       (aN ; gs , e, m)
                                                  aFπ
                                                 aMDs
                           R3 (aN ; gs , e, m) =       (aN ; gs , e, m) ,
                                                  aFπ
                                                 aMK + − aMK 0
                           R4 (aN ; gs , e, m) =                   (aN ; gs , e, m) .                 (28)
                                                      aFπ

   Note that for the present study we were unable to use MΩ to determine the lattice spacing
because the corresponding baryon correlators were unavailable. The choice of using Fπ instead to
set the scale clearly prevents us from being able to predict the value of |Vud |. This is one of the
reasons why we advocate the use of hadronic schemes with hadron masses as experimental inputs
for future lattice calculations. However, as already explained above, in this work we renormalise
the QCD theory using the same set of hadronic inputs adopted in our quark-mass analysis in
Ref. [28], since we started the present calculations using the RM123 method on previously generated
isosymmetric QCD gauge configurations from ETMC (see Appendix A). The bare parameters of
these QCD gauge ensembles were fixed in Ref. [28] by using the hadronic scheme corresponding to
  (0),FLAG                      (0),FLAG                            (0),FLAG                            (0)
Mπ           = 134.98 MeV, MK              = 494.2(3) MeV and fπ               = 130.41(20) MeV, while MDs
was chosen to be equal to the experimental Ds+ -meson mass, MDs+ = 1969.0(1.4) MeV [20]. Note
that in the absence of QED radiative corrections Fπ reduces to the conventional definition of the
                         (0)
pion decay constant fπ . The superscript FLAG has been used because the chosen values of three
out of the four hadronic inputs had been suggested in the previous editions of the FLAG review [3].
For this reason we refer to the scheme defined from these inputs as the FLAG scheme.
                                                                                                                        20


     We have calculated the same input parameters (28) used in the FLAG scheme also in the GRS
                                                                                             (0),GRS
scheme (corresponding to the MS scheme at µ = 2 GeV) obtaining2 : Mπ                                   = 135.0(2) MeV,
    (0),GRS                             (0),GRS                                    (0),GRS
MK            = 494.6(1) MeV, MDs                 = 1966.7(1.5) MeV and fπ                   = 130.65(12) MeV (see
Eq. (111) in Sec. VI below). Therefore, the values of the inputs determined in the GRS scheme
differ at most by ∼ 0.15% from the corresponding values adopted in Ref. [28] for the isosymmetric
QCD theory and the differences are at the level of our statistical precision. Thus, the result of our
analysis of the scheme dependence can be summarized by the conclusion that the FLAG and GRS
schemes can be considered to be equivalent at the current level of precision. Nevertheless, we have
used the results of this analysis to estimate the systematic error on our final determinations of the
isospin breaking corrections δRP induced by residual scheme uncertainties (see the discussion at
the end of Sec. VI).
     In light of this quantitative analysis, given the numerical equivalence of the two schemes at the
current level of precision, in the rest of the paper we shall compare our results obtained in the
GRS scheme with the results obtained by other groups using the FLAG scheme and we shall not
use superscripts to distinguish between the two schemes.
     The correction δRP , defined in Eq. (25), is given by (see Ref. [11])
                                       2
                              αem      MZ          δAP      δMP        (pt)
                     δRP =        log     2    + 2 (0) − 2 (0) + δΓP (∆Eγ ) ,                                        (29)
                               π       MW          AP       MP
where

                                      2 ) comes from the short-distance matching between the full
     i) the term containing log(MZ2 /MW
         theory (the Standard Model) and the effective theory in the W -regularisation [18];

                             (pt)
     ii) the quantity δΓP (∆Eγ ) represents the O(αem ) correction to the tree-level decay rate for
         a point-like meson (see Eq. (1)), which can be read off from Eq. (51) of Ref. [11]. The cut-
         off on the final-state photon’s energy, ∆Eγ , must be sufficiently small for the point like-
         approximation to be valid;

    iii) δAP is the e.m. and strong IB correction to the decay amplitude P → `ν with the corre-
         sponding correction to the amplitude with a point-like meson subtracted (this subtraction
                                                    (pt)
         term is added back in the term δΓP (∆Eγ ), see Eq. (1)).

2
    These values differ slightly from those obtained in Ref. [8], since we have now included the non-factorisable correc-
    tions of order O(αem αsn ) (with n ≥ 1) to the mass renormalisation constant (see the coefficient Zm
                                                                                                       fact
                                                                                                            in Eq. (40) and
    in Table I below). We take the opportunity to update Eqs. (8), (10), (14) and (15) of Ref. [8] with π0 = 0.01(4),
    K 0 = 0.01(2), δMD+ + δMD0 = 1.7(1.0) MeV and δMD+ = 2.3(4) MeV.
                                                               S
                                                                                                                 21


  iv) δMP are the e.m. and strong IB corrections to the mass of the P-meson. The correction
                                       (0)                                                     (0)
       proportional to 2 δMP /MP             is present because of the definition of fP              in terms of the
       amplitude and of the meson mass in Eq. (22).

Since we adopt the qQED approximation, which neglects the effects of the sea-quark electric
charges, the calculation of δAP and δMP only requires the evaluation of the connected diagrams.
These are shown in Figs. 1 - 5 for the case of K`2 decays. At O(αem ) the diagram in Fig. 1
corresponds to the insertion of the operator renormalised in the W-renormalisation scheme.

                                                    s                      ℓ+

                                        K+
                                                    u                      νℓ
                                                           (a)



                                s                    ℓ+                    s                   ℓ+

                   K+                                         K+
                                u                    νℓ                    u                   νℓ


                                     (b)                                         (c)



                                                     ℓ+                s                       ℓ+
                            s
                   K+                                         K+
                            u                                          u                       νℓ
                                                     νℓ

                                     (d)                                         (e)


FIG. 2: Connected diagrams contributing at O(αem ) to the K + → `+ ν` decay amplitude, in which the photon is
attached to quark lines: (a) exchange, (b, c) self-energy and (d, e) tadpole diagrams. The labels are introduced to
identify the individual diagrams when describing their evaluation in the text.



   In Eq. (29) δAP and δMP contain both the e.m. and the strong IB leading-order corrections

                                                                    δAiP + δA`P + δA`,self
                                                           X
                          δAP = δAW     SIB
                                  P + δAP +                                         P      ,                    (30)
                                                        i=J,T,P,S
                                                 X
                         δMP = δMPSIB +                    δMPi ,                                               (31)
                                               i=J,T,P,S

where δAW
        P is the e.m. correction from both the matching of the four-fermion lattice weak operator

to the W-renormalisation scheme and from the mixing with several bare lattice four-fermion oper-
                                                                                                                      22



                               s                         ℓ+            s                      ℓ+

                      K+                                          K+
                               u                         νℓ            u                      νℓ
                                        (a)                                     (b)


FIG. 3: Connected diagrams contributing at O(αem ) to the K + → `+ ν` decay amplitude corresponding to the
insertion of the pseudoscalar density related to the e.m. shift of the critical mass, δmcrit
                                                                                        f , determined in Ref. [8].




                           s                             ℓ+            s                           ℓ+

                K+                                                K+
                           u                             νℓ            u                           νℓ
                                    (a)                                           (b)


FIG. 4: Connected diagrams contributing at O(αem ) and O(md − mu ) to the K + → `+ ν` decay amplitude related
to the insertion of the scalar density (see Ref. [8]).




                  s                ℓ+                         s            ℓ+                 s                       ℓ+

K+                                            K+                                  K+
                  u                νℓ                         u            νℓ                 u                       νℓ
                  (a)                                         (b)                                  (c)


FIG. 5: Connected diagrams contributing at O(αem ) to the K + → `+ ν` decay amplitude corresponding to photon
exchanges involving the final-state lepton.



ators generated by the breaking of chiral symmetry with the twisted-mass fermion action which we
are using. Both the matching and the mixing will be discussed and calculated in Sec. IV. As already
pointed out, the renormalised operator, defined in the W-renormalisation scheme, is inserted in
the diagram of Fig. 1. As for the diagrams of Figs. 2 - 5, which are already of order O(αem ) and
O((md − mu )/ΛQCD ), it is sufficient to insert the weak current operator renormalised in QCD only.

   In Eqs. (30) and (31) the quantity δASIB
                                        P   (δMPSIB ) represents the strong IB corrections propor-
tional to md − mu and to the diagram of Fig. 4(b), while the other terms are QED corrections
coming from the insertions of the e.m. current and tadpole operators, of the pseudoscalar and
scalar densities (see Refs. [4, 9]). The term δAJP (δMPJ ) is generated by the diagrams of Fig. 2(a-c),
δATP (δMPT ) by the diagrams of Fig. 2(d-e), δAPP (δMPP ) by the diagrams of Fig. 3(a-b) and δASP
                                                                                                                   23


(δMPS ) by the diagrams of Fig. 4(a-b). The term δA`P corresponds to the exchange of a photon
between the quarks and the final-state lepton and arises from the diagrams in Fig. 5(a-b). The
term δAP`,self corresponds to the contribution to the amplitude from the lepton’s wave function
renormalisation; it arises from the self-energy diagram of Fig. 5(c). The contribution of this term
cancels out in the difference Γ0 (L) − Γpt
                                        0 (L) and could be therefore omitted, as explained in the

following section. The different insertions of the scalar density encode the strong IB effects together
with the counter terms necessary to fix the masses of the quarks. The insertion of the pseudoscalar
density is peculiar to twisted mass quarks and would be absent in standard Wilson (improved)
formulations of QCD.
     In the following subsection we discuss the calculation of all the diagrams that do not involve
the photon attached to the charged lepton line. The determination of the contributions δA`P and
δA`,self
  P      will be described later in subsection III B.


        A.      Quark-quark photon exchange diagrams and scalar and pseudoscalar insertions


     The terms δAiP and δMPi (i = J, T, P, S) can be extracted from the following correlators:
          J            1 X        n
                                      ρ      em      em      †
                                                                      o
                                                                            em           pρP
       δCP (t) = 4παem        h0|T JW (0) jµ (y1 )jν (y2 ) φP (~x, −t) |0i∆µν (y1 , y2 )     , (32)
                       2                                                                 MP
                               ~
                               x,y1 ,y2

            T
                          X    n
                                 ρ      em     †
                                                         o
                                                              em        pρP
          δCP (t) = 4παem  h0|T JW (0) Tµ (y) φP (~x, −t) |0i∆µµ (y, y)     ,                                    (33)
                                                                        MP
                             ~
                             x,y
                                                       n                                     o   pρ
                                                         ρ
                                                           (0) iq f (y)γ5 qf (y) φ†P (~x, −t) |0i P ,
                               X                  X
          δCPP (t) = 4παem               δmcrit
                                           f ·     h0|T JW                                                       (34)
                                                                                                 MP
                             f =f1 ,f2            ~
                                                  x,y
                                                f
                                               Zm            n                                 o   pρ
                                                               ρ
                                                                 (0) q f (y)qf (y) φ†P (~x, −t) |0i P ,
                                   X                    X
          δCPS (t) = −4παem
                                                                                 
                                          mf    (0)
                                                    ·    h0|T JW                                                 (35)
                                               Zm                                                  MP
                           f =f1 ,f2      ~
                                          x,y
       em                                       ρ
where ∆µν (y1 , y2 ) is the photon propagator, JW (x) is the local version of the hadronic (V − A)
weak current renormalised in QCD only3
                                                        h           i
                                     ρ                    (0)  (0)
                                    JW (x) = q f2 (x)γ ρ ZV − ZA γ 5 qf1 (x) ,                                   (36)

jµem is the (lattice) conserved e.m. current4
                                    X       1
                         jµem (y) =      ef     q̄f (y)(γµ − iτ 3 γ5 )Uµ (y)qf (y + aµ̂)
                                            2
                                      f
                                                                             i
                                  + q̄f (y + aµ̂)(γµ + iτ 3 γ5 )Uµ† (y)qf (y)                                    (37)
3
    In our maximally twisted-mass setup, in which the Wilson r-parameters rf1 and rf2 are always chosen to be opposite
    rf1 = −rf2 (see Appendix A), the vector (axial) weak current in the physical basis renormalises multiplicatively
                                                                                        (0)             (0)
    with the RC ZA (ZV ) of the axial (vector) current for Wilson-like fermions, i.e. ZV      = ZA and ZA = ZV (see
    Appendix D).
4
    The use of the conserved e.m. current guarantees the absence of additional contact terms in the product
    jµem (y1 )jνem (y2 ).
                                                                                                           24


and Tµem is the tadpole operator
                                        X       1
                          Tµem (y) =         e2f    q̄f (y)(γµ − iτ 3 γ5 )Uµ (y)qf (y + aµ̂)
                                                2
                                          f
                                                                                 i
                                      − q̄f (y + aµ̂)(γµ + iτ 3 γ5 )Uµ† (y)qf (y) .                      (38)

In Eqs. (32) - (35) φ†P (~x, −t) = iq f1 (~x, −t)γ5 qf2 (~x, −t) is the interpolating field for a P-meson com-
posed by two valence quarks f1 and f2 with charges e1 e and e2 e. The Wilson r-parameters rf1
and rf2 are always chosen to be opposite rf1 = −rf2 (see Appendix A). We have also chosen to
place the weak current at the origin and to create the P-meson at a negative time −t, where t
and T − t are sufficiently large to suppress the contributions from heavier states and from the
backward propagating P-meson (this latter condition may be convenient but is not necessary). In
            (0)
Eq. (35) Zm is the mass RC in pure QCD, which for our maximally twisted-mass setup is given
     (0)          (0)           (0)
by Zm = 1/ZP , where ZP is the RC of the pseudoscalar density determined in Ref. [28]. The
          f
quantity Zm is related to the e.m. correction to the mass RC

                   QCD+QED
                               αem f  (0) m n
                  Zm       = 1−    Z Z + O(αem αs )                                 (m > 1, n ≥ 0)       (39)
                                4π m m

and can be written in the form

                                                    f    f    fact
                                                   Zm = ZQED Zm    ,                                     (40)

       f
where ZQED is the pure QED contribution at leading order in αem , given in the MS scheme at a
renormalisation scale µ by [30, 31]

                                  f
                                      (MS, µ) = e2f 6 log(aµ) − 22.5954 ,
                                                                       
                                 ZQED                                                                    (41)

                                                       fact takes into account all the corrections of
where ef is the fractional charge of the quark qf and Zm
order O(αsn ) with n ≥ 1.
                 fact is computed non-perturbatively in section IV and represents the QCD cor-
   The quantity Zm
                                                     f    f          fact = 1) introduced in
rections to the “naive factorisation” approximation Zm = ZQED (i.e. Zm
Refs. [8, 32].
   Analogously, the term [δAP ]SIB and [δMP ]SIB can be extracted from the correlator
                          X m     b f − mf X         n                         †          o     pρP
      δCPSIB (t) = −                                    ρ
                                                              
                                      (0)
                                          ·     h0|T  Jw  (0)  q f (y)q f (y)  φ P (~
                                                                                    x , −t)  |0i     ,   (42)
                                     Zm                                                          MP
                        f =f1 ,f2           ~
                                            x,y

where, following the notation of Ref. [8], we indicate with b
                                                            mf and mf the renomalized masses of
the quark with flavour f in the full theory and in isosymmetric QCD only, respectively. We stress
                                                                                                            25


again that the separation between QCD and QED corrections is prescription dependent and in this
work we adopt the GRS prescription of Refs. [2, 4, 8], where

            m
            b u (MS, 2 GeV) + m
                              b d (MS, 2 GeV) = 2m
                                                 b ud (MS, 2 GeV) = 2mud (MS, 2 GeV) ,

           m
           b s (MS, 2 GeV) = ms (MS, 2 GeV) ,            m
                                                         b c (MS, 2 GeV) = mc (MS, 2 GeV) .                (43)

                                                              b d − mud = −(m
Thus, in Eq. (42), the only relevant quark mass difference is m             b u − mud ), whose
value in the (MS, 2 GeV) scheme was found to be equal to 1.19 (9) MeV [8] using as inputs the
experimental values of the charged and neutral kaon masses.
   Following Ref. [4] we form the ratio of δCPi (t) with the corresponding tree-level correlator

                                (0)
                                           X    n
                                                  ρ     †
                                                                  o    pρP
                               CP (t) =     h0|T JW (0)φP (~x, −t) |0i                                     (44)
                                                                       MP
                                             ~
                                             x

and at large time distances t we obtain (i = J, T, P, S, QCD)

                 δCPi (t)                  δ[GiP AiP ]
                   (0)
                            −−−−−−−−−−→
                            ta,(T −t)a   (0) (0)
                                                   +
                 CP (t)                  GP AP
                                  "               −M (0) t        (0)
                                                                −MP (T −t)
                                                                                           #
                            δMPi
                                         
                                     (0)   T       e  P      + e                     (0) T
                              (0)
                                    MP        −t       (0)         (0)
                                                                              − 1 − MP                     (45)
                            M              2        −M
                                                   e P −e Pt    −M     (T −t)            2
                              P

where

                                                 (0)
                                             GP ≡ h0|φP (0)|P (0) i                                        (46)

is the coupling of the interpolating field of the P-meson with its ground-state in isosymmetric
QCD. The term proportional to δMPi in the r.h.s. of Eq. (45) is related to the e.m. and strong IB
corrections of the meson mass.
   The function in the square brackets on the r.h.s. of Eq. (45) is an almost linear function of t.
Thus, the correction to the P-meson mass, δMPi , can be extracted from the slope of the ratio
          (0)
δCPi (t)/CP (t) and the quantity δ[GiP AiP ] from its intercept. As explained in Ref. [11], in order to
obtain the quantity δAiP the correction δGiP is separately determined by evaluating a correlator
                                                                  ρ ρ
similar to those of Eqs. (32) - (35), in which the weak operator JW pP /MP is replaced by the P-meson
interpolating field φP .
   For illustration, in Fig. 6 we show the ratios CPi for the charged kaon (P = K) obtained from
                                                                         SIB (t)/C             (0)
the ensemble D20.48 (see Appendix A). The top panel contains the ratio δCK        K (t), the ratio
  J (t)/C (0)                                                 T              (0) P                   (0)
δCK       K (t) is shown in the middle panel and the ratios δCK (t)/CK (t) and δCK (t)/CK (t) are

presented in the bottom panel.
                                                                                                                                                           26


                                    0.01


                                    0.00
                   (t)                                                                                                  scalar (u)
                (0)                -0.01
                          K


                   (t) / C
                                   -0.02
                                                            D20.48
                SIB
                          K        -0.03        M ~ 255 MeV
                   δC                                   π


                                   -0.04
                                                M ~ 535 MeV
                                                        K

                                   -0.05
                                           0                   10                       20                   30                  40                   50
                                                                                                    t/a

                                   0.01
                                                                                                                       self energy (2b)+(2c)
                                   0.00                                                                                exchange (2a)

                 (t)               -0.01                                                                               J (2a)+(2b)+(2c)
                (0)
                        K
                                   -0.02



                 δ C (t) / C
                                   -0.03                D20.48
                J
                        K
                                   -0.04       M ~ 255 MeV
                                                    π


                                   -0.05
                                               M ~ 535 MeV
                                                K

                                   -0.06
                                           0                   10                       20                   30                  40                   50
                                                                                                    t/a
                                                                                                          0.004
                                                                           P (3a)+(3b)              sum
                                   0.2                        a)                                                              b)
                                                                           T (2d)+(2e)

                       (t)                                                                                0.002
                                                                                                                                 sum
                                   0.1
                    (0)
                               K


                       (t) / C
                                   0.0                                                                    0.000

                    P,T
                               K                                                    D20.48
                                   -0.1
                       δC                                                                                 -0.002
                                                                            M ~ 255 MeV
                                                                                π


                                   -0.2                                     M ~ 535 MeV
                                                                                K
                                                                                                          -0.004
                                      0        10             20           30            40          50            0   10   20        30   40     50
                                                                   t/a                                                       t/a
                                              SIB      (0)
FIG. 6: Top panel: The strong IB correction δCK   (t)/CK (t) for the charged kaon obtained on the ensemble
D20.48 (see Appendix A). The solid line is the “linear” fit (45) applied in the time interval where the ground-state
is dominant. Middle panel: contributions of the exchange (2a) and self-energy (2b)+(2c) diagrams. The circles
                                                   J                                          (0)
represent the sum (2a)+(2b)+(2c), i.e. the ratio δCK (t)/CK (t). Bottom panel: contributions of the tadpole operator
  T       (0)                                                                         P                                                         (0)
δCK (t)/CK (t), i.e. diagrams (2d)+(2e), and of the e.m. shift of the critical mass δCK (t)/CK (t), i.e. diagrams
                      T        P                                     (0)
(3a)+(3b). The sum δ[CK (t) + CK (t)]/CK (t), shown by the circles, is non vanishing and it is determined quite
precisely (see the right-hand plot where it is presented on an expanded scale). Errors are statistical only.
                                                                                                                     27

                                   T (t)/C            P       (0)                       (0)
   We find: i) the contributions δCK      P (t) and δCK (t)/CP (t) are separately large, but

strongly correlated, since the tadpole insertion dominates the values of the e.m. shift of the critical
mass δmcrit
       f    (see Ref. [8]). In the chiral limit they would cancel, but at finite masses the sum is
small and linear in t. Because of the correlations it can nevertheless, be determined quite precisely
(see the bottom right-hand plot of Fig. 6) where the sum is presented on an expanded scale. ii) the
                               J (t)/C             (0)
time dependence of the ratio δCK       K (t) is almost linear in the time interval where the ground

state is dominant.


                             B.    Crossed diagrams and lepton self-energy


   The evaluation of the diagrams 5(a) - (b), corresponding to the term δA`P in Eq. (30), can be
obtained by studying the correlator [11]
                                               n                            o
                                                 ρ
                                                   (0)jµem (x1 )φ†P (~x, −t) |0i∆em
                                  X
                                                                                                E` t2 −i~
                                                                                                        p` ·~
                                                                                                            x2
          δCP` (t) = −4παem               h0| T JW                               µν (x1 , x2 )e
                               ~
                               x,x1 ,x2
                                                                                   pσ
                                                                                                   
                                             `
                   · u(pν )γρ (1 − γ5 )S (0, x2 )γν v(p` ) v(p` )γσ (1 − γ5 )u(pν ) P                   ,           (47)
                                                                                   MP
where S ` (0, x2 ) stands for the free twisted-mass propagator of the charged lepton. For the numerical
analysis we have found it to be convenient to saturate the Dirac indices by inserting on the r.h.s. of
Eq. (47) the factor [v(p` )γσ (1 − γ5 )u(pν )], which represents the lowest order “conjugate” leptonic
(V − A) amplitude, and to sum over the lepton polarizations. In this way we are able to study the
time behaviour of the single function δCP` (t).
                                                    0 )) is
   The corresponding correlator at lowest order (O(αem

                                                                                                pσP
                       n                 o                                                         
  `(0)                   ρ     †
             X
 CP (t) =         h0| T JW (0)φP (~x, −t) |0i u(pν )γρ (1 − γ5 )v(p` ) v(p` )γσ (1 − γ5 )u(pν )       . (48)
                                                                                                MP
              ~
              x
                                                                         ρ
In Eqs. (47) and (48) the contraction between the weak hadronic current JW (0) [see Eq. (36)] and
its leptonic (V − A) counterpart gives rise to two terms corresponding to the product of either the
temporal or spatial components of these two weak currents, which are odd and even under time
reversal, respectively. Thus, on a lattice with finite time extension T , for t  a and (T − t)  a
one has
                                                 (0)    4
                                             GP                           h       (0)         (0)
                                                                                                            i
                                                              δA`,j `,j
                                                        X
                  δCP` (t) −−−−−−−−−−→
                           ta,(T −t)a           (0)           P XP          e−MP t + sj e−MP (T −t)           ,   (49)
                                            2MP         j=0

where s0 = −1, s1,2,3 = 1 and

                                    XP`,j = Tr γj (1 − γ5 )``γ0 (1 − γ5 )νν
                                                                           
                                                                                                                    (50)
                                                                                                                          28


is the relevant leptonic trace evaluated on the lattice using for the charged lepton the free twisted-
mass propagator and for the neutrino the free Wilson propagator in the P-meson rest frame
[pσP = (MP , ~0)].
   Similarly, for the lowest-order correlator one has
                                                    (0)
                      `(0)                     GP           (0)
                                                                           h         (0)       (0)
                                                                                                      i
                     CP (t) −−−−−−−−−−→
                            ta,(T −t)a
                                                        A XP`,0
                                                     (0) P
                                                                               e−MP t − e−MP (T −t)       ,              (51)
                                              2MP

         (0)
where AP is the renormalised axial amplitude evaluated on the lattice in isosymmetric QCD in
the P-meson rest frame, namely

                                       (0)                                             (0)
                                     ZA h0|q̄2 γj γ5 q1 |P (0) i = δj,0 AP .                                             (52)

   The effect of the different signs of the backward-propagating signal in Eq. (49) can be removed
by introducing the following new correlators:
               (                                      )                            (0)
     `       1     `      δCP` (t − 1) − δCP` (t + 1)                   `    `,0 GP          (0)
                                                                                           −MP t
  δC P (t) ≡    δCP (t) +          (0)       (0)
                                                         −−−−−− −−−−→
                                                         ta,(T −t)a
                                                                      δAP  X P      (0)
                                                                                         e         ,
             2                  eMP − e−MP                                       2MP
               (            `(0)            `(0)
                                                        )                            (0)
   `(0)      1   `(0)      CP (t − 1) − CP (t + 1)                        (0) `,0 GP           (0)
 C P (t) ≡      CP (t) +             (0)       (0)
                                                           −−−−−−−−−−→ A X
                                                           ta,(T −t)a   P    P       (0)
                                                                                           e−MP t ,                      (53)
             2                    eMP − e−MP                                      2M                      P

where
                                                            4
                                                          1 X             `,j
                                        δA`P =                      δA`,j
                                                                      P XP .                                             (54)
                                                      XP`,0 j=0

                               (0)                                                                            `   `(0)
Thus, the quantity δA`P /AP can be extracted from the plateau of the ratio δC P (t)/C P (t) at
large time separations, viz.
                                              `
                                        δC P (t)                               δA`P
                                             `(0)
                                                          −−−−−−−−−−→
                                                          ta,(T −t)a           (0)
                                                                                       .                                 (55)
                                        C P (t)                                AP

Note that the diagrams in Fig. 5(a) - (b) do not contribute to the electromagnetic corrections to
the masses of the mesons and therefore the ratio (55) has no slope in t in contrast to the ratios
(45). Moreover, the explicit calculation of XP`,j on the lattice is not required.
   In terms of the lattice momenta ae
                                    p` and ap` , defined as
                                                  s X
                                      ae
                                       p` =                       sin2 (ap`k ) ,                                         (56)
                                                     k=1,2,3
                                                     s X                    ap 
                                                                                 `k
                                      ap` = 2                       sin2                   ,                             (57)
                                                                                 2
                                                          k=1,2,3
                                                                                                                 29


the energy-momentum dispersion relations for the charged lepton and the neutrino in the P-meson
rest frame are given by
                                          " s                            #
                                              a2 m 2 + a2 p 2 + a4 p4 /4
                                           1       `      e `       `
                          aE
                           e` = 2 arcsinh                                  ,                                   (58)
                                           2         1 + a2 p2` /2

                          aE
                           eν = arcsinh(ae
                                         p` ) .                                                                (59)

                                              pν = −~
The 3-momentum of the final-state lepton p~` (~     p` ) must be chosen to satisfy the equation

                                            E    eν = M (0) .
                                            e` + E                                                             (60)
                                                       P

                                                      (0)
Thus, for any given simulated P-meson mass MP , the 3-momentum p~` = |~
                                                                      p` |(1, 1, 1), is calculated
from Eq. (60) and is injected on the lattice using non-periodic boundary conditions [33, 34] for the
lepton field. A simple calculation yields
                                                                h                i
                  XP`,0 = Tr γ0 (1 − γ5 )``γ0 (1 − γ5 )νν = 8ae
                                                        
                                                                       e` ) − ae
                                                              p` sinh(aE       p` .                            (61)

                                       µ(0)                       µ(0)              µ
   In Fig. 7 we show the correlators Cπ       (t), δCπµ (t), C π         (t) and δC π (t) for πµ2 decays, multiplied
by the ground-state exponential. These were obtained on the gauge ensembles A40.24 and D30.48
of Appendix A. The subtraction of the backward signals, needed for extracting directly the quantity
δA`P given by Eq. (54), is beneficial also for extending the time region from which δA`P (as well as
                  (0)
the ratio δA`P /AP ) can be determined.
                                                  µ         µ(0)
   The quality of the signal for the ratio δC P (t)/C P            (t) is illustrated in Fig. 8 for charged kaon
and pion decays into muons for the case of the ensembles B55.32 and D30.48.
   The calculation of the correction due to the diagram 5(c) is straightforward, since it is obtained
                                                            (0)
by simply multiplying the lowest order amplitude, AP , by the one-loop lepton self-energy evaluated
on the lattice.


 IV.   RENORMALISATION OF THE EFFECTIVE HAMILTONIAN AND CHIRALITY
                                                  MIXING


   In this section we provide the basic formalism to derive the e.m. corrections to the RCs non-
perturbatively; further details of the calculation will be presented in a forthcoming publication [29].
This procedure relates the bare lattice operators to those in the RI'-MOM (and similar) renormal-
isation schemes up to order O(αem ) and to all orders in αs . We also improve the precision of the
matching of the weak operator O1 (see Eq. (24)) renormalised in the RI'-MOM scheme to that in
                                                                                            2 /µ2 )
the W-regularisation by calculating the coefficient of the term proportional to αem αs log(MW
                                                                                                                                                                                            30

                          -5                                                                                              -7
                  4 10                                                                                            2.5 10

                                                                                                                                                                A40.24
                                                                                A40.24
                                                                                                                          -7
                                                                                                                  2.0 10                               M ~ 325 MeV
                          -5                                           M ~ 325 MeV                                                                          π
                  3 10                                                      π
     t)                                                                                            t)
   (0)                                                                                          (0)                       -7
              π                                                                                               π   1.5 10


     (t) exp(M
                                                                                                   δC (t) exp(M
                          -5
                  2 10
                                                                                                                          -7
                                                                                                                  1.0 10
  µ(0)
                                                                                                µ
                                                                                                              π
              π
     C                                          µ(0)                   (0)
                          -5            C              (t) exp(M            t)                                                                    µ
                                                                                                                                        δC (t) exp(M
                                                                                                                                                                         (0)
                                                                                                                                                                           t)
                  1 10                      π                      π
                                                                                                                                              π                      π
                                                                                                                          -8
                                                                                                                  5.0 10
                                                                                                                                                  µ                      (0)
                                        C
                                                µ(0)
                                                       (t) exp(M
                                                                       (0)
                                                                            t)                                                          δC (t) exp(M                       t)
                                                                                                                                              π                      π
                                            π                      π



                          0                                                                                           0.0
                               0    5                   10              15          20   25                                    0    5             10            15              20   25
                                                             t/a                                                                                       t/a

                         -6                                                                                              -8
                  6 10                                                                                            5 10

                                                                                                                                                            D30.48
                         -6
                                                                             D30.48
                  5 10                                                                                                   -8
                                                                                                                  4 10                                 M ~ 310 MeV
                                                                   M ~ 310 MeV                                                                          π
                                                                        π
  t)                     -6                                                                    t)
                  4 10
 (0)                                                                                          (0)                        -8
        π                                                                                              π          3 10


  (t) exp(M
                                                                                               δC (t) exp(M
                         -6
                  3 10
                                                                                                                         -8
                                                                                                                  2 10
 µ(0)
                                                                                              µ
                                                                                                       π
                         -6
  C
        π         2 10
                                            µ(0)                   (0)
                                    C              (t) exp(M            t)                                                                    µ
                                                                                                                                        δC (t) exp(M
                                                                                                                                                                     (0)
                                                                                                                                                                          t)
                                        π                      π
                                                                                                                         -8               π                      π
                         -6                                                                                       1 10
                  1 10                                                                                                                        µ                      (0)
                                    C
                                            µ(0)
                                                   (t) exp(M
                                                                   (0)
                                                                        t)                                                              δC (t) exp(M                      t)
                                                                                                                                          π                      π
                                        π                      π



                         0                                                                                               0
                              0    10                  20           30              40   50                                   0    10     20                    30              40   50
                                                            t/a                                                                                       t/a

FIG. 7: Time dependence of the correlators Cπµ(0) (t) (left panels) and δCπµ (t) (right panels) for πµ2 decays. These
are given in lattice units and multiplied by the ground-state exponential, and were obtained from gauge ensemble
                                                                                                                                                                           µ         µ(0)
A40.24 (top panels) and D30.48 (bottom panels). The blue squares represent the correlators δC π (t) and C π                                                                                 (t)
given by Eqs. (53) - (53). Errors are statistical only. For details of the simulations see Appendix A.



in the matching coefficient. Using the two-loop anomalous dimension thus determined, we can
evolve the operator to the renormalisation scale of MW . Following this calculation the error due
to renormalisation is reduced from order O(αem αs (1/a)) to order O(αem αs (MW )).
        The effective Hamiltonian, including the perturbative electroweak matching with the Standard
Model [18], can be written in the form
                                                                             
                                                     GF ∗         αem       MZ
                                                HW = √ Vq1 q2 1 +     log         O1W-reg (MW ) ,                                                                                     (62)
                                                      2            π        MW
                                                                                                                31


                        0.010



                        0.008                                                 +
                                                                          π
           (t)
          µ(0)
                  P     0.006




           δC (t) / C
                                                                      +
                                                                  K

          µ             0.004
                  P
                                                                 M ~ 375 MeV
                                                                  π

                                               B55.32
                        0.002
                                                                 M ~ 580 MeV
                                                                  K



                        0.000
                                0         5            10    15           20               25        30   35
                                                                  t/a

                        0.012




                        0.009                                                          +
                                                                                   π
          (t)
         µ(0)
                 P




          δC (t) / C
                                                                      +
                        0.006                                     K
         µ
                 P
                                                                  M ~ 310 MeV
                                                                      π
                        0.003
                                              D30.48
                                                                  M ~ 550 MeV
                                                                      K


                        0.000
                                0              10           20                30                40        50
                                                                  t/a
                                    µ           µ(0)
FIG. 8: Results for the ratio δC P (t)/C P (t), given by Eq. (55), for Kµ2 and πµ2 decays obtained from the gauge
ensembles B55.32 (top panel) and D30.48 (bottom panel). The vertical dashed lines indicate the time region used for
                                    (0)
the extraction of the ratio δAµ
                              P /AP . Errors are statistical only.




where the term proportional to the logarithm has been already included in Eq. (29) and O1W-reg (MW )
is the operator renormalised in the W-regularisation scheme, which is used to regularise the photon
propagator. Since the W-boson mass is too large to be simulated on the lattice, a matching of
the lattice weak operator O1 to the W-regularisation scheme is necessary. In addition, for lattice
formulations which break chiral symmetry, like the one used in the present study, the lattice weak
                                                                                                             32


operator O1 mixes with other four-fermion operators of different chirality.


             A.   The renormalised weak operator in the W-regularisation scheme


   In order to obtain the operator renormalised in the W-regularisation scheme, we start by renor-
malising the lattice four-fermion operator O1 defined in Eq. (24) in the RI'-MOM scheme [35],
obtaining O1RI' (µ), and then perturbatively match the operator O1RI' (µ) to the one in the W-
regularization [11]
                                                                              
                                                            MW
                            O1W-reg (MW ) = Z W-RI'            , αs (µ), αem       O1RI' (µ) .              (63)
                                                             µ

The coefficient Z W-RI' (MW /µ, αs (µ), αem ) can be computed by first evolving the operator in the
RI' scheme to the scale MW and then matching it to the corresponding operator in the W-scheme.
The coefficient can therefore be written as the product of a matching coefficient and an evolution
operator
                                            
                          MW
            Z W-RI'          , αs (µ), αem       = Z W-RI' (1, αs (MW ), αem ) U RI' (MW , µ, αem ) .       (64)
                           µ

Below we will only consider terms of first order in αem and, therefore we will consistently neglect
the running of αem .
   We note that the original bare lattice operators and O1W-reg (MW ) are gauge invariant, and thus
the corresponding matching coefficients are gauge invariant. This is not the case for O1RI' (µ) that
instead depends not only on the external states chosen to define the renormalisation conditions,
                                                                                     
but also on the gauge. Consequently the matching coefficient Z W-RI' MµW , αs (µ), αem and the
evolution operator U RI' (MW , µ, αem ) are in general gauge dependent. However, at the order of
perturbation theory to which we are working, the evolution operator turns out to be both scheme
and gauge independent.
   In the following, we discuss in turn the matching coefficient, Z W-RI' (1, αs (MW ), αem ), the evo-
                                                                                                        0
lution operator U RI' (MW , µ, αem ), and the definition of the renormalised operator O1RI (µ), which
will be obtained non-perturbatively.


   a) The matching coefficient. At first order (one loop) in αem

                                                                      αem W-RI'
                                Z W-RI' (1, αs (MW ), αem ) = 1 +        C      ,                           (65)
                                                                      4π

where the strong interaction corrections for the RI'-MOM operator vanish, at this order, because
of the Ward identities of the quark vector and axial vector currents appearing in the operator O1
                                                                                                             33


in the massless limit. We recall that we currently do not include terms of O(αs (MW )αem ) in the
matching coefficient Z W-RI' .

                                                                     0
   b) The evolution operator. The evolution operator U RI (MW , µ, αem ) is the solution of the
renormalisation group equation
                                    
             2 ∂                  ∂
           µ      + β(αs , αem )       U RI' (MW , µ, αem ) = γ(αs , αem ) U RI' (MW , µ, αem ) ,           (66)
              ∂µ2                ∂αs

where U RI' (MW , µ, αem ) satisfies the initial condition U RI' (MW , MW , αem ) = 1, γ(αs , αem ) is, in
general, the anomalous dimension matrix [36, 37], although in our particular case it is actually a
number (and not a matrix), and β(αs , αem ) is the QCD β-function:

                                         dαs           αs2        αs3          2
                                                                           se αs αem
                      β(αs , αem ) =            = −β 0     − β 1       − β1          ,                      (67)
                                       d log µ2        4π        (4π)2        (4π)2

with
                                                                                   
                           2                       38                    8       Nd
                  β0 = 11 − Nf ,         β1 = 102 − Nf ,        β1se = −    Nu +      ,                     (68)
                           3                        3                    9       4

where Nf denotes the number of active flavours, and Nu and Nd denote the number of up-like and
down-like active quarks respectively so that Nf = Nu + Nd . We may expand γ(αs , αem ) in powers
of the couplings as follows

                                      αs (0)   αs2           αem (0) αs αem (1)
                     γ(αs , αem ) =      γs +        γs(1) +    γ +        γ ,                              (69)
                                      4π      (4π) 2         4π e    (4π)2 se
        (1)                                                                                           (0)
where γse has been previously calculated in Ref. [38]. In the case of the operator O1 both γs               and
 (1)
γs vanish whereas

                                        γe(0) = −2 ,      (1)
                                                         γse  = +2 .                                        (70)

                                                                                          (0)   (1)
It can be demonstrated that, in addition to the leading anomalous dimension γe , γse is also
independent of the renormalisation scheme, thus in particular it is the same in RI' and in the
W-regularisation schemes. It is then straightforward to derive U RI' (MW , µ, αem )
                                                  2                            2 
                                      αem (0)      MW        αs (µ)αem (1)       MW
           U RI' (MW , µ, αem ) = 1 −     γe log      2
                                                           −        2
                                                                       γ se log
                                      4π            µ          (4π)               µ2
                                                             2 
                                      αem        αs (µ)         MW
                                =1+       2 1−            log          .                                    (71)
                                      4π           4π            µ2

Note that at this order the evolution operator is independent of the QCD β-function. This is a
consequence of the fact that the QCD anomalous dimension vanishes for the operator O1 .
                                                                                                  34


   Combining Eqs. (63) - (65) and (71) we obtain the relation between the operator O1 in the
W-regularization scheme and the one in the RI' scheme,
                                                      2            
                              αem           αs (µ)        MW
          O1W-reg (MW ) = 1 +       2 1−             log       + C W-RI'
                                                                            O1RI' (µ) ,         (72)
                               4π            4π           µ2

which is valid at first order in αem and up to (and including) terms of O(αem αs (MW )) in the strong
coupling constant.


   c) The renormalised operator in the RI'-MOM scheme. When we include QCD and
e.m. corrections at O(αem ), the operator O1 on the lattice with Wilson fermions mixes with a
complete basis of operators with different chiralities. In addition to O1 , the mixing involves the
following operators

                               O2bare = q 2 γ µ (1 + γ5 )q1 ν ` γµ (1 − γ5 )` ,

                               O3bare = q 2 (1 − γ5 )q1 ν ` (1 + γ5 )` ,

                               O4bare = q 2 (1 + γ5 )q1 ν ` (1 + γ5 )` ,

                               O5bare = q 2 σ µν (1 + γ5 )q1 ν ` σµν (1 + γ5 )` .               (73)

The mixing is a consequence of the explicit chiral symmetry breaking of Wilson-like fermions
                                                                             ~ RI' (µ), with
on the lattice. Therefore, the renormalised operators in the RI'-MOM scheme, O
~ = (O1 , . . . O5 ), can be written in terms of bare lattice operators O
O                                                                       ~ bare (a) as

                                       ~ RI' (µ) = ZO (µa) O
                                       O                   ~ bare (a)                           (74)

where ZO (µa) is a 5 × 5 renormalisation matrix. We note that in pure QCD the operator O1 mixes
only with O2 , with scale independent coefficients, whereas the full 5 × 5 renormalisation matrix is
necessary in general when e.m. corrections are included.
   We find it particularly convenient to rewrite Eq. (74) in the form

             ~ RI' = Z QED (Z QED )−1 ZO (Z QCD )−1 Z QCD O
                                                          ~ bare = Z QED R Z QCD O
                                                                                 ~ bare
                                                  
             O                                                                                  (75)

where Z QCD is the mixing matrix in pure QCD (corresponding to αem = 0), and

                                                        αem
                                        Z QED ≡ 1 +         ∆Z QED                              (76)
                                                        4π

is the pure, perturbative QED mixing matrix (corresponding to αs = 0). In Eq. (75) we have
introduced the ratio

                                                                           αem
                              R = (Z QED )−1 ZO (Z QCD )−1 ≡ 1 +               η,               (77)
                                                                           4π
                                                                                                  35


so that, at first order in αem , Eq. (75) is written as

                            ~ RI'
                                  h αem    QED
                                                 i QCD bare
                                                       ~
                            O = 1+      ∆Z     +η Z    O     .                                  (78)
                                    4π

   The ratio R encodes all the nonperturbative contributions of order O(αem αsn ) with n ≥ 1, other
than the factorisable terms given by the product Z QED Z QCD . In other words if ZO were simply
given by ZO = Z QED Z QCD at first order in αem then η would be zero. The case η = 0 thus
corresponds to the factorisation approximation that was first introduced in Refs. [8, 32].
   In this work, the ratio R has been computed non-perturbatively on the lattice to all orders in αs
and up to first order in αem . Introducing this ratio R in the non-perturbative calculation is useful
since by using the same photon fields in the lattice calculation of ZO and Z QED the statistical
uncertainty due to the sampling of the photon field is significantly reduced. Note that the ratio
is also free from cut-off effects of O(αem an ). The non-perturbative calculation of R, in terms of
the matrix η, is described in Appendix C and all the details and results will be presented in a
forthcoming publication [29].
   As already mentioned, pure QCD corrections in Eq. (78) only induce the mixing of the operator
O1 with the operator O2 . This mixing produces the renormalised QCD operators

                                                   h                i
                                ~ bare )1 = q 2 γ µ Z (0) − Z (0) γ5 q1 ν ` γµ (1 − γ5 )` ,
                   O1χ ≡ (Z QCD O                    V       A
                                                   h                i
                                ~ bare )2 = q 2 γ µ Z (0) + Z (0) γ5 q1 ν ` γµ (1 − γ5 )` ,
                   O2χ ≡ (Z QCD O                                                               (79)
                                                     V       A


which, similarly to the corresponding continuum operators, belong respectively to the (8, 1) and
(1, 8) chiral representations with respect to a rotation of the quark fields [23]. These are the
combinations entering on the r.h.s. of Eq. (78).
   When we include the e.m. corrections at O(αem ), the matrices ∆Z QED and η in Eq. (78) induce,
in general, the mixing of O1χ with the full basis of operators in Eq. (73). As shown in Appendix D,
however, in the twisted-mass formulation used in this paper the only relevant chirality mixing is
the one between the operators O1 with O2 . Indeed, the mixing coefficients with the operators
O3 and O4 are found to be odd in the parameter r ≡ r1 r` = −r2 r` , defined by the product of
the Wilson r-parameters of the valence quarks and the lepton (with r2 = −r1 in our procedure).
Therefore, taking the average over the values of the parameter r (with r = ±1) when computing the
amplitude, eliminates the mixing with O3 and O4 . Moreover, the matrix element of the operator
O5 between a pseudoscalar meson and the vacuum vanishes, so that the mixing with the operator
O5 cannot contribute to the decay rate. Therefore, Eq. (78) for the renormalised operator O1RI'
                                                                                                  36


simplifies to
                             h   αem                                   i
                 O1RI' (µ) = 1 +      ∆Z QED (µa)11 + η(µa, αs (1/a))11 O1χ (a) +
                                  4π
                             αem    QED
                                                        
                           +       ∆Z12  + η(αs (1/a))12 O2χ (a) ,                              (80)
                              4π

where we have explicitly indicated the dependence of the various terms on αs and the renormali-
sation scale. Since the mixing of the bona fide (8, 1) operator O1χ with O2χ is a consequence of the
explicit chiral symmetry breaking of Wilson-like fermions on the lattice, the corresponding coef-
ficient is due to lattice artefacts and can only be a function of the lattice bare coupling constant
αs (1/a) [23].


                     B.   Complete expression for the matching coefficients


   We are now in a position to collect the results of the previous subsection in order to provide the
final expression relating the renormalised operator O1W-reg in the W-regularization to the lattice
bare operators O1 and O2 at first order in αem . Combining Eqs. (72) and (80) and choosing µ = 1/a
as renormalisation scale in the intermediate RI'-MOM scheme we obtain:
                                                    
                               αem           αs (1/a)
     O1W-reg (MW ) = O1χ (a) +                          log a2 MW
                                                                2                  QED
                                                                    + C W-RI' + ∆Z11
                                                                  
                                      2 1−                                             (1/a)+
                                4π              4π
                                                                        
                                       χ     αem
                   + η11 (αs (1/a)) O1 (a) +       ∆Z12 + η12 (αs (1/a)) O2χ (a) .
                                                       QED
                                                                                              (81)
                                              4π

Using the results of Ref. [11], obtained in perturbation theory at order O(αs0 ), we have determined
the values for the matching and mixing coefficients,

                   C W-RI' = −5.7825 + 1.2373 ξ ,
                     QED                                       QED
                   ∆Z11  (1/a) = −9.7565 − 1.2373 ξ      ,   ∆Z12  = −0.5357 ,                  (82)

where ξ is the photon gauge parameter (ξ = 0 (1) in the Feynman (Landau) gauge). It is worth
noting that the renormalised operator in the W-regularization scheme is gauge independent, at
any order of perturbation theory. In particular, as shown by Eq. (82), at first order in αem and
at zero order in αs the gauge dependence of the matching coefficient of O1χ cancels in the sum
            QED
C W-RI' + ∆Z11  = −15.539. By contrast, for the matching coefficient of O2χ , the two terms
  QED
∆Z12  and η12 are separately gauge independent.
   When inserted into the expression for amplitude for the decay P → `ν, the term of order αem
of the renormalised operator O1W-reg (MW ) of Eq. (81), namely δO1W-reg (MW ) = O1W-reg (MW ) − O1χ ,
                                                                                                                  37


provides the contribution denoted as δAWP in Eq. (30)
                                      n                            o
                                h0| Tr δO1W-reg (MW )`γ0 (1 − γ5 )ν |P (0) i
                      δAWP =−                                                ,                                  (83)
                                                  XP`,0

where XP`,0 is the leptonic trace defined in Eq. (61). We then note that O1χ and O2χ entering in
Eq. (81) give opposite contributions to the tree-level amplitude, i.e.

                                                                                       (0)
            h0|Tr O1χ `γ0 (1 − γ5 )ν |P (0) i = −h0|Tr O2χ `γ0 (1 − γ5 )ν |P (0) i = −AP XP`,0 ,
                                                     
                                                                                                                (84)

          (0)
with AP         given in Eq. (52) . Therefore, after averaging the amplitude over the values of the
parameter r = ±1, in order to cancel out the contribution of the mixing with O3 and O4 , one
obtains

                                                                  (0)
                                               δAW
                                                 P =Z
                                                      W-reg
                                                            AP ,                                                (85)

with
                                                                                        
        W-reg     αem       αs (1/a)        2 2
                                                
    Z           =      2 1−            log a MW − 15.0032 + η11 (αs (1/a)) − η12 (αs (1/a)) .                   (86)
                  4π           4π
     As already noted, the contribution δAW
                                          P of the matching factor at order αem to the decay

amplitude, expressed by Eqs. (85) and (86), is gauge independent. It then follows that also the order
αem contribution of the bare diagrams to the amplitude, expressed by the other terms in Eq. (30),
is by itself gauge independent. Therefore, we can numerically evaluate the two contributions
separately by making different choices for the gluon and the photon gauge in the two cases 5 . In
particular, we have chosen to compute the matching factor Z W-reg of Eq. (86) in the Landau gauge
for both gluons and photons, because this makes RI' equivalent to RI up to higher orders in the
perturbative expansions. On the other hand, in the calculation of the physical amplitudes described
in Sec. III (and already computed in Ref. [2]) we have used a stochastic photon generated in the
Feynman gauge, which has been adopted also in the calculation of Γpt
                                                                  0 (L) in Ref. [14].

     As discussed in Ref. [11], when we compute the difference Γ0 (L) − Γpt
                                                                         0 (L) in Eq. (1) at leading

order in αem , the contribution from the lepton wave function RC cancels out provided, of course,
it is evaluated in Γ0 (L) and Γpt
                               0 (L) in the same W-regularization scheme and in the same photon

gauge. Since Γpt
              0 (L) has been computed in Ref. [14] by omitting the lepton wave function RC

contribution in the Feynman gauge, we have to subtract the analogous contribution from Eq. (86)

5
    It should be noted, however, that while Z W-reg of Eq. (86) is gauge independent at any order of perturbation
    theory, its actual numerical value may display a residual gauge dependence due to higher order terms in the
    non-perturbative determination of η11 which are neglected in the perturbatively evaluated matching coefficient.
                                                                                                                   38


in the Feynman gauge. The QCD and QED corrections to the the lepton wave function RC at
O(αem ) factorise, so that their contribution does not enter into the non-perturbative determination
of the matrix η, which only contains, by its definition, non-factorisable QCD+QED contributions.
Therefore, as discussed in Ref. [11], the subtraction of the lepton wave function RC only requires
the replacement of Z W-reg in Eq. (86) by the subtracted matching factor

                                                              1
                                          Z̃ W-reg = Z W-reg − ∆Z`W-reg ,                                         (87)
                                                              2

where

                                                    αem 
                                   ∆Z`W-reg =            − log a2 MW
                                                                   2
                                                                               
                                                                       − 13.3524 .                                (88)
                                                    4π

The final expression to be used in Eq. (30) is therefore

                                                                          (0)
                                                    δAW
                                                      P = Z̃
                                                             W-reg
                                                                   AP ,                                           (89)

with
                                                                                                          
        W-reg     αem        5    αs (1/a)              2  2
                                                               
   Z̃           =              −2                 log   a MW       − 8.3270 + η11 (αs (1/a)) − η12 (αs (1/a)) .   (90)
                  4π         2       4π

   To make contact with the factorisation approximation introduced in Refs. [8, 32], we rewrite
Eq. (90) as

                                                                        W-reg
                                                   Z̃ W-reg ≡ Z fact · Zη=0                                       (91)

       W-reg
where Zη=0   is the result in the factorisation approximation (i.e. with η = 0)
                                                                                          
                              W-reg     αem        5    αs (1/a)
                                                                         log a2 MW
                                                                                 2
                                                                                   
                             Zη=0   =                −2                              − 8.3270 ,                   (92)
                                        4π         2       4π

and Z fact is the factor correcting the result for Z̃ W-reg to include the entries of the matrix η
determined in Ref. [29]

                                                   αem η11 (αs (1/a)) − η12 (αs (1/a))
                                  Z fact ≡ 1 +                       W-reg
                                                                                       .                          (93)
                                                   4π              Zη=0

                                W-reg
The values of the coefficients Zη=0   and Z fact are collected in Table I for the three values of the
inverse coupling β adopted in this work and for µ = 1/a. In the same Table we also include the
                           fact corresponding to the non-factorisable e.m. corrections to the mass
values of the coefficient Zm
RC (see Eq. (40)), evaluated in Ref. [29]. The two methods M1 and M2 correspond to different
treatments of the O(a2 µ2 ) discretisation effects and are described in Ref. [28]. The difference of the
                                                                                                                39


                                                   Method M1                     Method M2
                             W-reg               fact          fact            fact       fact
                 β          Zη=0             Z                Zm           Z             Zm

                1.90    0.00542 (11)      1.184 (11)        1.629 (41)   1.126 (7)     1.637 (14)
                1.95    0.00519 (10)      1.172 (9)         1.514 (33)   1.123 (5)     1.585 (12)
                2.10    0.00440 (7)       1.160 (6)         1.459 (17)   1.136 (4)     1.462 (6)


                                     W-reg
TABLE I: Values of the coefficients Zη=0   (see Eq. (92)) and Z fact (see Eq. (93)) calculated for the three values
of the inverse coupling β adopted in this work and for µ = 1/a. In the fourth and sixth columns the values of
                 fact
the coefficient Zm    corresponding to the non-factorisable e.m. corrections to the mass RC in the MS(2 GeV) (see
Eq. (40)) are shown. The evaluation of the RCs in the RI'-MOM scheme has been carried out in Ref. [29] using the
methods M1 and M2 of Ref. [28] (see Appendix A).


results obtained with these two methods enters into the systematic uncertainty labelled as ()input
in Sec. VI below. The results in Table I show that the non-factorisable corrections are significant,
of O(12 - 25%) for Z W-reg and even larger, O(40 - 60%), for Zm .
   We close this section by noting that Eq. (29) implies that the contribution to δRP from the
matching factor in Eq. (89) is 2Z̃ W-reg . Such a term is mass independent. Thus, as already pointed
out in Ref. [2], all the matching and mixing contributions to the axial amplitude in Eq. (30) cancel
exactly in the difference between the corrections corresponding to two different channels, e.g. in
δRK − δRπ . A similar cancelation also occurs in the difference between the corrections to the
amplitudes corresponding to the meson P decaying into two different final-state leptonic channels.


                       V.    FINITE VOLUME EFFECTS AT ORDER O(αem )


   The subtraction Γ0 (L) − Γpt
                             0 (L) in Eq. (1) cancels both the IR divergences and the structure-

independent FVEs, i.e. those of order O(1/L). The point-like decay rate Γpt
                                                                         0 (L) is given by
                                                      αem `    
                                     Γpt
                                      0  (L) =   1 + 2    YP (L)  Γtree
                                                                   P    ,                                     (94)
                                                       4π

where

                                                         b1    b2      b3
              YP` (L) = bIR log(MP L) + b0 +                +       +        + O(e−MP L )                     (95)
                                                        MP L (MP L)2 (MP L)3

with the coefficients bj (j = IR, 0, 1, 2, 3) depending on the dimensionless ratio m` /MP and given
explicitly in Eq. (98) of Ref. [14] (see also Ref. [39]) after the subtraction of the lepton self-energy
contribution in the Feynman gauge. An important result of Ref. [14] is that the structure-dependent
FVEs start at order O(1/(MP L)2 ). Consequently the coefficients bIR,0,1 in the factor YP` (L) are
                                                                                                                                                       40


“universal”, i.e. they are the same as in the full theory when the structure of the meson P is
considered6 .
     Eq. (30) is therefore replaced by

                                                                                                                    (0)
                                                               X
                          δAP = δAW     SIB
                                  P + δAP +                              δAiP + δA`P − YP` (L) AP ,                                             (96)
                                                             i=J,T,P,S

where δAW
        P is given by Eq. (89).

                 0.020

                                                                                              (a) universal FVEs subtracted
                 0.015
                                           A40.40
                                                    A40.32                                                                                             y = m1 + m2 * M0

                 0.010                                                           A40.24                                                                    Value            Error
                                                                                                   δR            A40.20                      m1        0.011863    0.00060935
                                                                                                       π
                                                                                                                                             m2         -1.8588          0.51802

             P                  β = 1.90                                                                                                   Chisq        0.20222              NA

            δR   0.005                                                                                                                            R     0.99224              NA




                 0.000                                                                                                                                y = m1 + m2 * M0
                                                                                                                                                           Value            Error
                               M ~ 320 MeV                                                                                                 m1         0.0026638    0.00045082
                                π
                 -0.005                                                                         δR                                         m2           -2.6134           0.3863
                                                                                                   K                                      Chisq          11.012               NA
                                                                                                                                             R          0.89781               NA
                               M ~ 580 MeV
                                K
                 -0.010
                      0.0000         0.0005         0.0010          0.0015                   0.0020              0.0025          0.0030
                                                                        2       2
                                                                    a /L
                 0.015


                 0.010                                                          (b) universal FVEs and b
                                                                                                           pt          2
                                                                                                                / (M L) subtracted
                                                                                                           2       P
                                           A40.40
                 0.005                                                                                                                                y = m1 + m2 * M0
                                                    A40.32                                                                                                 Value          Error
                                                                                                                                             m1         0.01102    0.0006134
                                                                                                                                             m2         -9.5971      0.51435
                 0.000                                              δR                                                                     Chisq        0.14729             NA
             P                                                              π                                                                     R     0.99979             NA
            δR                                                                      A40.24
                 -0.005         β = 1.90
                                                                  δR                                                                                  y = m1 + m2 * M0
                                                                    K
                 -0.010                                                                                           A40.20                                   Value            Error
                               M ~ 320 MeV                                                                                                 m1         0.0025085    0.00047673
                                π
                                                                                                                                           m2           -6.3228          0.38568
                 -0.015                                                                                                                   Chisq          5.0835               NA
                               M ~ 580 MeV                                                                                                   R          0.99067               NA
                                K

                 -0.020
                      0.0000         0.0005         0.0010          0.0015                   0.0020              0.0025          0.0030
                                                                        2       2
                                                                    a /L

FIG. 9: Results for the corrections δRπ and δRK for the gauge ensembles A40.20, A40.24, A40.32 and A40.40
sharing the same lattice spacing, pion, kaon and muon masses, but with different lattice sizes (see Table II). Top
panel (a): the universal FVEs, i.e. the terms up to order O(1/MP L) in Eq. (95), are subtracted for each quantity.
Bottom panel (b): the same as in (a), but in addition to the subtraction of the universal terms, bpt       2
                                                                                                  2 /(MP L) , where

bpt                                                                                                                   2
 2 is the pointlike contribution to b2 in Eq. (95), is also removed. The solid and dashed lines are linear fits in 1/L .

The maximum photon energy ∆Eγ corresponds to the fully inclusive case ∆Eγ = ∆Eγmax,P = MP (1 − m2µ /MP2 )/2.


6
    Notice that the decay rate in the full theory, Γ0 (L), can be affected also by non-universal FVEs of order
    O[1/(MP L)n ] with n ≥ 4 that do not appear in Γpt
                                                    0 (L).
                                                                                                  41


   In order to study the FVEs in detail we consider four ensembles generated at the same values of
β and quark masses, but differing in the size of the lattice; these are the ensembles A40.40, A40.32,
A40.24 and A40.20 (see Appendix A). The residual FVEs after the subtraction of the universal
terms as in Eq. (96) are illustrated in the plots in Fig. 9 for δRπ and δRK in the fully inclusive
case, i.e. where the energy of the final-state photon is integrated over the full phase space. In
this case ∆Eγ = ∆Eγmax,P = MP (1 − m2µ /MP2 )/2, which corresponds to ∆Eγmax,K ≃ 235 MeV and
∆Eγmax,π ≃ 29 MeV, respectively. With a muon as the final state lepton, the contribution from
photons with energy greater than about 20 MeV is negligible and hence the point-like approximation
is valid. In the top plot the universal FV corrections have been subtracted and so we would expect
the remaining effects to be of order O(1/(MP L)2 ) and this is indeed what we see.
   In the bottom plot of Fig. 9, in addition to subtracting the universal FVEs, we also subtract
the contribution to the order O(1/(MP L)2 ) corrections from the point-like contribution to b2 ,
which can be found in Eq. (3.2) of Ref. [39]. We observe that this additional subtraction does not
reduce the O(1/(MP L)2 ) effects, underlining the expectation that these effects are indeed structure
dependent.
   It can be seen that after subtraction of the universal terms the residual structure-dependent
FVEs are almost linear in 1/L2 , which implies that the FVEs of order O(1/(MP L)3 ) are quite
small; indeed they are too small to be resolved with the present statistics. Nevertheless, since the
QEDL formulation of QED on a finite box, which is adopted in this work, violates locality [13], we
may expect that there are also FVEs of order O(a3 /L3 ) [39]. We have checked explicitly that the
addition of such a term in fitting the results shown in Fig. 9 changes the extrapolated value at
infinite volume well within the statistical errors.
   A more detailed description of the full analysis, including the continuum and chiral extrapo-
lations, is given in the following section. As far as the FVEs are concerned, the central value is
obtained by subtracting the universal terms and fitting the residual O(1/L2 ) corrections to

                                           KP      KP`
                                                +         ,                                     (97)
                                         (MP L)2 (EP` L)2

where KP and KP` are constant fitting parameters and EP` is the energy of the charged lepton
in the rest frame of the pseudoscalar P (see Eq. (98) below). Such an ansatz is introduced to
model the unknown dependance of b2 on the ratio m` /MP . For the four points in each of the
plots of Fig. 9 m` /MP takes the same value, but this is not true for all the ensembles used in
the analysis. We estimate the uncertainty due to the use of the ansatz in Eq. (97) by repeating
the same analysis, but on the data in which, in addition to subtracting the universal terms in
                                                                                                              42


Eq. (95), we also subtract the term bpt       2         pt
                                     2 /(MP L) , where b2 is contribution to b2 from a point-like

meson [39]. Since bpt
                   2 depends on m` /MP , the result obtained with this additional subtraction is a

little different from that obtained with only the universal terms removed and we take the difference
as an estimate of the residual FV uncertainty.



      VI.    RESULTS FOR CHARGED PION AND KAON DECAYS INTO MUONS


   We now insert the various ingredients described in the previous sections into the master formula
in Eq. (29) for the decays π + → µ+ ν[γ] and K + → µ+ ν[γ].
   The results for the corrections δRπ and δRK are shown in Fig. 10, where the “universal” FSEs up
to order O(1/L) have been subtracted from the lattice data (see the empty symbols) and all photon
energies (i.e. ∆Eγ = ∆Eγmax,P = MP (1 − m2µ /MP2 )/2) are included, since the experimental data
on π`2 and K`2 decays are fully inclusive. As already pointed out in section I, structure dependent
contributions to real photon emission should be included. According to the ChPT predictions of
Ref. [17], however, these contributions are negligible in for both kaon and pion decays into muons,
while the same does not hold as well for decays into final-state electrons (see Ref. [11]). This
important conclusion needs to be explicitly validated by an ongoing dedicated lattice study of the
real photon emission amplitudes in light and heavy P-meson leptonic decays.
   The combined chiral, continuum and infinite-volume extrapolations are performed using the
following SU(2)-inspired fitting function

                                 (0)          (χ)                 (1)          (2)
                       δRP = RP + RP log(mud ) + RP mud + RP m2ud + DP a2

                                KP      KP`
                           +         +           + δΓpt (∆Eγmax,P ) ,                                        (98)
                               MP2 L2 (EP` )2 L2

where mud = µud /ZP and µud is the bare (twisted) mass (see Table II in Appendix A below), EP` is
                                                         (0),(1),(2)
the lepton energy in the P-meson rest frame, RP                         , DP , KP and KP` are free parameters. In
                                       (χ)
Eq. (98) the chiral coefficient RP is known for both pion and kaon decays from Ref. [40]; in QED
the coefficients are

                                             αem                        (χ)    αem
                               Rπ(χ) =           (3 − 2X) ,         RK = −         X ,                       (99)
                                             4π                                4π

while in qQED they are
                                                        
                                  αem               10                   (χ)     αem 8
                          Rπ(χ) =                 3− X        ,         RK = −         X ,                 (100)
                                        4π          9                            4π 9
                                                                                                                            43


           0.04           β = 1.90, L/a = 20            β = 1.90, L/a = 20 (FVE corr.)             continuum limit
                          β = 1.90, L/a = 24            β = 1.90, L/a = 24 (FVE corr.)             fit at β = 1.90
                          β = 1.90, L/a = 32            β = 1.90, L/a = 32 (FVE corr.)             fit at β = 1.95

                          β = 1.90, L/a = 40            β = 1.90, L/a = 40 (FVE corr.)             fit at β = 2.10
           0.03
                          β = 1.95, L/a = 24            β = 1.95, L/a = 24 (FVE corr.)             physical point

                          β = 1.95, L/a = 32            β = 1.95, L/a = 32 (FVE corr.)
       π
                          β = 2.10, L/a = 48            β = 2.10, L/a = 48 (FVE corr.)
    δR
           0.02
                                                                         PDG


           0.01
                      +          +
                     π -> µ ν[γ]
              0.00                   0.01             0.02                 0.03              0.04                    0.05
                                                             m    (GeV)
                                                             ud

           0.03           β = 1.90, L/a = 20            β = 1.90, L/a = 20 (FVE corr.)             continuum limit
                          β = 1.90, L/a = 24            β = 1.90, L/a = 24 (FVE corr.)             fit at β = 1.90
                          β = 1.90, L/a = 32            β = 1.90, L/a = 32 (FVE corr.)             fit at β = 1.95
                          β = 1.90, L/a = 40            β = 1.90, L/a = 40 (FVE corr.)             fit at β = 2.10
           0.02
                          β = 1.95, L/a = 24            β = 1.95, L/a = 24 (FVE corr.)             physical point

                          β = 1.95, L/a = 32            β = 1.95, L/a = 32 (FVE corr.)
      K
                          β = 2.10, L/a = 48            β = 2.10, L/a = 48 (FVE corr.)
    δR
           0.01

                           PDG


           0.00
                                                                                               +           +
                                                                                             K -> µ ν[γ]
              0.00                   0.01             0.02                 0.03              0.04                    0.05
                                                             m    (GeV)
                                                             ud


FIG. 10: Results for the corrections δRπ (top panel) and δRK (bottom panel) obtained after the subtraction of the
“universal” FSE terms up to order O(1/L) in Eq. (95) (empty markers). The full markers correspond to the lattice
data corrected by the residual FSEs obtained in the case of the fitting function (98) including the chiral log. The
dashed lines are the (central) results in the infinite volume limit at each value of the lattice spacing, while the shaded
areas identify the results in the continuum limit at the level of one standard deviation. The crosses represent the
                     phys
values δRπphys and δRK    extrapolated at the physical point mphys
                                                              ud (MS, 2 GeV) = 3.70 (17) MeV [28]. The blue dotted
                                                           phys
lines correspond to the values δRπphys = 0.0176 (21) and δRK    = 0.0064 (24), obtained using ChPT [25] and adopted
by the PDG [26].



where X is obtained from the chiral limit of the O(αem ) correction to Mπ2± (i.e. δMπ2± =
4παem Xf02 + O(mud )). In Ref. [8] we found X = 0.658(40).
   Using Eq. (98) we have fitted the data for δRπ and δRK using a χ2 -minimization procedure
with an uncorrelated χ2 , obtaining values of χ2 /d.o.f. always around 0.9. The uncertainties on the
                                                                                                    44


fitting parameters do not depend on the χ2 -value, because they are obtained using the bootstrap
samplings of Ref. [28] (see Appendix A). This guarantees that all the correlations among the data
points and among the fitting parameters are properly taken into account.
   The quality of our fits is illustrated in Fig. 10. It can be seen that the residual SD FVEs are
still visible in the data and well reproduced by our fitting ansatz in Eq. (98). Discretisation effects
on the other hand, only play a minor role.
   At the physical pion mass in the continuum and infinite-volume limits we obtain

                δRπphys = +0.0153 (16)stat+f it (4)input (3)chiral (6)F V E (2)disc (6)qQED

                        = +0.0153 (19) ,                                                         (101)
                  phys
                δRK    = +0.0024 (6)stat+f it (3)input (1)chiral (3)F V E (2)disc (6)qQED

                        = +0.0024 (10) ,                                                         (102)

where

    • ()stat+f it indicates the uncertainty induced by the statistical Monte Carlo errors of the sim-
        ulations and its propagation in the fitting procedure;

    • ()input is the error coming from the uncertainties of the input parameters of the quark-mass
        analysis of Ref. [28];

    • ()chiral is the difference between including or excluding the chiral logarithm in Eq. (98),
        i.e. taking Rχ 6= 0 or Rχ = 0;

    • ()F V E is the difference between the analyses of the data corresponding to the FVE sub-
        tractions up to the order O(1/L) alone or by also subtracting the term proportional to
        bpt       2
         2 /(MP L) (see Fig. 9 and the discussion towards the end of Sec. V);


    • ()disc is the uncertainty coming from including (D 6= 0) or excluding (setting D = 0) the
        discretisation term proportional to a2 in Eq. (98);

    • ()qQED is our estimate of the uncertainty of the QED quenching. This is obtained using the
        ansatz (98) with the coefficient Rχ of the chiral log fixed either at the value (100), which
        corresponds to the qQED approximation, or at the value (99), which includes the effects of
        the up, down and strange sea-quark charges [40]. The change both in δRπphys and in δRK
                                                                                             phys
                                                                                                  is
        ≃ 0.0003, which has been already added in the central values given by Eqs. (101) and (102).
        To be conservative, we use twice this value for our estimate of the qQED uncertainty.
                                                                                                         45


   Our results in Eqs. (101) - (102) can be compared with the ChPT predictions δRπphys =
                 phys
0.0176(21) and δRK    = 0.0064(24) obtained in Ref. [25] and adopted by the PDG [20, 26].
The difference is within one standard deviation for δRπphys , while it is larger for δRK
                                                                                       phys
                                                                                            . Note that
the precision of our determination of δRπphys is comparable to the one obtained in ChPT, while our
                   phys
determination of δRK    has a much better accuracy compared to that obtained using ChPT; the
improvement in precision is a factor of about 2.2. We stress that the level of precision of our pion
and kaon results depends crucially on the non-perturbative determination of the chirality mixing,
carried out in section IV by including simultaneously QED at first order and QCD at all orders.
                                                                         (0)
   As already stressed, the correction δRP and the QCD quantity fP             separately depend on the
prescription used for the separation between QED and QCD corrections [27]. Only the product
 (0) √
fP 1 + δRP is independent of the prescription and its value, multiplied by the relevant CKM
matrix element, yields the P-meson decay rate. We remind the reader that our results (101) - (102)
are given in the GRS prescription (see the dedicated discussion in sections II B and III) in which
the renormalised couplings and quark masses in the full theory and in isosymmetric QCD coincide
in the MS scheme at a scale of 2 GeV [19]. We remind the reader that, to the current level of
precision, this GRS scheme can be considered equivalent to the FLAG scheme.

   Taking the experimental values Γ(π − → µ− ν̄µ [γ]) = 3.8408(7)·107 s−1 and Γ(K − → µ− ν̄µ [γ]) =
5.134(11) · 107 s−1 from the PDG [20] and using our results (101) - (102), we obtain


                     fπ(0) |Vud | = 127.28 (2)exp (12)th MeV = 127.28 (12) MeV ,                   (103)
                      (0)
                     fK |Vus | = 35.23 (4)exp (2)th MeV = 35.23 (5) MeV ,                          (104)


where the first error is the experimental uncertainty and the second is that from our theoretical
calculations. The result for the pion in Eq. (103) agrees within the errors with the updated value
 (0)
fπ |Vud | = 127.12(13) MeV [20], obtained by the PDG and based on the model-dependent ChPT
estimate of the e.m. corrections from Ref. [25]. Our result for the kaon in Eq. (104) however, is larger
                                       (0)
than the corresponding PDG value fK |Vus | = 35.09(5) MeV [20], based on the ChPT calculation
of Ref. [25], by about 2 standard deviations.

   As anticipated in the Introduction and discussed in detail in Sec. III, we cannot use the result
(103) to determine the CKM matrix element |Vud |, since the pion decay constant was used by
                                                                                 (0)
ETMC [28] to set the lattice scale in isosymmetric QCD and its value, fπ               = 130.41(20) MeV,
was based on the determination of |Vud | obtained from super-allowed β-decays in Ref. [42]. On
                                                                                                   (0)
the other hand, adopting the best lattice determination of the QCD kaon decay constant, fK =
                                                                                                                  46


156.11(21) MeV [3, 43–45] 7 , we find that Eq. (104) implies

                                  |Vus | = 0.22567(26)exp (33)th = 0.22567 (42) ,                             (105)

which is a result with the excellent precision of ≃ 0.2%.
                                                                                      fact in Table I)
     Since the non-factorisable e.m. corrections to the mass RC (see the coefficient Zm
were not included in Ref. [2], we update our estimate of the ratio of the kaon and pion decay rates:

                                     phys     phys
                                   δRKπ   = δRK    − δRπphys = −0.0126 (14) .                                 (106)

Using the pion and kaon experimental decay rates we get
                                       (0)
                               |Vus | fK
                                            = 0.27683 (29)exp (20)th = 0.27683 (35) .                         (107)
                               |Vud | fπ(0)

Using the best Nf = 2 + 1 + 1 lattice determination of the ratio of the QCD kaon and pion decay
                (0)   (0)
constants, fK /fπ = 1.1966 (18) [3, 43–45], we find

                                  |Vus |
                                         = 0.23135 (24)exp (39)th = 0.23135 (46) .                            (108)
                                  |Vud |

Taking the updated value |Vud | = 0.97420 (21) from super-allowed nuclear beta decays [21],
Eq. (108) yields the following value for the CKM element |Vus |:

                                  |Vus | = 0.22538 (24)exp (39)th = 0.22538 (46) ,                            (109)

which agrees with our result (105) within the errors. Note that our result (109) agrees with the
latest estimate |Vus | = 0.2253(7), recently updated by the PDG [20], but it improves the error by
a factor of approximately 1.5.
     Taking the values |Vub | = 0.00413(49) [20] and |Vud | = 0.97420(21) [21] our result in Eq. (109)
implies that the unitarity of the first-row of the CKM matrix is confirmed to better than the
per-mille level

                                      |Vud |2 + |Vus |2 + |Vub |2 = 0.99988 (46) .                            (110)

     With the same value |Vud | = 0.97420(21) from super-allowed nuclear beta decays [21], our result
(103) implies for the QCD pion decay constant (in the GRS prescription) the following value

                            fπ(0) = 130.65 (12)exp+th (3)Vud MeV = 130.65 (12) MeV ,                          (111)

7                                                                                                       (0)
    The average value of fK ± quoted by FLAG [3] includes the strong IB corrections. In order to obtain fK therefore,
    we have subtracted this correction which is given explicitly in Refs. [43–45].
                                                                                                 47

                                                                             (0)
which, as anticipated in Sec. III, agrees within the errors with the value fπ      = 130.41 (20) MeV
adopted in Ref. [28] to set the lattice scale in the isosymmetric QCD theory. This demonstrates
the equivalence of the GRS and PDG schemes within the precision of our simulation.
     In a recent paper [46] the hadronic contribution to the electroweak radiative corrections to
neutron and super-allowed nuclear β decays has been analyzed in terms of dispersion relations
and neutrino scattering data. With respect to the result Vud = 0.97420(21) from Ref. [21] a
significant shift in the central value and a reduction of the uncertainty have been obtained, namely
Vud = 0.97370(14) [46]. The impact of the new value of Vud on our determinations of Vus and
 (0)                              (0)
fπ     is Vus = 0.22526 (46) and fπ     = 130.72 (12) MeV, i.e. well within the uncertainties shown
in Eqs. (109) and (111), respectively. On the contrary, the first-row CKM unitarity (110) will be
significantly modified into

                               |Vud |2 + |Vus |2 + |Vub |2 = 0.99885(34) ,                     (112)

which would imply a ≃ 3.4σ tension with unitarity. A confirmation of the new calculation of the
radiative corrections made in Ref. [46] is therefore urgently called for.
     Before closing this section, we comment briefly about the comparison between our result
  phys                                                                      phys
δRK    = 0.0024(10) and the corresponding model-dependent ChPT prediction δRK    = 0.0064(24)
from Ref. [25]. The latter is obtained by adding a model-dependent QED correction of 0.0107(21)
and a model-independent next-to-leading strong IB contribution equal to −0.0043(12). Our re-
sult on the other hand, obtained in the GRS prescription, stems from a QED correction equal to
0.0088(9) and a strong IB term equal to −0.0064(7) (see also Ref. [47]). The difference between
our result and the ChPT prediction of Ref. [25] appears to be mainly due to a different strong IB
contribution. Thus, in the present Nf = 2 + 1 + 1 study, we confirm for the strong IB term a
discrepancy at the level of about 2 standard deviations, which was already observed at Nf = 2 in
Ref. [4].


                                        VII.   CONCLUSIONS


     In this paper we have presented the details of the first lattice computation of the leading
e.m. and strong IB corrections to the π + → µ+ ν and K + → µ+ ν leptonic decay rates, following
a method recently proposed in Ref. [11]. This expands significantly on the discussion of Ref. [2],
where the results and a brief outline of the calculation had been presented. The results were
obtained using the gauge ensembles produced by the European Twisted Mass Collaboration with
                                                                                                48


Nf = 2 +1 + 1 dynamical quarks. Systematics effects are evaluated and the impact of the quenched
QED approximation is estimated.
   The effective weak Hamiltonian in the W-regularisation scheme appropriate for this calcula-
tion is obtained from the bare lattice operators in two stages. First of all, the lattice operators
are renormalised non-perturbatively in the RI0 -MOM scheme at O(αem ) and to all orders in the
strong coupling αs . Because of the breaking of chiral symmetry in the twisted mass formulation
we have adopted this renormalisation includes the mixing with other four-fermion operators of
different chirality. In the second step we perform the matching from the RI0 -MOM scheme to
the W-regularisation scheme perturbatively. By calculating and including the two-loop anomalous
dimension at O(αem αs ) [38], the residual truncation error of this matching is of O(αem αs (MW )),
reduced from O(αem αs (1/a)) in our earlier work [2, 11].
   The evaluation of isospin breaking (IB) “corrections” raises the question of how QCD with-
out these corrections is defined. Since IB corrections change hadronic masses and other physical
quantities a prescription is needed to define QCD, whether isosymmetric or not, and in Sec. II
and Appendix B we discuss this issue in detail. In particular, the correction δRP and the QCD
          (0)
quantity fP   separately depend on the prescription used for the definition of QCD [27]. Only the
         (0) √
product fP 1 + δRP is independent of the prescription and its value, multiplied by the relevant
CKM matrix element, yields the P-meson decay rate. In this paper we chose to follow the conven-
tionally used GRS prescription (see the dedicated discussion in sections II B and III) in which the
renormalised couplings and quark masses in the full QCD+QED theory and in isosymmetric QCD
coincide in the MS scheme at a scale of 2 GeV [19]. For future studies however, we advocate the
use of “hadronic schemes” in which QCD is defined by requiring that a set of hadronic quantities
(for example a set of hadronic masses) take their physical values in QCD and in QCD+QED.
   The main results of the calculation are presented in Sec. VI together with a detailed discussion
of their implications. In summary, after extrapolation of the data to the physical pion mass, and
to the continuum and infinite-volume limits, the isospin-breaking corrections to the leptonic decay
rates can be written in the form:

                     Γ(π ± → µ± ν` [γ]) ≡ (1 + δRπphys ) Γ(0) (π ± → µ± ν` )

                                        = (1.0153 ± 0.0019) Γ(0) (π ± → µ± ν` ),             (113)

                                                phys
                    Γ(K ± → µ± ν` [γ]) ≡ (1 + δRK    ) Γ(0) (π ± → µ± ν` )

                                        = (1.0024 ± 0.0010) Γ(0) (K ± → µ± ν` ) ,            (114)

where Γ(0) is the leptonic decay rate at tree level in the GRS scheme (see Eqs. (101) and (102)).
                                                                                                 49


These results can be compared with the ChPT predictions δRπphys = 0.0176(21) and δRK
                                                                                   phys
                                                                                        =
0.0064(24) obtained in Ref. [25] and adopted by the PDG [20, 26]. The difference is within one
standard deviation for δRπphys , while it is larger for δRK
                                                          phys
                                                               . We also underline that our result
|Vus | = 0.22538(46) in Eq. (109), together with the value of Vud determined in Ref. [21] and |Vub |
from the PDG [20], implies that the unitarity of the first row of the CKM matrix is satisfied at the
per-mille level (see Eq. (110)).



                                    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


   We gratefully acknowledge the CPU time provided by the Partnership for Advanced Computing
in Europe (PRACE) under the project Pra10-2693 “QED corrections to meson decay rates in
Lattice QCD” and by CINECA under the specific initiative INFN-LQCD123 on the BG/Q system
Fermi at CINECA (Italy). V.L., G.M. and S.S. thank MIUR (Italy) for partial support under the
contract PRIN 2015. G.M. also acknowledges partial support from the European Research Council
Ideas Advanced Grant n. 267985 “DaMeSyFla”. C.T.S. was partially supported by the UK Science
and Technology Facilities Council (STFC) grant No. ST/P000711/1 and by an Emeritus Fellowship
from the Leverhulme Trust. N.T. gratefully acknowledges the University of Rome Tor Vergata for
the support granted to the project PLNUGAMMA.



                              Appendix A: Details of the simulation


   The gauge ensembles used in this work are those generated by ETMC with Nf = 2 + 1 + 1
dynamical quarks and used in Ref. [28] to determine the up, down, strange and charm quark masses.
We use the Iwasaki action [48] for the gluons and the Wilson Twisted Mass Action [41, 49, 50]
for the sea quarks. In the valence sector we adopt a non-unitary setup [51] in which the strange
quark is regularized as an Osterwalder-Seiler fermion [52], while the up and down quarks have
the same action as the sea. Working at maximal twist such a setup guarantees an automatic
O(a)-improvement [50, 51].
   We have performed simulations at three values of the inverse bare lattice coupling β and at
several different lattice volumes as shown in Table II. We allow a separation of 20 trajectories
between each of the Ncfg analysed configurations. For the earlier investigation of finite-volume
effects (FVEs) ETMC had produced three dedicated ensembles, A40.20, A40.24 and A40.32, which
share the same quark masses and lattice spacing and differ only in the lattice size L. To improve
                                                                                                                50


such an investigation, which is crucial in the present work, we have generated a further gauge
ensemble, A40.40, at a larger value of the lattice size L.

      ensemble β         V /a4    Ncfg aµsea = aµud      aµσ      aµδ       aµs   Mπ (MeV) MK (MeV) Mπ L

        A40.40 1.90 403 × 80 100            0.0040       0.15     0.19 0.02363 317 (12)      576 (22)   5.7
                          3
        A30.32         32 × 64 150          0.0030                                275 (10)   568 (22)   3.9
        A40.32                    100       0.0040                                316 (12)   578 (22)   4.5
        A50.32                    150       0.0050                                350 (13)   586 (22)   5.0
        A40.24         243 × 48 150         0.0040                                322 (13)   582 (23)   3.5
        A60.24                    150       0.0060                                386 (15)   599 (23)   4.2
        A80.24                    150       0.0080                                442 (17)   618 (14)   4.8
       A100.24                    150       0.0100                                495 (19)   639 (24)   5.3
        A40.20         203 × 48 150         0.0040                                330 (13)   586 (23)   3.0

       B25.32 1.95 323 × 64 150             0.0025      0.135 0.170 0.02094       259 (9)    546 (19)   3.4
       B35.32                     150       0.0035                                302 (10)   555 (19)   4.0
       B55.32                     150       0.0055                                375 (13)   578 (20)   5.0
       B75.32                      80       0.0075                                436 (15)   599 (21)   5.8
       B85.24          243 × 48 150         0.0085                                468 (16)   613 (21)   4.6

       D15.48 2.10 483 × 96 100             0.0015      0.1200 0.1385 0.01612     223 (6)    529 (14)   3.4
       D20.48                     100       0.0020                                256 (7)    535 (14)   3.9
       D30.48                     100       0.0030                                312 (8)    550 (14)   4.7


TABLE II: Values of the valence and sea bare quark masses (in lattice units), of the pion and kaon masses for the
Nf = 2 + 1 + 1 ETMC gauge ensembles used in Ref. [28] and for the gauge ensemble, A40.40 added to improve the
investigation of FVEs. A separation of 20 trajectories between each of the Ncfg analysed configurations. The bare
twisted masses µσ and µδ describe the strange and charm sea doublet as in to Ref. [41]. The values of the strange
quark bare mass aµs , given for each β, correspond to the physical strange quark mass mphys
                                                                                       s    (MS, 2 GeV) = 99.6(4.3)
MeV and to the mass RCs determined in Ref. [28]. The central values and errors of pion and kaon masses are
evaluated using the bootstrap procedure of Ref. [28].



   At each lattice spacing, different values of the light sea-quark masses have been considered. The
light valence and sea quark masses are always taken to be degenerate. The bare mass of the valence
strange quark (aµs ) is obtained, at each β, using the physical strange mass and the mass RCs
determined in Ref. [28]. There the “FLAG” hadronic scheme was adopted in which the pion and
                                                                (0),FLAG                        (0),FLAG
kaon masses in isosymmetric QCD are equal to Mπ                            = 134.98 MeV and MK             = 494.2
                                                           (0),FLAG
MeV and the lattice scale is fixed by the value fπ                      = 130.41 (20) MeV for the physical pion
                                                                                   (0)
decay constant. In the charm sector instead, the Ds -meson mass MDs was chosen to be equal to
                                                                                                      51


its experimental value MDs+ = 1969.0(1.4) MeV [20]. The values of the lattice spacing are found to
be a = 0.0885(36), 0.0815(30), 0.0619(18) fm at β = 1.90, 1.95 and 2.10, respectively.
   The two valence quarks q1 and q2 in the P meson are regularized with opposite values of the
Wilson r-parameter (r2 = −r1 ) in order to guarantee that discretisation effects on the P meson
mass are of order O(a2 µ ΛQCD ). The lepton is a free twisted-mass fermion with Wilson parameter
r` and its mass is taken fixed at the physical muon value m` = mµ = 105.66 MeV [20]. The
regularization of the (massless) neutrino is irrelevant and it is taken to be a free fermion field.
   In this work we made use of the bootstrap samples generated for the input parameters of the
quark mass analysis of Ref. [28]. There, eight branches of the analysis were adopted differing in:

    • the continuum extrapolation adopting for the matching of the lattice scale either the Sommer
      parameter r0 or the mass of a fictitious P-meson made up of two valence strange(charm)-like
      quarks;

    • the chiral extrapolation performed with fitting functions chosen to be either a polynomial
      expansion or a Chiral Perturbation Theory (ChPT) Ansatz in the light-quark mass;

    • the choice between the methods M1 and M2, which differ by O(a2 ) effects, used to determine
      the mass RC Zm = 1/ZP in the RI0 -MOM scheme .


                Appendix B: Relating observables in the full theory and in QCD


   In this appendix we provide the detailed derivation of the relation between observables calculated
in the full theory (QCD+QED) and in QCD (in the absence of QED). We start by a discussion of
the separation of the QCD action from that in the full theory.


                            1.   Actions of the full theory and of QCD


   The lattice action in the full theory given in Eq. (4) can be written as
                                                X
                             S full = S QCD +           S`,0 + S A + S ct + ∆S ,                  (B1)
                                                    `
              kin + m S m and the counterterm S ct and the QED vertices ∆S are given by
where S`,0 = S`,0    ` `
                               
                  ct   1      1           X
                S =     2
                          − 2 S YM +         (mcr      cr   cr            m
                                                f − m0 )Sf + (mf − mf,0 )Sf  ,          (B2)
                       gs    g0
                                          f
                     X                 X               
               ∆S =       S`kin − S`,0
                                   kin
                                        +    Sfkin − Sf,0
                                                      kin
                                                            .                           (B3)
                        `                       f
                                                                                                                  52


   We now consider these terms in detail using Wilson fermions for illustration. The kinetic term
for the quark with flavour f , Sfkin , is given by:

                                          ∇µ [U Vf ] + ∇∗µ [U Vf ] ∇µ [U Vf ]∇∗µ [U Vf ]
                         X                                                                      
               Sfkin =         ψ̄f (x) γµ                         −                                  ψf (x) ,    (B4)
                          x
                                                     2                      2

where ψf is the quark field, while Uµ and Vf,µ are the QCD and QED gauge links, respectively.
Specifically


                                                    Vf,µ (x) = e−ief eAµ (x) ,                                   (B5)


where ef is the charge of the quark with flavour f in units of the positron charge. The forward
and backward derivatives are given by


                         ∇µ [U Vf ]ψf (x) = Uµ (x)Vf,µ (x)ψf (x + µ̂) − ψf (x)            and                    (B6)
                                                                    †
                         ∇∗µ [U Vf ]ψf (x) = ψf (x) − Uµ† (x − µ̂)Vf,µ (x − µ̂)ψf (x − µ̂) .                     (B7)


The leptonic action is given by

                                                     ∇µ [V` ] + ∇∗µ [V` ] ∇µ [V` ]∇∗µ [V` ]
                               X                                                               
               S`kin + S`m =              ψ̄` (x) γµ                     −                  + m` ψ` (x)          (B8)
                                                              2                  2
                               x,ell


with ψ` being the lepton field. The renormalisation of the lepton masses is performed perturba-
tively, by requiring that the on-shell masses correspond to the physical ones.
   In QCD the kinetic term only includes the gluon links so that for Wilson fermions

                                                     ∇µ [U ] + ∇∗µ [U ] ∇µ [U ]∇∗µ [U ]
                               X                                                         
                       kin
                      Sf,0 =              ψ̄f (x) γµ                   −                      ψf (x) ,           (B9)
                                  x
                                                             2                2

and the derivatives are defined in Eqs. (B6) - (B7) with the Vf = 1. Since for leptonic and semilep-
tonic decays, leptonic spinors are present even in the absence of electromagnetism, it is also con-
venient to define the kinetic action for free leptons:

                                                      ∇µ [1] + ∇∗µ [1] ∇µ [1]∇∗µ [1]
                                  X                                                   
                          kin
                         S`,0 =            ψ̄` (x) γµ                 −                    ψ` (x) .             (B10)
                                      x
                                                             2              2


                 2.    Relation between observables in the full theory and in QCD


   Physical observables are determined from correlation functions evaluated from lattice compu-
tations in the full theory. For a generic observable O evaluated in the full theory up to O(αem ) we
                                                                                                             53


write:
                                  −S full O[ψ , ψ , U, A]
                  R
                   U,A,ψf ,ψ` e              f   `
          hOi =           R
                                       −S full
                           U,A,ψf ,ψ` e
                              QCD              A
                                                           n                     2
                                                                                   o
                                                            1 − S ct − ∆S + (∆S)
                                                     P
                        −S                    −S −       ` S`,0
                  R                 R
                 U,ψf e                 A,ψ` e                                 2     O[ψf , ψ` , U, A]
               =                                                  n                        o           ,   (B11)
                                                     −S A − ` S`,0 1 − S ct − ∆S + (∆S)2
                                                           P
                                          QCD
                         R                     R
                                     −S
                              U,ψf e           A,ψ` e                                  2

where in the integrand O is a multilocal composite operator. For a given choice of the strong
coupling gs , the parameters of the action, the bare quark masses and the lattice spacing, are
determined by imposing that a set of physical quantities take their experimental values as explained
in Sec. II A. Physical quantities other than those used for the calibration can now be determined
unambiguously up to lattice artefacts, which are removed by taking the continuum limit.
   In general, the determination of physical observables requires the processing of correlation
functions of the form of Eq. (B11). Hadronic masses, for example are obtained from the behaviour
in the time separation of two interpolating operators and the determination of hadronic matrix
elements may require the cancelation of interpolating operators at the source and/or sink using
a combination of three- and two-point functions. The discussion in this appendix concerns the
evaluation of a generic correlation function.
   We now turn to the definition of correlation functions in QCD defined in a generic scheme. For
a generic observable O we define its value in QCD by:
                                           QCD R            A
                                                              P
                                       e−S              e−S − ` S`,0 O[ψf , ψ` , U, A]
                               R
                                 U,ψ              A,ψ
                    hOiQCD ≡         f                `
                                                                  −S A − ` S`,0
                                                                        P              ,                   (B12)
                                                  −S QCD
                                         R                R
                                           U,ψf e          A,ψ` e

where the bare quark masses and the lattice spacing are defined as discussed in Sec. II B. The
free QED action is included in the numerator and denominator of Eq. (B12) since even without
radiative corrections the physical quantities such as Γ(K`2 ) and Γ(π`2 ) studied in this paper are
obtained by combining the results for hadronic matrix elements obtained from QCD simulations
with leptonic spinors. Moreover, for other quantities, for example the long-distance contributions
to the amplitude for the rare kaon decay K + → π + ν ν̄, there are internal free lepton propagators
even in the absence of isospin breaking [53].
   Comparing Eqs. (B11) and (B12) we arrive at
                                                  QCD
                                            (∆S)2
                                     
                              QCD
    hOifull = hOiQCD − O S ct conn − O ∆S −              ≡ hOiQCD + hδOiQCD ,                              (B13)
                                              2     conn

where the subscript “conn” reminds that only connected Feynman diagrams contribute: hO1 O2 iconn =
hO1 O2 i − hO1 i hO2 i.
                                                                                                   54


   There is one final subtlety which we must account for. We need to convert the results obtained
from simulations in lattice units (i.e. in units of the lattice spacing) into values given in physical
units such as MeV. Eq. (B13) is also written in lattice units. Imagine that the observable O has
mass dimension n and rewrite Eq. (B13) with the lattice spacing included explicitly:

                                  han Oifull = han0 OiQCD + han0 δOiQCD                         (B14)

where, since we are working to first order in isospin breaking, in the second term on the right-
hand side we do not need to distinguish between the lattice spacing in the full theory (a) and
that obtained in QCD (a0 ). The quantity which we wish to determine, hOifull in physical units, is
therefore given by

                                  han0 OiQCD han0 δOiQCD   n δa
                      hOifull =         n   +       n    − n+1 han0 OiQCD ,                     (B15)
                                       a0          a0     a0

where δa = a − a0 . The three expectation values on the right-hand side of (B15) are directly
computed in QCD simulations.


           Appendix C: Non-perturbative renormalisation in the RI'-MOM scheme


   In this paper, as explained in Sec. IV, we have renormalised the weak four-fermion operator O1
non-perturbatively on the lattice to all orders in αs and up to first order in αem . In this appendix
we describe the main steps of the non-perturbative renormalisation procedure at O(αem ) and we
refer the reader to a forthcoming publication [29] for further details and results.
   Given the amputated Green function, ΛO , of an operator O computed in a given gauge between
external states with momentum p and a suitable projector on the relevant Dirac structure, PO , we
define the projected Green function as

                                       ΓO (pa) = Tr [ΛO (pa) PO ] .                              (C1)

In the RI'-MOM scheme, the renormalisation constant (RC) ZO (µa) is found by imposing the
condition [35]

                                      ZΓO (µa)ΓO (pa)|p2 =µ2 = 1 ,                               (C2)

where

                                                             −1/2
                                                       Y
                                  ZΓO (µa) = ZO (µa)        Zf      (µa) .                       (C3)
                                                        f
                                                                                                  55


The Zf are the RCs of the external fields and the index f runs over all external fields entering the
expression of the composite operator O. For the four-fermion operators considered in this work,
the RCs ZO (µa) and the projected Green functions ΓO (pa) are 5 × 5 matrices, the latter with
                            
elements (ΓO )ij = Tr ΛOi POj . In QCD+QED the RCs ZO and Zf depend both on the strong
and the e.m. coupling constants.
   Following the discussion of Sec. IV (see Eqs. (75) - (78)), we write the RCs of any composite
operator, and in particular of the fields, bilinear and four-fermion operators, in the generic decom-
position

                  QED
                      h
                         QED −1     QCD −1
                                           i
                                              QCD
                                                   h   αem    QED
                                                                       i
                                                                          QCD
           ZO = ZO     (ZO  ) ZO (ZO   )     ZO   = 1+       ∆ZO   + ηO ZO
                                                       4π
                    αem     
                                QCD
              = 1+       ∆ZO ZO     ,                                                           (C4)
                      4π
       QCD      QED
where ZO   and ZO   are the RCs of the operator O in pure QCD and pure QED respectively
and we have put

                                                QED
                                        ∆ZO = ∆ZO   + ηO .                                      (C5)

                  QED
The first term, ∆ZO   , in Eq. (C5) represents the pure QED contribution to the RC at O(αem ),
whereas ηO contains the O(αem ) non-factorisable QCD+QED correction.
   In terms of the QCD renormalised operators Oχ , as those in Eq. (79), we define the QCD
renormalised projected Green function ΓχO , and expand it at first order in αem

                                                     QCD
                                                              h
                                                                 QCD        αem          i
           ΓχO (µa) = ZΓQCD (µa)Γ O (pa)|  2
                                          p =µ 2 = Z ΓO  (µa)   ΓO   (µa) +     ∆Γ O (µa)  =
                         O                                                  4π
                           αem
                    =1+        ∆ΓχO (µa) ,                                                      (C6)
                           4π

where we have used the RI'-MOM renormalisation condition ZΓQCD
                                                            O
                                                               (µa)ΓQCD
                                                                    O   (µa) = 1 applied in
the pure QCD theory and defined


                                  ∆ΓχO (µa) = ZΓQCD
                                                 O
                                                    (µa) ∆ΓO (µa) .                             (C7)


   Using Eqs. (C4) and (C6), we can rewrite Eq. (C2) at first order in αem as

                                                  αem
                                                      ∆ZΓO (µa) + ∆ΓχO (µa)
                                                                           
                      1 = ZΓO (µa)ΓO (µa) = 1 +                                                 (C8)
                                                  4π

which provides, in turn, the RI-MOM renormalisation condition at order αem


                                      ∆ZΓO (µa) = −∆ΓχO (µa) .                                  (C9)
                                                                                                   56


Using the expression of ZΓO in Eq. (C3) in terms of ZO and the external fields RCs one also obtains

                                                         1X
                              ∆ZO (µa) = −∆ΓχO (µa) +       ∆Zf (µa) .                          (C10)
                                                         2
                                                            f


Thus, ∆ZO is expressed directly in terms of the O(αem ) contribution to the QCD renormalised
projected Green function ∆ΓχO = ZΓQCD
                                   O
                                      ∆ΓO evaluated at p2 = µ2 .
     In the following we describe a completely non-perturbative determination of the RCs ∆ZO (µa)
to all orders in αs . We will assume that all the relevant RCs of fields and composite operators
in pure QCD have been already determined, by following the standard RI'-MOM renormalisation
procedure. With appropriate modifications to the kinematical conditions and projectors, the dis-
cussion can readily be adapted to similar schemes, such as the Symmetric Momentum subtraction
one [54].
     In addition to the renormalisation of the four-fermion operator appearing in the Hamiltonian,
the e.m. shift of the quark masses (see Sec. III A) requires the knowledge of the RC of the pseu-
doscalar density [4]. We therefore start by discussing the non-perturbative renormalisation of quark
bilinear operators.



                  1.   Renormalisation of the quark field and bilinear operators


     We start with the renormalisation of the quark fields. The e.m. corrections to a quark propagator
can be represented schematically in the form

                αem QCD
                   S    (p)∆Sq (p)S QCD (p) =
                4π


                          +            − [mf − m0f ]            ∓ [mcr   cr
                                                                    f − m0 ]            ,       (C11)


where the last two diagrams represent the mass and critical Wilson parameter counter-terms [4].
     The amputated one-particle irreducible two-point function is then given by


                  ∆Σq (p) = − hS QCD (p)i−1 hS QCD (p)∆Sq (p)S QCD (p)i hS QCD (p)i−1           (C12)


and the correction to the quark field RC in the RI'-MOM scheme is obtained, according to Eq. (C9),
as

                           6 p ∆Σχq (p)
                                                                         
                      i                             i QCD −1    6 p ∆Σq (p)
              ∆Zq = − Tr                        = − (Zq  ) Tr                       .           (C13)
                     12         p2       p2 =µ2    12                p2      p2 =µ2
                                                                                                              57


   The e.m. correction to the RC ZO of a generic bilinear operator OΓ = q̄2 Γ q1 , where Γ is one of
the Dirac matrices (Γ = 1, γ 5 , γ µ , γ µ γ 5 , σ µν ), is given by Eq. (C10), which in this case reads
                                                          1
                                   ∆ZO = −∆ΓχO +            (∆Zq1 + ∆Zq2 ) .                               (C14)
                                                          2
Two kinds of corrections contribute to the amputated Green function: either the QCD Green
function is amputated with the e.m. corrections on the inverse propagators, or the correction to
the Green function itself is amputated with QCD propagators. Thus we have

                           ∆ΓχO = (ZqQCD
                                     1
                                         )−1/2 (ZqQCD
                                                  2
                                                             QCD
                                                      )−1/2 ZO   Tr [∆ΛO PO ]                              (C15)

with
                                              †
       ∆ΛO = ∆Σq2 (p) GQCD
                       O   (p) γ5 hS QCD (p)i−1 γ5 + hS QCD (p)i−1 GQCD
                                                                    O   (p) γ5 ∆Σ†q1 (p) γ5 +
                                                      †
               + hS QCD (p)i−1 ∆GO (p) γ5 hS QCD (p)i−1 γ5 ,                                               (C16)

where GO is the non-amputated Green function and ∆GO is given diagrammatically by

                               *                                                         +
                  ∆GO (p) =                       +                   +                      .             (C17)


   In this work we have used an improved method to compute the first diagram in Eq. (C17),
as well as all the diagrams containing a photon propagator connecting different points. In this
method, some of the sequential propagators introduced in Ref. [8] are summed in order to reduce
the number of inversions of the Dirac matrix. All details of the calculation will be given in the
forthcoming publication [29].
   Before closing this subsection, we stress that in the calculation of ZP and its e.m. correction
∆ZP , the Goldstone pole contamination has been taken into account and subtracted. In pure
QCD, at each p2 and for each combination of valence quark masses, µ1 and µ2 , the amputated
Green function has been fitted to the ansatz
                                                                   C0
                                      ΓQCD
                                       P   = A0 + B0 MP2 +             ,                                   (C18)
                                                                   MP2
where MP ≡ MP (µ1 , µ2 ) is the mass of the pseudoscalar meson composed of valence quarks of
mass µ1 and µ2 . When including QED in the calculation, Eq. (C18) has to be modified to take
into account the e.m. correction to the meson mass. By considering the ansatz in Eq. (C18) in
QCD+QED and expanding it in terms of αem one finds
                                                      C1                ∆MP2
                          ∆ΓP = A1 + B1 MP2 +          2 + B0 ∆MP2 − C0      ,                             (C19)
                                                      MP                MP4
                                                                                                                           58


where ∆MP2 is the correction to MP2 evaluated in Ref. [8]. Note, in particular, that ∆ΓP also
receives the contribution of a double pole. In Eq. (C19) only the coefficients A1 , B1 , C1 need to be
fitted, since the values of B0 and C0 are already obtained from the QCD fit in Eq. (C18).


                             2.       Renormalisation of the four-fermions operators


   We conclude this section by describing the calculation of the RCs of the complete basis of four-
fermion operators Oi (i = 1, . . . , 5), in the RI'-MOM scheme. In this case, the renormalisation
condition (C10) for the renormalisation matrix at O(αem ) reads:

                                                              1
                                      ∆ZO = −∆ΓχO +             (∆Zq1 + ∆Zq2 + ∆Z` ) ,                             (C20)        1
                                                              2
                                                                                              p             p
where ∆Z` is only e.m. and can be computed in perturbation theory. We remind the reader that
this term is omitted in the actual calculation since its contribution cancels out in the difference
                                                                                                  S
Γ0 (L) − Γpt
          0 (L).
                                                                                              p       1     p
   In Eq. (C20) ∆ΓχO is a matrix expressed by
                                                          p                          p        p             p

               (∆ΓχO )ij = (ZqQCD                                                  QCD
                                                                         X
                                  )−1/2 (ZqQCD )−1/2
                                                                                                      
                              1            2
                                                                                 (ZO   )ik Tr ∆ΛSOk POj .          (C21)
                                                                        k=1,...,5
                                                                    S
As in the case of bilinear operators, the correction to the amputated Green function gets two kind
                                                          p                1         p        p             p

of contributions,                                                                                     1

                        p                        p    p                              p        p             p
                                                    †  p                              p
     ∆ΛOi   = ∆Σq2 (p) GQCD
                        Oi (p)γ5 hS
                                                QCD      −1
                                                      (p)i          γS 5 + hS QCD (p)i−1 GQCD        †
                                                                                          Oi (p)γ5 ∆Σq1 (p) γ5 +
                                                                †
                      (p)i−1 ∆GOi (p) γ5 hS QCD (p)i−1 γ5 ,
               +hS QCD S                                                                                           (C22)
                                                                    S
                        p                        p        p                          p        p             p
                                                           p                          p
and in this case ∆GOi is given by                                           1

                        p                        p        p                          p        p             p
                         p                        p        p                          p
                                  S
               *                                                    S
  ∆GOi (p) =                                          +                                   +                        (C23)
                                  S
                        p                        p        p                          p        p             p
                         p                        p        p                          p

                        p                        p        p                          p        p             p
                         p                        p        p                          p
                                                                                                                   +
                    +             S                   +                                   +                            .

                        p                        p        p                          p        p             p
                         p                        p        p                          p

The fermionic linesp on the left-hand side
                                        p  ofp the diagrams in Eq.
                                                                p (C23) represent the ingoing and
                        p                         p       p                           p
outgoing light quarks. On the right-hand side, the external charged anti-lepton and the neutrino


                        p                        p        p                          p
                         p                        p        p                          p
                                                                                                  59


propagators are drawn for illustration but not actually included in the calculation. For this reason
their amputation is neglected in Eq. (C22). The lepton self-energy is not reported in Eq. (C23)
since its contribution cancels out in the amputation.




     Appendix D: Matching, chirality mixing and fermion operators in the twisted mass
                                             regularisation



   In the main text and in Appendix C we have described the renormalisation of the relevant
operators in the physical basis. This discussion is valid for a generic Wilson-like fermion regulari-
sation. In this appendix we address instead some important aspects peculiar to the twisted mass
fermions used in our numerical calculation. We derive, in particular, the relations between RCs in
the so-called physical and twisted basis, for the bilinear and four-fermion operators considered in
this work.

   The relevant observation is that the lattice action for twisted mass fermions at maximal twist
in the twisted basis only differs from the standard Wilson fermion lattice action for the twisted
rotation of the fermion mass term. The two actions become identical in the chiral limit. It then
follows that, in any mass-independent renormalisation scheme, the RCs for twisted mass operators
in the twisted basis are the same as those of the corresponding operators with standard Wilson
fermions. It is customary to denote these RCs, for a generic operator O, as ZO . They are valid for
both standard Wilson and twisted mass operators in the twisted basis and differ, in general, from
                                                                                       (0)
the RCs for twisted mass operators in the physical basis, that we denote here as ZO .

   At maximal twist the rotation from the twisted to the physical basis for both quark and lepton
fields is given by



                                 1                               1
                     qtwisted = √ (1 + iγ5 rq ) q ,   `twisted = √ (1 + iγ5 r` ) ` ,            (D1)
                                  2                               2



where q and ` are the quark and lepton fields in the physical basis and rq and r` are the corre-
sponding r-parameters. In our simulations we use opposite values of the r-parameter for the two
                                                                                                           60


valence quarks, r2 = −r1 (ri = ±1). The quark and lepton bilinears then transform as

                        [q 2 γµ (1 ± γ5 )q1 ]twisted = ±ir1 [q 2 γµ (1 ± γ5 )q1 ] ,

                            [q 2 (1 ± γ5 )q1 ]twisted = [q 2 (1 ± γ5 )q1 ] ,

                       [q 2 σµν (1 + γ5 )q1 ]twisted = [q 2 σµν (1 + γ5 )q1 ]
                                                         1
                            [νγµ (1 − γ5 )`]twisted = √ (1 − ir` ) [νγµ (1 − γ5 )`] ,                    (D2)
                                                          2
                                                         1
                              [ν(1 + γ5 )`]twisted = √ (1 + ir` ) [ν(1 + γ5 )`]
                                                          2
                                                         1
                          [νσµν (1 + γ5 )`]twisted = √ (1 + ir` ) [νσµν (1 + γ5 )`] .
                                                          2
   From Eqs. (D2) one readily derives the relations between the quark vector and axial vector
current in the two basis,

                       (Vµ )twisted = [q 2 γµ q1 ]twisted = i r1 [q 2 γµ γ5 q1 ] = i r1 Aµ ,

                       (Aµ )twisted = [q 2 γµ γ5 q1 ]twisted = i r1 [q 2 γµ q1 ] = i r1 Vµ ,             (D3)

which, in turn, determine the relation between the RCs in the two basis

                          (0)
                  V̂µ = ZV Vµ = −i r1 (Âµ )twisted = −i r1 ZA (Aµ )twisted = ZA Vµ ,
                          (0)
                  Âµ = ZA Aµ = −i r1 (V̂µ )twisted = −i r1 ZV (Vµ )twisted = ZV Aµ ,                    (D4)

                                                                                                          (0)
where Ô denotes the generic renormalised operator. One then sees from Eq. (D4) that the RC ZV
of the vector current in the physical basis, with r1 = −r2 , is simply the RC of the axial current
in the twisted basis, which in turn is just ZA computed with Wilson fermions in the chiral limit.
                (0)
Analogously, ZA in the physical basis, with r1 = −r2 , corresponds to ZV computed with Wilson
fermions in the chiral limit.
   From the transformations (D2) one can also derive the relations between the four-fermion op-
erators O1 − O5 of Eq. (24) and (73) in the physical and twisted basis

                            i                                            i
          (O1 )twisted = − √ r1 (1 − ir` ) O1 ,                  O1 = + √ r1 (1 + ir` ) (O1 )twisted ,
                             2                                            2
                            i                                            i
          (O2 )twisted = + √ r1 (1 − ir` ) O2 ,                  O2 = − √ r1 (1 + ir` ) (O2 )twisted ,
                             2                                            2
                          1                                            1
          (O3 )twisted = √ (1 + ir` ) O3 ,                       O3 = √ (1 − ir` ) (O3 )twisted ,        (D5)
                           2                                            2
                          1                                            1
          (O4 )twisted = √ (1 + ir` ) O4 ,                       O4 = √ (1 − ir` ) (O4 )twisted ,
                           2                                            2
                          1                                            1
          (O5 )twisted = √ (1 + ir` ) O5 ,                       O5 = √ (1 − ir` ) (O5 )twisted .
                           2                                            2
                                                                                                         61


We can then obtain the relation between the renormalisation matrix in the physical basis, Z (0) ,
and the corresponding matrix Z for standard Wilson fermions. In particular, for the weak operator
O1 one finds
                 X  (0)      i                               i                X
    Ô1 =          Z1j Oj = √ r1 (1 + ir` ) (Ô1 )twisted = √ r1 (1 + ir` )           Z1j (Oj )twisted =
         j=1,...,5
                              2                               2             j=1,...,5
                                                                                                   
          i                    i                                     1                X
       = √ r1 (1 + ir` ) − √ r1 (1 − ir` ) (Z11 O1 − Z12 O2 ) + √ (1 + ir` )                Z1j Oj  =
           2                    2                                     2              j=3,4,5
                                 X
       = Z11 O1 − Z12 O2 − r        Z1j Oj ,                                                            (D6)
                                  j=3,4,5

with r ≡ r1 r` . Therefore

           (0)          (0)                  (0)                (0)               (0)
      Z11 = Z11 ,     Z12 = −Z12 ,          Z13 = −r Z13 ,     Z14 = −r Z14 ,   Z15 = −r Z15 .        (D7)

Eq. (D7) shows in particular that the mixing coefficients Z13,14,15 for the operators O3,4,5 are pro-
portional to r ≡ r1 r` . Thus, we can eliminate the mixing with these operators by simply averaging
the numerical results over the two possible values r = ±1.
   In order to illustrate the above point, using the results of Ref. [11] obtained in perturbation
                                            QED          (0)
theory at order O(αs0 ), the coefficients ∆Z1j  = Z1j /(αem /4π) are explicitly given in the physical
basis by

    QED                         QED                      QED                      QED
  ∆Z12  = −0.5357 ,           ∆Z13  = −1.6072 r ,      ∆Z14  = 3.2143 r ,       ∆Z15  = 0.8036 r .    (D8)




 [1] N. Cabibbo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 10 (1963) 531.
    M. Kobayashi and T. Maskawa, Prog. Theor. Phys. 49 (1973) 652.
 [2] D. Giusti, V. Lubicz, G. Martinelli, C. T. Sachrajda, F. Sanfilippo, S. Simula, N. Tantalo and
    C. Tarantino, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120 (2018) no.7, 072001 [arXiv:1711.06537 [hep-lat]].
 [3] S. Aoki et al. [Flavour Lattice Averaging Group], arXiv:1902.08191 [hep-lat].
 [4] G. M. de Divitiis et al., Phys. Rev. D 87 (2013) no.11, 114505 [arXiv:1303.4896 [hep-lat]].
 [5] S. Borsanyi et al., Science 347 (2015) 1452 [arXiv:1406.4088 [hep-lat]].
 [6] P. Boyle, V. Gülpers, J. Harrison, A. Jüttner, C. Lehner, A. Portelli and C. T. Sachrajda, JHEP 1709
    (2017) 153 [arXiv:1706.05293 [hep-lat]].
 [7] M. Hansen, B. Lucini, A. Patella and N. Tantalo, JHEP 1805 (2018) 146 [arXiv:1802.05474 [hep-lat]].
 [8] D. Giusti, V. Lubicz, C. Tarantino, G. Martinelli, S. Sanfilippo, S. Simula and N. Tantalo, Phys. Rev.
    D 95 (2017) no.11, 114504 [arXiv:1704.06561 [hep-lat]].
                                                                                                        62


 [9] G. M. de Divitiis et al., JHEP 1204 (2012) 124 [arXiv:1110.6294 [hep-lat]].
[10] F. Bloch and A. Nordsieck, Phys. Rev. 52 (1937) 54.
[11] N. Carrasco, V. Lubicz, G. Martinelli, C. T. Sachrajda, N. Tantalo, C. Tarantino and M. Testa, Phys.
     Rev. D 91 (2015) no.7, 074506 [arXiv:1502.00257 [hep-lat]].
[12] M. Hayakawa and S. Uno, Prog. Theor. Phys. 120 (2008) 413 [arXiv:0804.2044 [hep-ph]].
[13] A. Patella, PoS LATTICE 2016 (2017) 020 [arXiv:1702.03857 [hep-lat]].
[14] V. Lubicz, G. Martinelli, C. T. Sachrajda, F. Sanfilippo, S. Simula and N. Tantalo, Phys. Rev. D 95
     (2017) no.3, 034504 [arXiv:1611.08497 [hep-lat]].
[15] R. Baron et al. [ETM Coll.], JHEP 1006 (2010) 111 [arXiv:1004.5284 [hep-lat]].
[16] R. Baron et al. [ETM Collaboration], PoS LATTICE 2010 (2010) 123 [arXiv:1101.0518 [hep-lat]].
[17] V. Cirigliano and I. Rosell, JHEP 0710 (2007) 005 [arXiv:0707.4464 [hep-ph]].
[18] A. Sirlin, Nucl. Phys. B 196 (1982) 83.
[19] J. Gasser, A. Rusetsky, I. Scimemi, Eur. Phys. J. C32 (2003) 97-114. [hep-ph/0305260].
[20] M. Tanabashi et al. [Particle Data Group], Phys. Rev. D 98 (2018) no.3, 030001.
[21] J. Hardy and I. S. Towner, PoS CKM 2016 (2016) 028.
[22] D. Giusti, V. Lubicz, G. Martinelli, C. Sachrajda, F. Sanfilippo, S. Simula and N. Tantalo, PoS LAT-
     TICE 2018 (2019) 266 [arXiv:1811.06364 [hep-lat]].
[23] M. Bochicchio, L. Maiani, G. Martinelli, G. C. Rossi and M. Testa, Nucl. Phys. B 262 (1985) 331.
[24] B. Lucini, A. Patella, A. Ramos and N. Tantalo, JHEP 1602 (2016) 076 [arXiv:1509.01636 [hep-th]].
[25] V. Cirigliano and H. Neufeld, Phys. Lett. B 700 (2011) 7 [arXiv:1102.0563 [hep-ph]].
[26] J. L. Rosner, S. Stone and R. S. Van de Water, Submitted to: Particle Data Book [arXiv:1509.02220
     [hep-ph]].
[27] J. Gasser and G. R. S. Zarnauskas, Phys. Lett. B 693 (2010) 122 [arXiv:1008.3479 [hep-ph]].
[28] N. Carrasco et al. [ETM Coll.], Nucl. Phys. B 887 (2014) 19 [arXiv:1403.4504 [hep-lat]].
[29] M. Di Carlo et al., in preparation.
[30] G. Martinelli and Y. C. Zhang, Phys. Lett. 123B (1983) 433.
[31] S. Aoki, K. i. Nagai, Y. Taniguchi and A. Ukawa, Phys. Rev. D 58 (1998) 074505 [hep-lat/9802034].
[32] D. Giusti, V. Lubicz, G. Martinelli, F. Sanfilippo and S. Simula, JHEP 1710 (2017) 157
     [arXiv:1707.03019 [hep-lat]].
[33] P. F. Bedaque, Phys. Lett. B 593 (2004) 82 [nucl-th/0402051].
[34] G. M. de Divitiis, R. Petronzio and N. Tantalo, Phys. Lett. B 595 (2004) 408 [hep-lat/0405002].
[35] G. Martinelli, C. Pittori, C. T. Sachrajda, M. Testa and A. Vladikas, Nucl. Phys. B 445 (1995) 81
     [hep-lat/9411010].
[36] A. J. Buras, M. Jamin and M. E. Lautenbacher, Nucl. Phys. B 408, 209 (1993) [hep-ph/9303284].
[37] M. Ciuchini, E. Franco, G. Martinelli and L. Reina, Nucl. Phys. B 415, 403 (1994) [hep-ph/9304257].
[38] J. Brod and M. Gorbahn, Phys. Rev. D 78 (2008) 034006 [arXiv:0805.4119 [hep-ph]].
[39] N. Tantalo, V. Lubicz, G. Martinelli, C. T. Sachrajda, F. Sanfilippo and S. Simula, arXiv:1612.00199
                                                                                                      63


    [hep-lat].
[40] J. Bijnens and N. Danielsson, Phys. Rev. D 75 (2007) 014505 [hep-lat/0610127].
[41] R. Frezzotti and G. C. Rossi, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 128 (2004) 193 [hep-lat/0311008].
[42] J. C. Hardy and I. S. Towner, Phys. Rev. C 91 (2015) no.2, 025501 [arXiv:1411.5987 [nucl-ex]].
[43] R. J. Dowdall, C. T. H. Davies, G. P. Lepage and C. McNeile, Phys. Rev. D 88 (2013) 074504
    [arXiv:1303.1670 [hep-lat]].
[44] N. Carrasco et al., Phys. Rev. D 91 (2015) no.5, 054507 [arXiv:1411.7908 [hep-lat]].
[45] A. Bazavov et al., Phys. Rev. D 98 (2018) no.7, 074512 [arXiv:1712.09262 [hep-lat]].
[46] C. Y. Seng, M. Gorchtein, H. H. Patel and M. J. Ramsey-Musolf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 (2018) no.24,
    241804 [arXiv:1807.10197 [hep-ph]].
[47] D. Giusti, V. Lubicz, G. Martinelli, F. Sanfilippo, S. Simula, N. Tantalo and C. Tarantino, EPJ Web
    Conf. 175 (2018) 06002 [arXiv:1710.06633 [hep-lat]].
[48] Y. Iwasaki, Nucl. Phys. B 258 (1985) 141.
[49] R. Frezzotti et al. [Alpha Collaboration], JHEP 0108 (2001) 058 [hep-lat/0101001].
[50] R. Frezzotti and G. C. Rossi, JHEP 0408 (2004) 007 [hep-lat/0306014].
[51] R. Frezzotti and G. C. Rossi, JHEP 0410 (2004) 070 [hep-lat/0407002].
[52] K. Osterwalder and E. Seiler, Annals Phys. 110 (1978) 440.
[53] N. H. Christ et al. [RBC and UKQCD Collaborations], Phys. Rev. D 93 (2016) no.11, 114517
    [arXiv:1605.04442 [hep-lat]].
[54] C. Sturm, Y. Aoki, N. H. Christ, T. Izubuchi, C. T. C. Sachrajda and A. Soni, Phys. Rev. D 80 (2009)
    014501 doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.80.014501 [arXiv:0901.2599 [hep-ph]].
