TIGHT BINDING BOOK

UNIVERSAL

LIBRARY

OU 162856

LIBRARY

UNIVERSAL

PLATE I

Ritchey

SPIRAL NEBULA
Messier ioi in Ursa Major. Receding velocity, 300 km. per sec.
Estimated distance, 1,300,000 light-years.

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
by

SIR ARTHUR EDDINGTON
MA, D.Sc., LL.D., F.R.S.
Plumian Professor of Astronomy in the
University of Cambridge

CAMBRIDGE
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS
1933

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN

PREFACE
This book is an expanded version of a public lecture
delivered at the meeting of the International Astronomical Union at Cambridge (Massachusetts) in
September 1932. It also furnished the subject-matter
of a series of three addresses which were broadcast in
the United States shortly afterwards.
I deal with the view now tentatively held that the
whole material universe of stars and galaxies of stars
is dispersing, the galaxies scattering apart so as to
occupy an ever-increasing volume. But I deal with
it not as an end in itself.^To take an analogy from
detective fiction, it is the clue not the criminal) The
5
“ hidden hand’ in my story is the cgsmical constant. In
Chapter rv we see that the investigation of the expanding universe falls into line with other methods
of inquiry, so that we appear to be closing down on the
capture of this most elusive constant of nature.
The subject is of especial interest, since it lies at the
meeting point of astronomy, relativity and wavemechanics. Any genuine progress will have important
reactions on all three.
I am, treating of very recent developments; and
investigations both on the theoretical and on the
observational side are still in progress which are likely
to teach us much more and may modify our views.
It might be argued that at this stage a book is pre-

v

PREFACE
mature ^but I have ventured to assume that in the
mystery stories of science the reader may be as much
interested in the finding and weaving together of clues
for the detection of the criminal as in his final capture

and execution^)
Suppose then that half-way through the chase one
of the blundering detectives is here summing up what
has been found out and where the strongest suspicion
lies. You read his discussion, not because you have
confidence that he has reached the point of identifying
the criminal, but because it is presumably a necessary
stage in the solution of the mystery. In real life
(unlike the stories) it is possible that the suspicion
already rests on the right person; be that as it may,
it is worth while to set forth and analyse the present
state of the inquiry.

In the astronomical part of the book

I

follow

generally the theory of Lemaitre ; there is a difference
in our views of evolution (see p. 59), but from my
point of view this is a very minor divergence. Several

counter theories of the apparent recession of the
nebulae have been proposed; an explanation of my
general attitude towards them is given on p. 61.
The book will be found to be of uneven difficulty;
and the reader who finds himself out of his depth in
Chapter 11 may discover that the going becomes easier
further on. I have endeavoured to make the explanations as simple as possible ; but the book is not
intended solely as a semipopular exposition, and I
have not hesitated to plunge into matters of extreme
difficulty when it seemed necessary for an adequate
discussion of the problem.
vi

:

PREFACE
In remembrance of the occasion of its delivery,
I add here the opening words of the lecture

This is an International Conference and I have chosen an
I shall speak of the theoretical work of
Einstein of Germany, de Sitter of Holland, Lemaitre of Belgium.
For observational data I turn to the Americans, Slipher, Hubble,
Humason, recalling however that the vitally important datum
of distance is found by a method which we owe to Hertzsprung
of Denmark. As I must not trouble you with mathematical
analysis, I have to pass over Levi-Civita of Italy whose methods
and ideas we employ. But I must refer especially to the new
interest which arises in the subject through its linkage to wavemechanics; as a representative name in wave-mechanics I mention that of its originator, de Broglie of France.
My subject disperses the galaxies, but it unites the earth.
May no “cosmical repulsion” intervene to sunder us!
international subject.

A. S. E.

CAMBRIDGE, ENGLAND
October 1932

Vll

6

CONTENTS

......

Preface

page v

CHAPTER I

The Recession of the Galaxies

i

.

.

....

CHAPTER II
Spherical Space

29

CHAPTER III
Features of the Expanding Universe

.

66

CHAPTER IV

The Universe and the Atom
Index

.

.

.

.

.

.

93

.127

.

....
PLATE I

Spiral Nebula

PLATE II
Spectra of Nebulae

.

frontispiece

facing page 1

Masters, I am to discourse wonders

but ask me not
what; for if I tell you, I am no true Athenian. I will
tell you everything, right as it fell out.
:

A Midsummer-Night's Dream

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
Chapter I

THE RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES
Pricked out with less and greater lights, between the poles of the
Way so gleameth white as to set very sages
Dante, Paradiso

universe, the Milky
questioning.

I

Tk«

first hint of an “ expanding universe” is contained in a paper published in November 1917 by
Prof. W. de Sitter. Einstein’s general theory of relativity had been published two years before, but it had
not yet attained notoriety it was not until the eclipse
expeditions of 1919 obtained confirmation of its prediction of the bending of light that public interest was
aroused. Meanwhile many investigators had been
examining the various consequences of the new theory.
;

Prominent among them was de Sitter who was interested especially in the astronomical consequences.

In the course of a highly technical discussion he found
that the relativity theory led to an expectation that
the most remote celestial objects would be moving away from
us, or at least that they would deceive the observer
into thinking that they were moving away.
De Sitter was perhaps a tipster rather than a
prophet. He would not promise anything definitely;
but he suggested that we ought to keep a look out for
the recession as a rather likely phenomenon. Theory
was at the cross-roads, and desired guidance from
observation as to which of two possible courses should

EEU

I

I

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
be pursued. If astronomers were to find a general
motion of recession of the most distant objects visible,
it would be a strong indication that the road rather
fancied by de Sitter was the one to follow. If not, the
inference was more doubtful it might mean that the
other road should be followed, or it might only mean
that our astronomical survey had not yet been extended to sufficient distance.
Subsequent researches in the field opened up by
de Sitter’s pioneer investigation have developed and
modified his theory. A new point of view has been
;

discovered which renders the results less paradoxical

than they appeared originally. We are still led to
expect a recession of remote objects, though the
recession now predicted is not the original de Sitter
effect, which has turned out to be of minor importance.
It varies with the distance according to a different
law. Moreover, it is a genuine receding motion of remote objects, whereas the phenomenon predicted by
de Sitter might be regarded as an imitation recession,

and generally was so regarded.

We shall put aside theory for the present, and
consider first what astronomical observation tells us.
Practically all that I have to relate has been discovered
since de Sitter’s forecast, much of it within the last four
years. These observational results are in some ways so

disturbing that there is a natural hesitation in accepting them at their face value. But they have not come

upon us like a bolt from the blue, since theorists for
the last fifteen years have been half expecting that a
study of the most remote objects of the universe might
yield a rather sensational development.
2

THE RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES
The spiral nebulae are the most remote objects
known. Rough m easurements of their distances have
beeii^txi.adej and we place them from i million to
150 milli on light years away; they doubtless extend
far beyond the latter distance, but at present it is the
limit of our survey. The name “nebula” is applied to
different classes of astronomical objects which have
nothing in

common except a cloudy appearance.

There are gaseous nebulae shown by their spectrum to
be extremely rarefied gas, either attached to and controlled by a single star or spreading irregularly through
,

a region containing many stars; these are not particularly remote. ^b^ s^iral nebulae on the other hand
are extra-galactic objects that is to say, they lie beyond
the limits of the Milky Way aggregation of stars which
is the system to which our sun belongs, and are
separated from it by wide gulfs of empty space. When
we have taken together the sun and all the naked-eye
stars and many hundreds of millions of telescopic stars,
we have not reached the end of things; we have explored only one island one oasis in the desert of
space. Other islands lie beyond. It is possible with
the naked eye to make out a hazy patch of light in the
constellation Andromeda which is one of the other
islands. A telescope shows many more
an archipelago
of island galaxies stretching away one behind another
until our sight fails. It is these island galaxies which
appear to us as spiral nebulae.
Each island system is believed to be an aggregation
of thousands of millions of stars with a general resemblance to our own Milky Way system. As in our
own system there may be along with the stars great
;

—

—

*

—
THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
tracts of nebulosity, sometimes luminous, sometimes
dark and obscuring. Many of the nearest systems
are seen to have a beautiful double-spiral form (see

Frontispiece) ; and it is believed that the coils of the

Milky Way would give the same spiral appearance
to our own system if it were viewed from outside.
The term “ spiral nebula 55 is, however, to be regarded
as a name rather than a description, for it is generally

applied to

all

external galaxies whether they show

traces of spiral structure or not.

The island systems are exceedingly numerous. From
sample counts it is estimated that more than a million
of them are within reach of our present telescopes. If
the theory treated in this book is to be trusted, the total
number of them must be of the order 100,000,000,000.
In order to fix in our minds the vastness of the
system that we shall have to consider, I will give you
a “ celestial multiplication table \ We start with a star
as the unit most familiar to us, a globe comparable to
5

the sun. Then

A hundred thousand million Stars make one
Galaxy;

A hundred thousand million Galaxies make one
Universe.

These figures may not be very trustworthy, but I
think they give a correct impression.
The lesson of humility has so often been brought

home to us in astronomy that we almost automatically
adopt the view that our own galaxy is not specially

—

not more important in the scheme of
nature than the millions of other island galaxies. But
distinguished

4

THE RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES
astronomical observation scarcely seems to bear this
out. According to the present measurements the spiral
nebulae, though bearing a general resemblance to our
Milky Way system, are distinctly smaller. It has been
said that if the spiral nebulae are islands, our own
galaxy is a continent. I suppose that my humility has
become a middle-class pride, for I rather dislike the
imputation that we belong to the aristocracy of the
universe. The earth is a middle-class planet, not a
giant like Jupiter, nor yet one of the smaller vermin
like the minor planets. The sun is a middling sort of
star, not a giant like Capella but well above the lowest
classes. So it seems wrong that we should happen to
belong to an altogether exceptional galaxy. Frankly
I do not believe it; it would be too much of a coincidence. I think that this relation of the Milky Way
to the other galaxies is a subject on which more light
will be thrown by further observational research, and
that ultimately we shall find that there are many
galaxies of a size equal to and surpassing our own.
Meanwhile the question does not much affect the
present discussion. If we are in a privileged position,
we shall not presume upon it.
I promised to leave aside theory for the present, but
I must revert to it for a moment to try to focus our
conception of this super-system of galaxies. It is a
vista not only of space but of time. A faint cluster of
nebulae in Gemini, which at present marks the limit
of our soundings of space, takes us back 150 million
years into the past to the time when the light now
reaching us started on its journey across the gulf of
spacefThusjwe can.scarcely isolate the thought of vast

—

:

—

—

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
extension from the thought of time and change; and
the problem of form and organisation becomes merged
in the problem of origin and development.)

We must,

suppose, imagine the island galaxies to have been

I

formed by gradual condensation of primordial matter.
Perhaps in the first stage only the rudiments of matter
existed protons and electrons traversing the void
and the evolution of the elements has progressed

—

simultaneously with the evolution of worlds. Slight
condensations occurring here and there by accident

would by their gravitating power draw more particles
to themselves. Some would quickly disperse again,
but some would become firmly established
Champions fierce.
Strive here for mastery, and to battle bring

.To whom these most adhere.
He rules a moment Chaos umpire sits.
And by decision more embroils the fray
Their embryon atoms.

.

.

:

By which he reigns

:

next him, high arbiter,

Chance governs all.*

By such conflict the matter of the universe would
slowly be collected into islands, leaving comparatively

empty spaces from which it had been drained away.
We think that one of these original islands has become
our Milky Way system, having subdivided again and
again into millions of stars. The other islands similarly
4eveloped into galaxies, which we see to-day shining
as spiral nebulae. It is to these prime units of subdivision ojf the material universe that our discussion
here will relate.
i

* Paradise Lost , Book n.

6

THE RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES
II

nebula is not too faint it is possible to
measure its radial velocity in the line of sight by
measuring the shift of the lines in its spectrum.
A valuable early series of such determinations was
made by Prof. V. M. Slipher at the Lowell Observatory.

If a spiral

More recently the distances of some of the spiral
nebulae have been determined by a fairly trustworthy
method. In the nearest spirals it is possible to make
out some of the individual stars; but only the most
luminous stars, some hundreds or thousands of times
brighter than the sun, can be seen at so great a distance. Fortunately among the very brightest of the
stars there is a particularly useful class called the
Qephcid variables. They vary periodically in brightness owing to an actual pulsation or physical change
of the star, the period being anything from a few hours
to a few weeks. It has been ascertained from observational study that Cepheids which have the same period
are nearly alike in their other properties

—luminosity,

radius, spectral type, etc. The period is thus a badge,
easily recognisable at a distance, which labels the star

For example, if the
have a period of io days, we immediately recognise it as a star of luminosity 950 times
greater than the sun. Knowing then its real brightness
we put the question, How far off must it be situated
so as to be reduced to the faint point of light which we
see? The answer gives the distance of the star and of
the galaxy in which it lies. This method uses the
Cepheid variables as standard candles. If you see a
standard candle anywhere and note how bright it
as having a particular luminosity.

star is seen to

7

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
appears to you, you can calculate how far off it is; in
‘standard
candle” in the midst of a nebula, notes its apparent
brightness or magnitude, and deduces the distance of
the nebula.
Dr E. P. Hubble at Mount Wilson Observatory was
able to discover Cepheid variables in two or three of
the nearest spiral nebulae, and so obtained the first
real measurement of their distances. Unfortunately
this method is not available for the more distant
galaxies, and he has had to use more indirect devices
for extending the survey. I think that, apart from
those distances actually determined by the Cepheid
method, we must regard the distances assigned to the
spiral nebulae as rather risky estimates; but there is
reason to believe that they cannot be entirely misleading, and we shall provisionally accept them here.
When the collected data as to radial velocities and
distances are examined a very interesting feature is
revealed. The velocities are large, generally very
much larger than ordinary stellar velocities. The more
distant nebulae have the bigger velocities the results
seem to agree very well with a linear law of increase,
the velocity being simply proportional to the distance.
the same way an astronomer observes his

4

;

The most striking feature is that the galaxies are
almost unanimously running away from us.
Let us consider especially the last result and state
the observational evidence in more detail. The light

of the spiral nebulae, being compounded of the light
of a great variety of stars, does not give a good spectrum
for measurement. For this reason and because of its
faintness the deduced velocities are inaccurate as
8

THE RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES
judged by ordinary standards; but, except for the
nearest nebulae, the velocities are themselves so enor-

mous that the error of measurement is comparatively
unimportant. Taking the results as published, the
present position is that line-of-sight velocities of about
90 galaxies have been measured, and of these only five
are moving towards us. At first sight it may seem
wrong to pass over the minority as insignificant. But
the five exceptions are confined to the very nearest of
the nebulae, and their approaching velocities are not
large. Since the phenomenon is one which depends
on distance (the effect increasing with distance), it is
natural that we should have to go out to a fair distance before we find it strong enough to prevail over
all

other effects (including observational error) so as

to

display

itself

uniformly.

The five approaching

velocities are at least partly attributable to the use of

an inappropriate standard of reference. Line-of-sight
velocities as published are relative to the sun; but it

would be more satisfactory to discuss the velocities
relative to our Milky Way system as a whole. J,t has
been found that the sun is pursuing an orbit round
the centre of the Milky Way system and has an orbital
speedTrom 200 to 300 kilometres per second.WKen

we correct for this so as to obtain the velocities referred to our galaxy as a whole, the approaching

reduced or disappear. I think it will
turn out ultimately that, after all corrections are
applied, these nearest nebulae have small receding
velocities; for the existence of even one genuine
velocities are

exception would be difficult to explain.
In saying that the speeds of the nebulae are large,

9

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
the velocities of ordinary stars are our standard of

comparison. For stars in our neighbourhood the individual speed averages io to 50 km. per sec. If the
speed exceeds 100 km. per sec. the star is described as
a “ runaway”. (We do not here include the abovementioned orbital motion about the centre of the
galaxy which is shared by all stars in the neighbourhood of the sun.) Slipher’s first determination of the
radial velocities of 40 nebulae included a dozen with
velocities from 800-1800 km. per sec. The survey has
since been extended to fainter and more distant nebulae
by M. L. Humason at Mount Wilson Observatory,
and much higher velocities have been found. The
speed record is continually being broken. The present
holder of the trophy is a nebula forming one of a faint
cluster in the constellation Gemini, which is receding
with a velocity of 2 5, 000 km. per sec. (15,000 miles per
second). This is about the speed of an Alpha particle.
Its distance is estimated at 150,000,000 light-years.
Doubtless a faster and more distant nebula will have
been announced by the time these words are in print.
The simple proportionality of speed to distance was
first found by Hubble in 1929. This law is also predicted by relativity theory. According to the original
investigation of de Sitter a velocity proportional to

the square of the distance would have been expected;

but the theory had become better understood since
then, and it was already known (though perhaps only
to a few*) that simple proportionality to the distance

was the correct theoretical result.
* I was not myself aware of it in 1 929. For the nature of the change,
see p. 49.

IO

;

THE RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES
According to Hubble’s most recent determination,
the speed of recession amounts to 550 km. per sec. per
megaparsec.*

That is to say, a nebula at 1 mega-

parsec distance should have a speed 550 km. per sec.
at 10 megaparsecs distance, 5500 km. per sec.; and
It has been claimed that this determination is

so on.

accurate to 20 per cent., but I do not think many
astronomers take so optimistic a view. The uncertainty

almost entirely in the scale of nebular

lies

distances; there are weak links in the long chain of

connection between these vast distances and our terrestrial standard metre. Corrections which have been
suggested mostly tend to increase the result; and
perhaps the fairest statement is that the velocity of
recession is probably between 500 and 1000 km. per
sec. per mp.
Specimens of the spectra from which these radial
velocities are obtained are shown in Plate II. In the
lower four photographs the spectra of the nebulae
are the torpedo-shaped black patches they have terrestrial comparison spectra above and below, which
are used to place them in correct vertical allignment.
Practically the only recognisable features in the nebulines
two interruptions
and
lar spectra are the
in the tail of the torpedo where it is fading away. It
;

H

K

—

will be seen that these interruptions move to the right,
i.e.

to the red end of the spectrum, as we go down the

plate.

It is this displacement which is measured and

gives the receding velocities stated at the foot of the
plate.
*

1

megaparsec = 3'26 million light-years.

II

!

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
III

We can exclude the spiral nebulae which are more or
whether they shall leave us by
drawing a sphere of rather more than a million lightyears radius round our galaxy. In the region beyond,

less hesitating as to

more than 80 have been observed to be moving outwards , and
not one has been found coming in to take their place.

The inference is that in the course of time all the
nebulae will withdraw to a greater distance,
evacuating the part of space that we now survey,
pitimately they will be out of reach of our telescopes
unless telescopic power is increased to correspond.
I find that the observer of nebulae will have to double
the aperture of his telescope every 1 300 million years
merely to keep up with their recession. If we have
been thinking that the human race has still billions of
years before it in which to find out all that can be
found out about the universe, we must count the
problem of the spiral nebulae as one of urgency. ]Let
us make haste to study them before they disappear
spiral

into tKe ‘distance

The unanimity with which the galaxies are running
away looks almost as though they had a pointed
aversion to us. We wonder why we should be shunned
though our system were a plague spot in the
But that is too hasty an inference, and
there is really no reason to think that the animus is
especially directed against our galaxy. If this lectureroom were to expand to twice its present size, the
seats all separating from each other in proportion, you
would notice that everyone had moved away from you.
Your neighbour who was 2 feet away is now 4 feet
as

universe.

12

THE RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES
away; the man over yonder who was 40 feet away is

now 80 feet away.

It is not you they are avoiding;
everyone is having the same experience. In a general
dispersal or expansion every individual observes
every other individual to be moving away from him.
The law of a general uniform expansion is that each
individual recedes from you at a rate proportional

to his distance from you

—precisely the law which we

observe in the receding motions of the spiral nebulae.*
We shall therefore no longer regard the phenomenon as a movement away from our galaxy. It is
a general scattering apart, having no particular centre
of dispersal.
I do not wish to insist on these observational facts
dogmatically. It is granted that there is a possibility
of error and misinterpretation. The survey is just beginning, and things may appear in a different light as
it proceeds. But if you ask what is the picture of the
universe now in the minds of those who have been

engaged in practical exploration of its large-scale
features
men not likely to be moved overmuch by
ideas of bending of space or the gauge-invariance of
the Riemann-phristoffel tensor I have given you
their answer. ^Their picture is the picture of an

—

—

expanding universe

.

The super-system of the galaxies is

dispersing as a puff of smoke disperses.

Sometimes I

wonder whether there may not be a greater scale of
existence of things, in which it is no more than a puff
of smoke.
* Our observations determine the relative velocity of recession of
a nebula, i.e. the rate at which its distance from us is increasing.
They do not indicate whether the nebula is moving away from us or
we are moving away from the nebula.

13

;

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
For the present

I

make no

reference

any

to

expansion of space
I am speaking of nothing more
recondite than the expansion or dispersal of a material
system. Except for the large scale of the phenomenon
the expansion of the universe is as commonplace as
the expansion of a gas. But nevertheless it gives very
serious food for thought. It is perhaps in keeping with
the universal change we see around us that time
should set a term even to the greatest system of all
but what is startling is the rate at which it is found to
be melting away. We do not look for immutability,
but we had certainly expected to find a permanence
greater than that of terrestrial conditions. But it
would almost seem that the earth alters less rapidly
than the heavens. The galaxies separate to double
their original distances in 1300 million years. That is
only of the order of geological time; it is approximately the age assigned to the older rocks in the
earth’s crust. This is a rude awakening from our dream
of leisured evolution through billions of years.*
Such a conclusion is not to be accepted lightly and
those who have cast about for some other interpretation of what seems to have been observed have displayed no more than a proper caution. If the apparent
recession of the spiral nebulae is treated as an isolated
discovery it is too slender a thread on which to hang
far-reaching conclusions; we can only state the bare
results of observation, contemplate without much conviction the amazing possibility they suggest, and
await further information on the subject.
;

* I

may remind American readers that the English billion is a

million million.

14

THE RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES
If that is not my own attitude,

it is

because the

motion of the remote nebulae does not present itself
to me as an isolated discovery. Following de Sitter,
I have for fifteen years been awaiting these observational results to see how far they would fall into line
with and help to develop the physical theory, which
though at first merely suggestive has become much

more cogent in the intervening years. After Prof.
Weyl’s famous extension of the relativity theory I
became convinced that the scale of structure of atoms
and electrons is determined by the same physical
agent that was concerned in de Sitter’s prediction.
So that hope of progress of a really fundamental kind
in our understanding of electrons, protons and quanta
is bound up with this investigation of the motions of
remote galaxies. Therefore when Dr Hubble hands
over a key which he has picked up in intergalactic
space, I am not among those who are turning it over
and over unable to decide from the look of it whether
it is good metal or base metal. The question for me is,
\yill it unlock the door?
( If the observed radial velocities are accepted as
genuine, there is no evading the conclusion that the
nebulae are rapidly dispersing.; The velocities are
direct evidence of a hustle which (according to the
usual ideas of the rate of evolutionary change) is out
of keeping with the character of our staid old universe.
Thus the only way of avoiding a great upset of ideas
would be to explain away these radial velocities as
spurious. What is actually observed is a shifting of the
spectrum of the nebula towards the red. Such a shift
is commonly caused by the. Doppler, effect of a re15

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
ceding velocity, in the same way that the pitch of a
receding whistle is lowered; but other causes are
imaginable. The reddening signifies lower frequency
of the light-waves and (in accordance with quantum
theory) lower energy so that if for any cause a lightquantum loses some of its energy in travelling to reach
us, the reddening is accounted for without assuming
any velocity of the source. For example, the light
coming to us from an atom on the sun uses up some of
its energy in escaping from the sun’s gravitational attraction, and consequently becomes slightly reddened
as compared with the light of a terrestrial atom which
does not suffer this loss; this is the well-kno„wn red
shift predicted by Einstein.
In one respect this hypothesis of the loss of energy
of nebular light is attractive. If the loss occurs during
the passage of the light from the nebula to the observer, we should expect it to be proportional to the
distance; thus the red-shift, misinterpreted as a velocity, should be proportional to the distance
which
is the law actually found. But on the other hand there
is nothing in the existing theory of light (wave theory
or quantum theory) which justifies the assumption of
such a loss. We cannot without undue dogmatism
exclude the possibility of modifications of the existing
theory. Light is a queer thing queerer than we
imagined twenty years ago but I should be surprised
if it is as queer as all that.
A theory put forward by Dr Zwicky, that light, by
its gravitational effects, parts with its energy to the
material particles thinly strewn in intergalactic space
which it passes on its way, at one time attracted atten;

—

—

16

—

NGG.
4-8S4-

Huniason

SPECTRA OF NEBULAE
showing lines shifted to the red

(to the right), interpreted as

velocity of recession.
( i )

(Seep, n.)

Sky; velocity, nil. (2) N.G.G. 221; velocity, - 1

(3)

85 km. per sec.
N.G.G. 385; velocity, +4900 km. per sec.
(4) N.G.G.
(5) Nebula in Leo;

4884; velocity, + 6700 km. per sec.
velocity, + 19,700 km. per sec.

THE RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES
tion.

But the numerical accordance alleged to support
be fallacious, and the sug-

his theory turned out to

gestion seems definitely untenable.
I think then we have no excuse for doubting the
genuineness of the observed velocities except in so
far as they share the general uncertainty that surrounds all our attempts to probe into the secrets of

—

nature.

IV

Now let us turn to theory.

A scientist commonly professes to base his beliefs
on observations, not theories. Theories, it is said, are
useful in suggesting new ideas and new lines of in55
vestigation for the experimenter; but “hard facts
are the only proper ground for conclusion. I have
never come across anyone who carries this profession
into practice certainly not the hard-headed experimentalist, who is the more swayed by his theories
because he is less accustomed to scrutinise them.
Observation is not sufficient. We do not believe our
eyes unless we are first convinced that what they
appear to fell us is credible.
It is better to admit frankly that theory has, and is
entitled to have, an important share in determining
belief. For the reader resolved to eschew theory and
admit only definite observational facts, all astro-

—

nomical books are banned. There are no purely obserAstronomical
vational facts about the heavenly bodies.
measurements are, without exception, measurements
of phenomena occurring in a terrestrial observatory
or station it is only by theory that they are translated
into knowledge of a universe outside.
;

EEU

i7

a

—
THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

When an observer reports that he has discovered a
new star in a certain position, he is probably unaware
that he is going beyond the simple facts of observation.
But he does not intend his announcement to be taken
as a description of certain phenomena that have occurred in his observatory he means that he has located
a celestial body in a definite direction in interstellar
space. He looks on the location as an observational
fact on a surer footing therefore than theoretical
inferences such as have been deduced from Einstein’s
theory. We must break it to him that his supposed
“fact”, far from being purely observational, is
actually an inference based on Einstein’s theory
unless, indeed, he has based it on some earlier theory
which is even more divorced from observational facts.
;

—

The observer has given a theoretical interpretation to
his measurements by assuming for theoretical reasons

that light travels through interstellar space approxi-

mately in a straight line. Perhaps he will reply that,
in assuming the rectilinear propagation of light, he is
not concerned with any theory but is using a fact
experiment. That begs the
an
experiment
under terrestrial conquestion how far
ditions can be extrapolated to apply to interstellar
established

by

direct

space. Surely a reasoned theory is preferable to blind

extrapolation.

But indeed the observer is utterly mis-

taken in supposing that the straightness of rays of light
assumed in astronomy has been verified by terrestrial

experiment. If the rays in interstellar space were no
straighter than they are on the earth,* the direction
in which a star is seen would be no guide to its actual
*

They are deflected by the earth’s gravitational field.

18

THE RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES
position. Light would in fact curl round and come back

again before traversing the distance to the nearest
star.

Our warrant for concluding that the celestial body
is

nearly in the direction in which

it

is

seen,

is

Einstein’s theory, which determines the deviation of
light from a straight line.

Coupled with other theo-

retical deductions as to the density of matter in interstellar space, it allows us to conclude that the deviation

So if we are willing to use

in this case is inappreciable.

both fact and theory as a basis for belief, we can accept
the observer’s announcement; but it is not a “hard
fact of observation ”. Although it is a minor point, we
may also insist that the theory concerned is Einstein’s
theory. There was an earlier theory according to which
light in empty space travels in straight lines in all cir-

cumstances; but since this has been found experimentally to be untrue, it can scarcely be the basis of
our observer’s conclusion. Perhaps, however, the
observer is one of those who do not credit the eclipse
observations of the deflection of light, or who deem

them insufficient ground for quitting the old theory. If
so, he illustrates

my dictum that with the hard-headed

experimentalist the basis of belief is often theory

rather than observation.

My point is that in astronomy it is not a question of
whether we are to rely on observation or on theory.
The so-called facts are in any case theoretical interpretations of the observations. The only question is,

Shall we for this interpretation use the fullest resources

of modern theory?

For my own part I can see no

more reason for preferring the theories of fifty years
i

9

2-2

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
ago than for preferring the observational data of fifty
years ago.

In turning now to the more theoretical side of the
problem of the expanding universe, I do not think
that we should feel that we are stepping from solid
ground into insecurity. Perhaps we are a little safer,
for we no longer depend on the interpretation of one
type of observation; and our theory comes from the
welding together of different lines of physical research.
I do not, however, promise security. An explorer is
jealous of his reputation for proper caution, but he can
never aspire to the quintessence of caution displayed

by the man who entrenches himself at home.

V
In 1 9 1 5 Einstein had by his general theory of relativity
brought a large section of the domain of physics into
good order. The theory covered field-physics which
includes the treatment of matter, electricity, radiation,
energy, etc., on the ordinary macroscopic scale perceptible to our senses, but not the phenomena arising
from the minute subdivision into atoms, electrons,
quanta. For the study of microscopic structure another
great theory was being developed the quantum
theory. At that time it lagged far behind, and even
now it has not reached the clearness and logical per,

—

fection of the relativity theory.

the two theories will meet,

It is recognised that

and that they must ulti-

mately coalesce into one comprehensive theory. The
irst bridge between them was made by Prof. P. A. M.
Dirac in 1928 by his relativity wave-equation of an
dectron. I hope to show in the last chapter that the

20

^
THE RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES
recession of the spiral nebulae leads us to the borderland territory between the two theories, where a
number of interesting problems await solution. At
present, however, we are concerned only with its
relation to the theory of relativity.
The central result of Einstein’s theory was his law
pf gravitation, generally expressed in the form G = o,
which has the merit of brevity if not of lucidity. We
naturally hear most about those rare phenomena in
which Einstein’s law gives results appreciably different
from Newton’s law; but it is to be remembered that
for ordinary practical purposes the two laws come to
the same thing. So if we take G^ v = o to be the law
governing the motions of the spiral nebulae, that is as
much as to say they exert the ordinary Newtonian
attraction on one another varying as the inverse square
of their distance apart. The law throws no light on
why the nebulae are running away from us and from
one another. The tendency would rather be for the
whole system to fall together though this tendency
to collapse might be counteracted as it is in the solar
system, for example.
A year or so later Einstein made a slight amend1

—

ment to his law to meet certain difficulties that he
encountered in his theory. There was just one place
where the theory did not seem to work properly, and
that was

—

infinity.

I think Einstein showed his great-

ness in the simple and drastic way in which he disposed

of difficulties at infinity.

He abolished infinity. He

slightly altered his equations so as to make space at

great distances bend round until it closed up. So that,
if in Einstein’s space you

keep going right on in one
21

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
direction, you do not get to infinity; you find yourself

back at your starting-point again. Since there was no
longer any infinity, there could be no difficulties at
infinity.

q.e.d.

However, at present we are not concerned with this
new kind of space. I only mention it here because I
want to speak of the alteration that Einstein made in
his law of gravitation. The amended law is written
G^ v = A^, and contains a natural constant A called
the cosmical constant The term Ag is called the cosmical
.

The constant is so small that in ordinary applications to the solar system, etc., we set it equal to zero,
term.

and so revert to the original law G v = o. But however small A may be, the amended law presents the
phenomenon of gravitation to us in a new light, and
has greatly helped to an understanding of its real
significance; moreover, we have now reason to think

that A is not so small as to be entirely beyond observation.

The nature of the alteration can be stated as

follows: the original

law stated that a certain geo-

metrical characteristic (<? „) of empty space is always
zero; the revised law states that

it is always in a
constant ratio to another geometrical characteristic

(Sfiv)-

We may say that the first form of the law utterly

dissociates the two characteristics by making one of

them zero and therefore independent of the other; the
second form intimately connects them. Geometers
can invent spaces which have not either of these
properties; but actual space, surveyed by physical
measurement, is not of so unlimited a nature.
We have already said that the original term in the

law gives rise to what is practically the Newtonian
22

THE RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES
attraction between material objects. It is found similarly that the

added term (A^ v ) gives rise to a re-

pulsion directly proportional to the distance. Distance

from what? Distance from anywhere in particular,
distance from the observer. It is a dispersive force
like that which I imagined as scattering apart the
audience in the lecture-room. Each thinks it is
directed away from him. We may say that the repulsion has no centre, or that every point is a centre
;

of repulsion.
Thus in straightening out his law of gravitation to
satisfy certain ideal conditions, Einstein almost inadvertently added a repulsive scattering force to the

Newtonian attraction of bodies. We call this force the
cosmical repulsion for it depends on and is proportional
y

It is utterly imperceptible
within the solar system or between the sun and neighbouring stars. But since it increases proportionately
to the distance we have only to go far enough to find
it appreciable, then strong, and ultimately overwhelming. In practical observation the farthest we
have yet gone is 150 million light-years. Well within

to the cosmical constant.

that distance we find that celestial objects are scattering apart as if under a dispersive force. Provisionally

we conclude that here cosmical repulsion has become
dominant and is responsible for the dispersion.
We have no direct evidence of an outward acceleration of the nebulae, since it is only the velocities that

we observe. But it is reasonable to suppose that the
nebulae, individually as well as collectively, follow the
rule the greater the distance the faster the recession.
If so, the velocity increases as the nebula recedes, so

—

23

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
that there is an outward acceleration. Thus from the

observed motions we can work backwards and calculate the repulsive force, and so determine observationally the cosmical constant A.

Much turns on whether Einstein was really justified
in making the change in his law of gravitation which

introduced this cosmical repulsion. His original reason
was not very convincing, and for some years the
cosmical term was looked on as a fancy addition
rather than as an integral part of the theory. Einstein
has been as severe a critic of his own suggestion as
anyone, and he has not invariably adhered to it. But
the cosmical constant has now a secure position owing
to a great advance made by Prof. Weyl, in whose
theory it plays an essential part.* Not only does it
unify the gravitational and electromagnetic fields, but
it renders the theory of gravitation and its relation to
space-time measurement so much more illuminating,
and indeed self-evident, that return to the earlier view
is unthinkable. I would as soon think of reverting to
Newtonian theory as of dropping the cosmical constant.

VI

Let us now review the position. According to relativity theory the complete field of force contains
besides the ordinary Newtonian attraction a repulsive
(scattering) force varying directly as the distance. It
is

well known that Einstein’s law differs slightly from

Newton’s, giving for example an extra effect which
*

“The cosmological factor which Einstein added to his theory

later is part of ours from the very beginning.”

p. 297 (English Edition).

24

Raum. £eit. Materie ,

THE RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES
has been detected in the orbit of the fast-moving
planet Mercury; the cosmical repulsion is another
point of difference between them, detectable only in
the motions of remote objects. From a theoretical
standpoint I think there is no more doubt about the
cosmical repulsion than about the force which perturbs Mercury; but it does not admit of so decisive an
observational test. As regards Mercury the theoretical
prediction was quantitative ; but relativity theory does

not indicate any particular magnitude for the cosmical
A merely qualitative test is never very con-

repulsion.
clusive.

However, so far as it goes, the test is satisfactory.

We do find observationally a dispersion of the system
of the galaxies such as would be caused by the predicted repulsion. The motions are extremely large
and the effect stands out clearly above all minor
irregularities. The theory thus clears its first hurdle
with some eclat whether it will win the race is another
;

Although the test is not quantitative it is
more far-reaching than is sometimes supposed. There
are only two ways of accounting for large receding
velocities of the nebulae ( i ) they have been produced
by an outward directed force as we here suppose,
or (2) as large or larger velocities have existed from
question.

:

the beginning of the present order of things.* Several
* For completeness we must add the possible hypothesis that the
system once extended much further than now, that it collapsed, and
is now on the rebound. This allows the large velocities to have been
produced by inward directed force, the inward velocities being turned
into outward velocities by passage through the centre. So far as I
know, this is not advocated by anyone. It does not seem capable of
providing for the distribution of velocities which we observe.

25

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
rival explanations of the recession of the nebulae,

which do not accept it as evidence of repulsive force,
have been put forward. These necessarily adopt the
second alternative,

and postulate that the large

velocities have existed from the beginning. This might

be true; but it can scarcely be called an explanation of
the large velocities.

Our best hope of further progress is to discover some
additional test for the theory

— possible, a stringent
if

quantitative test. We want to predict the actual mag-

nitude of the cosmical repulsion, and see if the observed

motions of the nebulae confirm the predicted value.
Relativity theory alone cannot do this, but when
relativity is combined with wave-mechanics the
quantitative prediction seems possible. This development is explained in Chapter iv.
Thus far we have been treating a fairly straightforward subject. Apart from the vast magnitudes
involved there is nothing that particularly taxes the
imagination. In the next chapter I shall present a
rather different view involving difficult conceptions.
I can imagine the reader saying, “Why do you spoil
it all, just when I was beginning to see what it is all

about?”
If I introduce a different kind of outlook it is because
I

am going on to treat of regions of the universe

beyond those that we have hitherto considered.
Primarily the present chapter deals with the region
actually explored, up to 150 million light-years’ distance. If the galaxies come to an end there, no more

need be said the points discussed in the next chapter
;

are scarcely relevant and its outlook is unnecessarily

26

THE RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES
pedantic. But there is no sign that the system of the
galaxies is coming to an end, and presumably it

extends considerably beyond 150 million light-years.
It might extend to, say, five times that distance without

any important new feature but if we have to go much
beyond that, there is trouble in store. The appropriate
speed of recession would be beginning to approach
the velocity of light a point which evidently requires
;

—

looking into. We have a force of cosmical repulsion,
increasing with the distance, which is already rather
if we go on to a vastly greater distance
something must give way at last only Einstein has
taken the precaution of closing up the universe to
prevent us from going too far.
The object of the ensuing development is to deal
with questions which arise as to the possible extension
of the system of the galaxies beyond the region at

powerful;

—

present explored. We shall consider extrapolation in

time as well as in space, and discuss the history of
evolution of the system.

What is the object of making these risky extrapolations to regions of space and time remote from our
practical experience? It might be a sufficient answer

But there is another and
more urgent reason. The man who for the first time

to say that we are explorers

.

sees an aeroplane passing overhead doubtless wonders

how it goes.

I

do not think he can be accused ot

eccentricity if he also wonders how ifstops.

It is true

that he sees no signs of its stopping; he is mentally
extrapolating the flight beyond the range that is
visible.

He cannot be sure of his extrapolation; out-

side his range of vision there may be conditions, of

27

;

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
which he is unaware, which will stop the flight in a

manner different from his conjecture. But he will
have much more confidence in his conclusions as to
the mechanism of the aeroplane if they will explain
the flight from start to stop without postulating some
unknown intervention. At first sight it seems a
reasonable programme for science to tidy up the
region of space and time of which we have some
experience and not to theorise about what lies beyond
but the danger of such a limitation is that the tidying
up may consist in taking the difficulties and inexplicabilities and dumping them over the border
instead of really straightening them out.
We have seen that there is a force of cosmical
repulsion growing larger as the distance from us increases. At the greatest distance yet explored it is still
increasing. The foregoing theory explains how it goes.

But we have still a desire to understand how it stops.

28

Chapter II

SPHERICAL SPACE
I could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a king of infinite

space.

Hamlet
I

When

a physicist refers to curvature of space he at
once falls under suspicion of talking metaphysics. Yet
space is a prominent feature of the physical world;
and measurement of space lengths, distances, volumes
is part of the normal occupation of a physicist.
Indeed it is rare to find any quantitative physical
observation which does not ultimately reduce to
measuring distances. Is it surprising that the precise
investigation of physical space should have brought to
light a new property which our crude sensory per-

—

—

ception of space has passed over?
Space-curvature is a purely physical characteristic
which we may find in a region by suitable experiments,
and measurements, just as we may find a magnetic
field.
In curved space the measured distances and
angles fit together in a way different from that with
which we are familiar in the geometry of flat space;
for example, the three angles of a triangle do not add
up to two right angles. It seems rather hard on the
physicist, who conscientiously measures the three
angles of a triangle, that he should be told that if the
sum comes to two right angles his work is sound
physics, but if it differs to the slightest extent he is
straying into metaphysical quagmires.

29

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
for this characIn using the name “curvature
teristic of space, there is no metaphysical implication.
The nomenclature is that of the pure geometers who
had already imagined and described spaces with this
characteristic before its actual physical occurrence
5

’

was suspected.
Primarily, then, curvature is to be regarded as the
technical
tionally.

name for a property discovered observamay be asked, How closely does “curva-

It

ture” as a technical scientific term correspond to the
meaning of the word? I think the correspondence is about as close as in the case of other
familiar words, such as Work, Energy, Probability,
which have acquired a specialised meaning in science.
We are familiar with curvature of surfaces it is a
property which we can impart by bending and deforming a flat surface. If we imagine an analogous
property to be imparted to space (three-dimensional)
by bending and deforming it, we have to picture an
extra dimension or direction in which the space is
bent. There is, however, no suggestion that the extra
dimension is anything but a fictitious construction,
useful for representing the property pictorially, and
thereby showing its mathematical analogy with the
property found in surfaces. The relation of the picture
to the reality may perhaps best be stated as follows.
In nature we come across curved surfaces and curved
spaces, i.e. surfaces and spaces exhibiting the observational property which has been technically called
“curvature”. In the case of a surface we can ourselves
remove this property by bending and deforming it;
we can therefore conveniently describe the property
familiar

;

30

;

SPHERICAL SPACE
by the operation (bending or curving) which we
should have to perform in order to remove it. In the
case of a space we cannot ourselves remove the
property; we cannot alter space artificially as we alter
surfaces. Nevertheless we may conveniently describe
the property by the imaginary operation of bending
or curving, which would remove it if it could be performed ; and in order to use this mode of description
a fictitious dimension is introduced which would make
the operation possible.
Thus if we are not content to accept curvature as
a technical physical characteristic but ask for a picture
giving fuller insight, we have to picture more than
three dimensions. Indeed it is only in simple and
symmetrical conditions that a fourth dimension suffices
and the general picture requires six dimensions (or,
when we extend the same ideas from space to spacetime, ten dimensions are needed). That is a severe
stretch on our powers of conception. But I would say
to the reader, do not trouble your head about this
picture unduly ;(it is a stand-by for very occasional
use.) Normally, when reference is made to spacecurvature, picture it as you picture a magnetic field.
Probably you do not picture a magnetic field; it is
something (recognisable by certain tests) which you
use in your car or in your wireless apparatus, and all
that is needed is a recognised name for it. Just so;
space-curvature is something found in nature with
which we are beginning to be familiar, recognisable
by certain tests, for which ordinarily we need not a
picture but a name.
It is sometimes said that the difference between the
3i

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
mathematician and the non-mathematician is that
the former can picture things in four dimensions
I suppose there is a grain of truth in this, for after
working for some time in four or more dimensions one
does involuntarily begin to picture them after a

But it has to be added that, although the
mathematician visualises four dimensions, his picture

fashion.

is wrong in essential particulars

—at least mine

is.

(Ijee

our spherical universe like a bubble in four dimensipns; length, breadth,

and thickness, all lie in the

skin of the bubble) Can I picture this bubble rotating?

Why, of course I can. I fix on one direction in the four
dimensions as axis, and I see the other three dimenPerhaps I never actually see
more than two at a time; but thought flits rapidly
sions whirling round it.

from one pair to another, so that all three seem to be
hard at it. Ca nyou picture it like that? If you fail, it
is just as well. For we know by analysis that a bubble
in four dimensions does not rotate that way at

all.

Three dimensions cannot spin round a fourth. They
must rotate two round two that is to say, the bubble
does not rotate about a line axis but about a plane.
;

I know that that is true ; but I cannot visualise it.
I need scarcely say that our scientific conclusions
about the curvature of space are not derived from the
false involuntary picture, but by algebraic working
out of formulae which, though they may be to some
extent illustrated by such pictures, are independent
of pictures. In fact, the pictorial conception of space-

curvature falls between two stools
to convey

:

it is

too abstruse

much illumination to the non-mathemati-

cian, whilst the mathematician practically ignores it

32

SPHERICAL SPACE
and relies on the more dependable and more powerful
algebraic methods of investigating this property of
physical space.

Having said so much in disparagement of the
picture of our three-dimensional space contorted by
curvature in fictitious directions, I must now mention
one application in which it is helpful. We are assured
by analysis that in one important respect the picture
is not misleading. The curvature, or bending round
55
of space, may be sufficient to give a “ closed space
space in which it is impossible to go on indefinitely

—

getting farther

and farther from the starting-point.

Closed space differs from an open infinite space in the
same way that the surface of a sphere differs from a
plane infinite surface.
II

We may say of the surface of a sphere (i) that it is a
curved surface, (2) that it is a closed surface. Similarly
we have to contemplate two possible characteristics of

our actual three-dimensional space, curvature and
A closed surface or space must necessarily be
curved, but a curved surface or space need not be
closed. Thus the idea of closure goes somewhat beyond
the idea of curvature; and, for example, it was not
contemplated in the first announcement of Einstein’s
general relativity theory which introduced curved
closure.

space.

In the ordinary application of Einstein’s theory to
the solar system and other systems on a similar scale
the curvature is small and amounts only to a very

hummocking. The distortion is
and does not affect the general character of

slight wrinkling or
local,

EEU

33

3

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
space as a whole.

Our present subject takes us much

farther afield, and we have to apply the theory to the

The small local
now have cumulative effect. The new

great super-system of the galaxies.
distortions

investigations

suggest that the curvature actually

leads to a complete bending round and closing up of
space, so that it becomes a domain of finite extent. It

be seen that this goes beyond the original proand the evidence for it is by no means so secure.
But all new exploration passes through a phase of
will

posal

;

insecurity.

For the purpose of discussion this closed space is

The presence of
matter will cause local unevenness; the scale that we
are now contemplating is so vast that we scarcely
notice the stars, but the galaxies change the curvature
locally* and so pull the sphere rather out of shape.
The ideal spherical space may be compared to the
geoid used to represent the average figure of the earth
with the mountains and ocean beds smoothed away.
It may be, however, that the irregularity is much
greater, and the universe may be pear-shaped or
sausage-shaped the 150 million light-years over which
our observational survey extends is only a small
generally taken to be spherical.

;

fraction of the whole extent of space, so that we are

not in a position to dogmatise as to the actual shape.

But we can use the spherical world as a typical model,
* Einstein’s law of gravitation connects the various components of
curvature of space with the density, momentum, and stress of the
matter occupying it. I would again remind the reader that spacecurvature is the technical name for an observable physical property,
so that there is nothing metaphysical in the idea of matter producing
curvature any more than in a magnet producing a magnetic field.

34

—
SPHERICAL SPACE
which will illustrate the peculiarities arising from the
closure of space.

In spherical space, if we go on in the same direction
we ultimately reach our starting-point
again, having “gone round the world”. The same
thing happens to a traveller on the earth’s surface who
keeps straight on bearing neither to the left nor to the
right. Thus the closure of space may be thought of as
analogous to the closure of a surface, and generally
speaking it has the same connection with curvature.
The whole area of the earth’s surface is finite, and so
too the whole volume of spherical space is finite. It
is “finite but ^unbounded’’; we never come to a
boundaryT^but owing to the re-entrant property we
can never be more than a limited distance away from
our starting-point.
In the theory that I am going to describe the
galaxies are supposed to be distributed throughout a
closed space of this kind. As there is no boundary
no point at which we can enter or leave the closed
space this constitutes a self-contained finite universe.
Perhaps the most elementary characteristic of a

continually,

—

spherical universe is that at great distances from us

not so much room as we should have anOn the earth’s surface the area within
2 miles of Charing Cross is very nearly 4 times the
area within 1 mile but at a distance of say 4000 miles
this simple progression has broken down badly.
Similarly in the universe the volume, or amount of
room, within 2 light-years of the sun is very nearly
8 times the volume within 1 light-year; but the
volume within 4000 million light-years of the sun is

there

is

ticipated.

;

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
considerably less than 8 times the volume within
2000 million light-years. We have no right to be surprised. How could we have expected to know how
much room there would be out there without
examining the universe to see? It is a common enough
experience that simple rules, which hold well enough
for a limited range of trial, break down when pushed
too far. There is no juggling with words in these state-

ments; the meaning of distance and volume in surveying the earth or the heavens is not ambiguous ; and
although there are practical difficulties in measuring
these vast distances and volumes there is no uncertainty as to the ideal that is aimed at. I do not suggest
that we have checked by direct measurement the
falling off of volume at great distances; like many
scientific conclusions, it is a very indirect inference.
But at least it has been reached by examining the
universe; and, however shaky the deduction, it has
more weight than a judgment formed without looking
at the universe at all.

Much confusion of thought has been caused by the
assertion so often made that we can use any kind of

space we please (Euclidean or non-Euclidean) for representing physical phenomena, so that it is impossible
to disprove Euclidean space observationally. We can
graphically represent (or misrepresent) things as we
please. It is possible to represent the curved surface of

the earth in a flat space as, for example, in maps on

Mercator’s projection; but this does not render meaningless the labours of geodesists as to the true figure

of the earth. Those who on this ground defend belief in
a flat universe must also defend belief in a flat earth.

36

SPHERICAL SPACE
III

There is a widespread impression, which has been
encouraged by some scientific writers, that the consideration of spherical space in this subject is an
unnecessary mystification, and that we could say all
we want to say about the expanding system of the
galaxies without using any other conception than
that of Euclidean infinite space.

It is suggested that

talk about expanding space is mere metaphysics, and

has no real relevance to the expansion of the material
universe itself, which is commonplace and easily comis a mistaken idea. The general
phenomenon of expansion, including the explanation
provided by relativity theory, can be expounded up

prehensible. This

to a certain point without any recondite conceptions
of space, as has been done in Chapter i; but there are
other consequences of the theory which cannot be
dealt with so simply. To consider these we have to
change the method, and partly transfer our attention
from the properties and behaviour of the material
system to the properties and behaviour of the space
which it occupies. This is necessary because the properties attributed to the material system by the theory
are so unusual that they cannot even be described
without self-contradiction if we continue to picture
the system in flat (i.e. Euclidean) space. This does not
constitute an objection to the theory, for there is, of
course, no reason for supposing space to be flat unless
our observations show it to be flat; and there is no
reason why we should be able to picture or describe
the system in flat space if it is not in flat space. It is no

37

:

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
disparagement to a square peg to say that it will not
a round hole.

fit into

I will liken the super-system

of galaxies (the uni-

—

space. In
Chapter i we were only concerned with a litde bit of
the peg (the 150 million light-years surveyed) and the

verse) to a peg which is fitted into a hole

question of fit scarcely arose. When we turn to consider the

whole peg we find mathematically

that,

unless something unforeseen occurs beyond the region

explored, it is (for the purposes of this analogy) a
square peg. Immediately there is an outcry: “That
is an impossible sort of peg
not really a peg at all”.

—

Our answer is that it is an excellent peg, as good as
any on the market, provided that you do not want to fit
a round hole. “But holes are round. It is the
nature ofholes to be round. A Greek two thousand years
ago said that they are round.” And so on. So whether
I want it or not, the argument shifts from the peg to
the hole the space into which the material universe is
fitted. It is over the hole that the battle has been fought
and won; I think now that every authority admits, if
only grudgingly, that the square hole by which I here

it into

—

symbolise closed space

—
— a physical

possibility.

is

The issue that I am here dealing with is not whether
the theory of a closed expanding universe is right or

wrong, probable or improbable, but whether, if we
hold the theory, spherical space is necessary to the
statement of it. I am not here replying to those who
disbelieve the theory, but to those who think its
strangeness is due to the mystifying language of its
exponents. The following will perhaps show that there
has been no gratuitous mystification

38

—
SPHERICAL SPACE
I want you to imagine a system of say a billion stars
spread approximately uniformly so that each star has
neighbours surrounding it on all sides, the distance of
each star from its nearest neighbours being approximately the same everywhere. (Lest there be any
doubt as to the meaning of distance I define it as the
distance found by parallax observation, or by any
other astronomical method accepted as equivalent to
actually stepping out the distance.) Can you picture
,

this?

— Yes. Except that you forgot

to consider that the

system will have a boundary; and the stars at the
edge will have neighbours on one side only, so that
they must be excepted from your condition of having
neighbours on all sides.

— No; meant just what
I

I said.

I want all the stars

to have neighbours surrounding them. If you picture

a place where the neighbours are on one side only
what you call a boundary you are not picturing the
system I have in mind.
But your system is impossible; there must be a
boundary.
Why is it impossible? I could arrange a billion
people on the surface of the earth (spread over the
whole surface) so that each has neighbours on all
sides, and no question of a boundary arises. I only
want you to do the same with the stars.
But that is a distribution over a surface. The
stars are to be distributed in three-dimensional space,
and space is not like that.
Then you agree that if space could be ‘Tike
that” my system would be quite possible and natural?

—

—
—

—

—

39

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

— suppose
But how could space be
— We discuss space you wish. But just now
I

like

so.

that?

will

if

when I was trying to explain that according to present
55

theory space does behave “like that , 1 was told that
the discussion of space was an unnecessary mystification, and that if I would stick to a description of my
material system it would be seen to be quite commonplace and comprehensible. So I duly described my
material system; whereupon you immediately raised
questions as to the nature of space.
In the spherical universe the character of the
material system is as peculiar as the character of the
space. The material system, like the space, exhibits
closure so that no galaxy is more central than another,
and none can be said to be at the outside. Such a distribution is at first sight inconceivable, but that is
because we try to conceive it in flat space. The space
and the material system have to fit one another. It is
no use trying to imagine the system of galaxies contemplated in Einstein’s and Lemaitre’s theories of the
universe, if the only kind of space in our minds is one
in which such a system cannot exist.
In the foregoing conversation I have credited the
reader with a feeling which instinctively rejects the
possibility of a spherical space or a closed distribution
of galaxies. But spherical space does not contradict
our experience of space, any more than the sphericity
of the earth contradicts the experience of those who
have never travelled far enough to notice the curvature. Apart from our reluctance to tackle a difficult
and unfamiliar conception, the only thing that can be
;

40

)

SPHERICAL SPACE
urged against spherical space is that more than twenty
centuries ago a certain Greek published a set of
axioms which (inferentially) stated that spherical
space is impossible. He had perhaps more excuse, but
no more reason, for his statement than those who
repeat it to-day.

Few scientific men nowadays would reject spherical
space as impossible, but there are many who take the
attitude that it is an unlikely kind of hypothesis only
to be considered as a last resort. Thus, in support of
some of the proposed explanations of the motions of
the spiral nebulae, it is claimed that they have the
“advantage” of not requiring curved space. But
what is the supposed disadvantage of curved space?
I cannot remember that any disadvantage has ever
been pointed out. On the other hand it is well known
that the assumption of flat physical space leads to very
serious theoretical

and logical difficulties, as will be

explained later (p. 102).
A closed system of galaxies requires a closed space.
If such a system expands, it requires an expanding
space. This can be seen at once from the analogy that
we have already used, viz. human beings distributed
evenly over the surface of the earth clearly they cannot scatter apart from one another unless the earth’s
surface expands.
This should make clear how the present theory of
the expanding universe stands in relation to (a) the
expansion of a material system, and ( b the expansion
of space. The observational phenomenon chiefly concerned (recession of the spiral nebulae) is obviously
expansion of a material system; and the onlooker is
;

41

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
often puzzled to find theorists proclaiming the doctrine
of an expanding space. He suspects that there has
been confusion of thought of a rather elementary kind.
Why should not the space be there already, and the
material system expand into it, as material systems
usually do? If the system of galaxies comes to an end
not far beyond the greatest distance we have plumbed,
then I agree that that is what happens. But the
system shows no sign of coming to an end, and, if it
goes on much farther, it will alter its character. This
change of character is a matter of mathematical computation which cannot be discussed here; I need only
say that it is connected with the fact that, if the speed
of recession continues to increase outwards, it will ere
long approach the speed of light, so that something
must break down. The result is that the system becomes a closed system and we have seen that such a
system cannot expand without the space also expanding. That is how expansion of space comes in.
I daresay that (for historical reasons) expansion of
space has often been given too much prominence in
;

and readers have been
more directly concerned

expositions of the subject,

led
in

to

think

that

the explanation

it

is

of the

motions of the nebu-

But if we are to give
a full account of the views to which we are led
by theory and observation, we must not omit to
mention it.
What I have said has been mainly directed towards
removing preliminary prejudices against a closed
space or a closed system of galaxies. I do not suggest
that the reasons for adopting closed space are over-

lae than

is

actually the case.

42

SPHERICAL SPACE
whelmingly strong;* but even slight advantages may
be of weight when there is nothing to place in the
opposite scale. If we adopt open space we encounter
certain difficulties (not necessarily insuperable) which

closed space entirely avoids; and we do not want to
divert the inquiry into a speculation as to the solution

of difficulties which need never arise. If we wish to
be non-committal, we shall naturally work in terms of
a closed universe of finite radius i?, since we can at any
time revert to an infinite universe by making R infinite.
There is one other type of critic to whom a word
may be said. He feels that space is not solely a matter
that concerns the physicists, and that by their technical definitions and abstractions they are making of
it

something different from the common man’s space.

It would be difficult to define precisely what is in his

mind. Perhaps he is not thinking especially of space
as a measurable constituent of the physical universe,
and is imagining a world order transcending the delusions of our sensory organs and the limitations of our
micrometers a space of “ things as they really are”.
It is no part of my present subject to discuss the
relation of the world as conceived in physics to a wider
interpretation of our experience; I will only say that
that part of our conscious experience representable by
physical symbols ought not to claim to be the whole.
As a conscious being you are not one of my symbols;
your domain is not circumscribed by my spatial
measurements. If, like Hamlet, you count yourself

—

* Curved space is fundamental in relativity theory, and the argument for adopting it is generally considered to be overwhelming. It
is closed space which needs more evidence.

43

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
king of an infinite space, I do not challenge your
I only invite attention to certain disquieting rumours which have arisen as to the state of
Your Majesty’s nutshell.
sovereignty.

IV

The immediate result of introducing the cosmical
term into the law of gravitation was the appearance
(in theory) of two universes
the Einstein universe
and the de Sitter universe. Both were closed spherical
universes; so that a traveller going on and on in the
same direction would at last find himself back at the
starting-point, having made a circuit of space. Both
claimed to be static universes which would remain
unchanged for any length of time; thus they provided
a permanent framework within which the small scale
systems galaxies and stars could change and evolve.
There were, however, certain points of difference
between them. An especially important difference,
because it might possibly admit of observational test,
was that in de Sitter’s universe there would be an
apparent recession of remote objects, whereas in
Einstein’s universe this would not occur. At that time
only three radial velocities of spiral nebulae were
known, and these somewhat lamely supported de
Sitter’s universe by a majority of 2 to i. There the
question rested for a time. But in 1922 Prof. V. M.

—

—

—

me with his (then unpublished)
measures of 40 spiral nebulae for use in my book
Mathematical Theory of Relativity As the majority had
become 36 to 4, de Sitter’s theory began to appear in
a favourable light.
Slipher furnished

.

44

SPHERICAL SPACE

The Einstein and de Sitter universes were two
alternatives arising out of the same theoretical basis.

To give an analogy

—suppose that we are transported

to a new star, and that we notice a number of celestial

bodies in the neighbourhood. We should know from
gravitational theory that their orbits must be either
ellipses or hyperbolas but only observation can decide
which. Until the observational test is made there are
;

two alternatives; the objects may have elliptic orbits
and constitute a permanent system like the solar system,
or they may have hyperbolic orbits and constitute
a dispersing system. Actually the question whether
the universe would follow Einstein’s or de Sitter’s
model depended on how much matter was present in
the universe, a question which could scarcely be
and is none too easy to settle by
settled by theory

—

—

observation.

We have now realised that the changelessness of
de Sitter’s universe was a mathematical fiction. Taken
literally his formulae described a completely empty universe; but that was meant to be interpreted generously
as signifying that the average density of matter in it,
though not zero, was low enough to be neglected in
calculating

the forces

controlling

the system.

It

turned out, however, that the changelessness depended on there being literally no matter present. In
fact the “changeless universe” had been invented by
the simple expedient of omitting to put into it anything that could exhibit change. We therefore no
longer rank de Sitter’s as a static universe; and
Einstein’s is the only form of material universe which
is genuinely static or motionless.

45

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
The situation has been summed up in the statement that Einstein’s universe contains matter but no
motion and de Sitter’s contains motion but no matter.
It is clear that the actual universe containing both
matter and motion does not correspond exactly to
either of these abstract models. The only question is,
Which is the better choice for a first approximation?
Shall we put a little motion into Einstein’s world of
inert matter, or shall we put a little matter into
de Sitter’s Primum Mobile?

The choice between Einstein’s and de Sitter’s
models is no longer urgent because we are not now
restricted to these two extremes; we have available
the whole chain of intermediate solutions between
motionless matter and matterless motion, from which
we can pick out the solution with the right proportion
of matter and motion to correspond with what we
observe. These solutions were not sought earlier,
because their appropriateness was not realised it was
the preconceived idea that a static solution was a
necessity in order that everything might be referred
to an unchanging background of space. We have seen
that this requirement should strictly have barred out
de Sitter’s solution, but by a fortunate piece of gatecrashing it gained admission it was the precursor of
the other non-static solutions to which attention is
now mainly directed.
;

;

The deliberate investigation of non-static solutions
was carried out by A. Friedmann in 1922. His solutions were rediscovered in 1927 by Abb6 G. Lemaitre,
who brilliantly developed the astronomical theory
resulting therefrom. His work was published in a
46

SPHERICAL SPACE
rather inaccessible journal, and seems to have re-

mained unknown until 1930 when attention was
called to it by de Sitter and myself. In the meantime
the solutions had been discovered for the third time
by H. P. Robertson, and through him their interest
was beginning to be realised. The astronomical application, stimulated by Hubble and Humason’s observational work on the spiral nebulae, was also being
rediscovered, but it had not been carried so far as in
Lemaitre’s paper.

The

intermediate

solutions

of Friedmann

and

Lemaitre are “ expanding universes
Both the
material system and the closed space, in which it
exists, are expanding. At one end we have Einstein’s
universe with no motion and therefore in equilibrium.
Then, as we proceed along the series, we have model
universes showing more and more rapid expansion
until we reach de Sitter’s universe at the other end of
the series. The rate of expansion increases all the way
along the series and the density diminishes; de Sitter’s
universe is the limit when the average density of
celestial matter approaches zero. The series of expanding universes then stops, not because the expansion becomes too rapid, but because there is
nothing left to expand.
We can better understand this series of models by
starting at the de Sitter end. As explained in Chapter 1
there are two forces operating, the ordinary Newtonian attraction between the galaxies and the cos-

mical repulsion. In the de Sitter universe the density
of matter is infinitely small so that the Newtonian
attraction is negligible.

The cosmical repulsion acts
47

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
without check, and we get the greatest possible rate
of expansion of the system. When more matter is
inserted, the mutual gravitation tends to hold the
mass together and opposes the expansion. The more
matter put in, the slower the expansion. There will
be a particular density at which the Newtonian attraction between the galaxies is just strong enough to
counterbalance the cosmical repulsion, so that the
expansion is zero. This is Einstein’s universe. If we
put in still more matter, attraction outweighs repulsion and we obtain a model of a contracting
universe.

Primarily this series of models is a series of alternatives, one of which has to be selected to represent

our actual universe. But it has a still more interesting
application. As time goes on the actual universe
travels along the series of models, so that the whole
series gives a picture of its life-history.

At the present

moment the universe corresponds to a particular
model; but since it is expanding its density is diminishing. Therefore a million years hence we shall

need a model of lower density, i.e. nearer to the
de Sitter end of the series.
Tracing this progression as far back as possible we
reach the conclusion that the world started as an
Einstein universe; it has passed continuously along
the series of models having more and more rapid
expansion; and it will finish up as a de Sitter universe.
Allusion has been made to the fact that the recession
of the galaxies in the present theory of the expanding
universe is not precisely the effect foreseen by de Sitter.
It may be well to explain the manner of the transition.
48

—
SPHERICAL SPACE

The phenomenon that is generally called the “de
Sitter effect
was a rather mysterious slowing down
55

of time at great distances from the observer; atomic
would be executed more slowly, so that
their light would be shifted to the red and imitate the
effect of a receding velocity. But besides discovering
this, de Sitter examined the equations of motion and
noticed that the real velocities of distant objects would
probably be large he did not, however, expect these
real velocities to favour recession rather than approach. I am not sure when it was first recognised
that the complication in the equations of motion was
neither more nor less than a repulsive force proportional to the distance; but it must have been before
1922. Summarising the theory at that date, I wrote
“De Sitter’s theory gives a double explanation of this
motion of recession first, there is the general tendency
to scatter according to the equation d^rjds 2 = ^Ar;
second, there is the general displacement of spectral
lines to the red in distant objects due to the slowing
down of atomic vibrations which would be erro55
neously interpreted as a motion of recession .* I also
pointed out that it was a question of definition whether
the latter effect should be regarded as a spurious or
a genuine velocity. During the time that its light is
travelling to us, the nebula is being accelerated by
the cosmical repulsion and acquires an additional
outward velocity exceeding the amount in dispute;
so thu: the velocity, which was spurious at the time ol
emission of the light, has become genuine by the time
of its arrival. Inferentially this meant that the slowing
vibrations

;

:

* Mathematical Theory of Relativity, p. 161.

eeu

49

4

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
down of time had become a very subsidiary effect
compared with cosmical repulsion; but this was not

The subsequent developments of Friedmann and Lemaitre
were geometrical and did not allude to anything so
crude as “force”; but, examining them to see what
has happened, we find that the slowing down of time

so clearly realised as it might have been.

has been swallowed up in the cosmical repulsion; it
was a small portion of the whole effect (a second-order
term) which had been artificially detached by the
earlier methods of analysis.

V
An Einstein universe is in equilibrium, but its equilibrium is unstable. The Newtonian attraction and the
Suppose
momentarily upsets the
balance; let us say that the Newtonian attraction is
slightly weakened. Then repulsion has the upper hand,
and a slow expansion begins. The expansion increases
cosmical repulsion are in exact balance.
that a slight disturbance

the average distance apart of the material bodies so
that their attraction on one another is lessened. This

widens the difference between attraction and repulsion, and the expansion becomes faster. Thus the

balance becomes more and more upset until the
universe becomes irrevocably launched on its course
of expansion. Similarly if the first slight disturbance

were a strengthening of the Newtonian attraction, this
would cause a small contraction. The material systems
would be brought nearer together and their mutual
attraction further increased. The contracting tendency
thus becomes more and more reinforced. Einstein’s
50

:

SPHERICAL SPACE
universe is delicately poised so that the slightest disturbance will cause it to topple into a state of everincreasing expansion or of ever-increasing contraction.

The original unstable Einstein universe might have
turned into an expanding universe or into a contracting universe. Apparently it has chosen expansion. The question arises, Can we explain this choice?
I do not think it will be any grave discredit if we fail,
for I cannot recall any other case in which theory has
succeeded in predicting which way an unstable body

However we shall try. We have to consider
what kind of spontaneous disturbance could occur in
the primordial distribution of matter from which our
galaxies and stars have been evolved for definiteness
will fall.

;

I picture it as a motionless uniform nebula filling the

Two kinds of spontaneous change
have been suggested
(1) The matter will form local condensations so as
to become unevenly distributed.
(2) Material mass may become converted into
radiation, either in the process of building up complex
atoms (e.g. the formation of helium from hydrogen)
or in the mutual annihilation of electrons and protons.
It can be shown that the conversion of material
mass into radiation would start a contraction. Mass
for mass, radiation is more effective than matter in
exerting gravitational attraction; hence the conversion tips the balance in favour of contraction. Accordingly our hopes of explaining the decision to expand
must rest on process (1). The investigation is peculiarly difficult, because it turns out that to a first
approximation the redistribution of matter in conspherical world.

5i

4-2

—

4

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
densations makes no difference to the balance, and it

necessary to carry the calculation to a high approximation to obtain the deciding term. The problem
has been treated by McVittie, McCrae, Lemaitre and
Sen not always with accordant results and I doubt
whether I am qualified to judge on so technical a
question. I am inclined to think, however, that
Lemaitre’s treatment goes to the root of the matter.*
It has been mentioned that, although we often
consider models of the universe which are perfectly
spherical, the actual universe must be more irregular.
A better approximation would be a pimply sphere
the pimples corresponding to the galaxies for wherever there is matter, the curvature is locally increased.
Whilst a pimply Einstein world
would have approximately the same properties as an ideal Einstein
world, it was at first thought that exact equilibrium
was only possible for the exact sphere. It is found,
however, that a pimply sphere can also be in exact
equilibrium and form a static universe. This was
pointed out explicitly by Prof. N. K. Sen, who has
given a simple and elegant treatment; but it appears
to have been implicit in the earlier work of Lemaitre.
Suppose for a moment that, when a condensation is
formed, the condensation separates completely from
the surrounding matter and leaves an empty crack all
round. We imagine that a sphere of gas is separated in
this way, and continues to condense more and more.
Lemaitre (by extending a theorem due to Birkhoff)

is

—

;

;

4

5

’

* Lemaitre’s paper {Monthly Notices , vol. xci, p. 490) seems to me
very obscure, but I have had the advantage of verbal explanations
from the author.

52

SPHERICAL SPACE
has shown that after the separation the gradual condensation of the matter can make no difference whatever to the gravitational force exerted by the sphere
on its surroundings so that, if the universe outside the
condensation was originally in equilibrium, its equilibrium will remain undisturbed. In these conditions
the formation of condensations will start neither contraction nor expansion of the universe as a whole.
The actual conditions differ from the foregoing in
that no empty crack is formed, the condensation
merging gradually into its surroundings. The crack,
by isolating the condensation from its surroundings,
would have prevented any pressure of one on the
other; in the absence of a crack there will be a pressure
(probably exceedingly small) which will change as
the condensation proceeds. It is this change of
pressure, neglected in the preceding paragraph, that
is the possible cause of expansion or contraction; for
we have seen that the mere rearrangement of matter
in a more condensed form has no effect. Lemaitre
describes the change which occurs as a “ stagnation”
of energy. It is not difficult to see that it is really the
converse kind of change to that which occurs when
energy of constitution of matter is liberated as radiation; energy is taken away from the transmissible form
(pressure) and immobilised in the constitution of the
condensation. Its effect is therefore opposite to that
of conversion of material mass into radiation, and it
tends to make the universe expand.
Sen’s procedure is different. Having found the
equations for a “pimply Einstein world” in static
equilibrium, he calculates the total mass of such a
;

53

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
world, and finds that it is always greater than that of
a uniform Einstein world It follows that, if the matter
of the original uniform Einstein world is rearranged
in condensations, there is not quite enough mass to
form an equilibrium distribution. If we could artificially add a little mass to each condensation, we
should obtain one of Sen’s pimply spheres in equilibrium; the absence of this mass leaves the gravitational
attraction in defect of the amount required to maintain equilibrium. Consequently cosmical repulsion
has the upper hand and the universe expands.
Although both Lemaitre and Sen agree that expansion (not contraction) ensues, there is a discrepancy
.

between them; for Sen obtains it as the direct result
of the rearrangement of matter, whereas Lemaitre
claims that the direct result is nil, and that the ex-

pansion

is

an

indirect

result

dependent on the

existence of a small pressure in the primordial nebula.

Lemaitre’s investigation has the advantage that it
avoids a very tricky calculation of the mass of the
condensations, and seems to offer less likelihood of
error.
It is only at the very beginning that we have to look

for a cause of expansion or contraction; once started,

the expansion or contraction continues and increases

automatically. If there were causes of contraction and
causes of expansion, victory went to the one which got
its shove in first.

Thus the formation of condensations

must have had the start of the conversion of mass into
radiation, since the latter would (as we have seen)
have brought about a contracting universe. To my

mind this rather suggests that the primordial material
54

SPHERICAL SPACE
consisted of hydrogen (or equivalently free protons

and electrons) since there would then be less opportunity for the conversion of mass into radiation than
if more complex atoms were present.

So long as they
combined in complex nuclei, protons and
electrons are immune from annihilation. The reason
for this security is that the photon or quantum of
radiation, which results from the annihilation of a
proton and electron, has to be provided with momentum, which must be balanced by a recoil momentum.
But in hydrogen there is nothing left to recoil.
Annihilation of a proton and electron (if it ever
occurs) can happen only when they form part of a
complex system which will leave a residuum to carry
are not

the recoil.*

VI

We have been led almost inevitably to the consideration of the beginning of the universe, or at least to the

beginning of the present order of physical law. This
always happens when we treat of an irreversible oneway process and the continual expansion of the world
raises the same kind of question of an ultimate beginning as has been raised by the continual increase
of entropy in the world.
Views as to the beginning of things lie almost
beyond scientific argument. We cannot give scientific
reasons why the world should have been created one
way rather than another. But I suppose that we all
;

have an aesthetic feeling in the matter. The solar
system must have started somehow, and I do not
*

I

am indebted to Sir Alfred Ewiner for calling my attentat to*

this.

55

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
know why it should not have been started by projecting nine planets in orbits going in the same direction round the sun. But we have a feeling that that is

not the way in which it would naturally be done and
we turn in preference to attempts none too successful
to account for it by evolution from a nebula.
Similarly the theory recently suggested by Einstein
and de Sitter, that in the beginning all the matter
created was projected with a radial motion so as to
disperse even faster than the present rate of dispersal of the galaxies,* leaves me cold. One cannot
deny the possibility, but it is difficult to see what
mental satisfaction such a theory is supposed to

—

—

;

afford.

Since I cannot avoid introducing this question of
a beginning, it has seemed to me that the most satisfactory theory would be one which made the beginning not too unaesthetically abrupt This condition can
only be satisfied by an Einstein universe with all the
major forces balanced. Accordingly the primordial
state of things which I picture is an even distribution
of protons and electrons, extremely diffuse and filling
all (spherical) space, remaining nearly balanced for
an exceedingly long time until its inherent instability
prevails. We shall see later that the density of this
distribution can be calculated it was about one proton
and electron per litre. There is no hurry for anything
to begin to happen. But at last small irregular tendencies accumulate, and evolution gets under way.
The first stage is the formation of condensations ulti.

;

*

They do not state this in words, but it is the meaning of their

mathematical formulae.

56

—
SPHERICAL SPACE
mately to become the galaxies; this, as we have seen,
which then automatically
increased in speed until it is now manifested to us in
started off an expansion,

the recession of the spiral nebulae.

As the matter drew closer together in the condensaevolutionary processes followed
evolution of stars, evolution of the more complex
elements, evolution of planets and life. Doubtless in
tions, the various

this as in other theories there are serious difficulties of
timing, so that one process should not go too fast

compared with another. These difficulties of timescale will be mentioned again later.

Perhaps it will be objected that, if one looks far
enough back, this theory does not really dispense with
an abrupt beginning; the whole universe must come
into being at one instant in order that it may start in
balance. I do not regard it in that way. To my mind
undifferentiated sameness and nothingness cannot be distinguished philosophically. The realities of physics are

unhomogeneities, happenings, change. Our initial
assumption of a homogeneous static medium is no
more than a laying out in order of the conceptions to
be used in our analytical description of the distinguishable objects and events whose history we are going to
relate. So far as these realities are concerned, the
theory achieves its aim of providing an imperceptible
and gradual beginning. When at last, by the thermodynamic degradation of energy, the universe with the
same gradualness again reaches undifferentiated sameness, that is the end of the physical universe. I do not
picture a worn out world careering forlornly through
the rest of eternity. What is left is only a few con-

57

.

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
ceptions which we forgot to put away after we had
finished using them.

To illustrate the instability of an Einstein universe
may

I will liken it to a pin standing on its point, which

fall either to the left or to the right into two horizontal

positions A or B. Position A corresponds to a universe

expanded to infinity, and position B to a universe
contracted to a point or as nearly to a point as quantum conditions allow. As the only way of avoiding an
abrupt beginning, I have supposed the pin to be
vertical initially.

Its

balance then

is

not quite so

precarious as it seems ; it would be at the mercy of the
^lightest disturbance from outside

—

b.ut there is nothing

So the fall must come from a slight “decay”
in the material of the pin. According to Lemaitre and
Sen the decay is such as to make it fall towards A> and
putside.

we now observe it midway in the fall.
If we do not mind a sudden, or even violent, beginning, many other experiments with the pin are
possible. We may drop it from an inclined position, or
in letting go give it a projection upwards or down-

Starting from the horizontal position i?, we
may project it so that it rises and falls again; or, if
projected with greater force, it may pass through the

wards.

vertical position and fall on the other side into posi-

A Similarly if it is projected from A. The
behaviour of a universe is precisely the same; to every
adventure of the pin there corresponds a similar
adventure of a universe and vice versa. These adventures have been treated at length by some writers, and
the appropriate formulae calculated. Whilst such a
mathematical study is proper in its own sphere, it is
tion

58

SPHERICAL SPACE
liable to give a misleading impression of the

com-

plexity of the problem before us. When the different

projections are enumerated and presented as though

they were all different “theories” of the universe, it
come across a bewildering
maze of possibilities. But all it amounts to is that the
universe is just like any other system that has a position of unstable equilibrium.

looks as though we had

At first sight there is a curious difference between
the universe and the pin. If the universe has a given

mass we cannot project it just how we please; in fact
the circumstances of projection determine its mass.
But this is explicable when we recollect that energy
and mass are equivalent. The total energy of the pin
varies according to the way it is projected, and strictly

speaking its mass changes in the same way. The mass
of the universe behaves analogously. To suppose that
velocity of expansion in the (fictitious) radial direction
involves kinetic energy, may seem to be taking our
picture of spherical space too literally; but the energy
is so far real that it contributes to the mass of the
universe. In particular a universe projected from B
to reach A necessarily has greater mass than one which
falls back without reaching the vertical (Einstein)
position.

Lemaitre does not share my idea of an evolution of
the universe from the Einstein state. His theory of the

—

beginning is a fireworks theory to use his own description of it. The world began with a violent projection
from position B i.e. from the state in which it is
condensed to a point or atom; the projection was
strong enough to carry it past the Einstein state, so
,

59

;

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
that it is now falling down towards A as observation
requires. This makes the mass of the universe somewhat greater than in my theory (as explained in the
last paragraph) ; but the change is scarcely important

at the present stage of our progress.

I

cannot but

think that my “placid theory is more likely to satisfy
the general sentiment of the reader; but if he inclines
55

otherwise, I would say

— “ Have your own way. And
it

now let us get away from the Creation back to
problems that we may possibly know something
about”.

The Einstein configuration was the one escape from
an expanding or contracting universe; by proving it
to be unstable, we show that it is no more than a temporary escape. Whether the original state was Einstein
equilibrium or not, at the date when astronomers
arrive on the scene they must be faced with an expanding or contracting universe. This result makes
the theory of the expanding universe much more
cogent. In 1917 theory was at the cross-roads (p. 1)
that is no longer true, and by its own resources it has
been guided into the road to a non-static universe.
Realising that some degree of expansion (or contraction) is inevitable, we are much more inclined to

admit the recession of the spiral nebulae as an indication of its magnitude.*
* I may mention that the proof of the instability of the Einstein
configuration was the turning point in my own outlook. Previously
the expanding universe (as it appeared in de Sitter’s theory) had
appealed to me as a highly interesting possibility, but I had no
particular preference for it.

60

—
SPHERICAL SPACE
VII

Several counter theories of the observed recession of
the nebulae have been proposed and I would like to

make clear my general attitude to such theories.

—

I am a detective in search of a criminal
the cosmical constant. I know he exists, but I do not know
his appearance; for instance I do not know if he is a
litde man or a tall man. Naturally the first move of
my chief (de Sitter) was to order a search for footprints on the scene of the crime. The search has
revealed footprints, or what look like footprints the
recession of the spiral nebulae. Of course, I am
tremendously interested in this possible clue to the
criminal. From the length of the stride I calculate the
presumed height of the criminal (in approved detective
fashion) Having gained this important information as
to his appearance, I can now turn to my other clues
in relativity and wave-mechanics and checking one
against the other I think I have now about enough
evidence to justify an arrest.
It happens that there are other persons interested in
the footprints, who are not in the least interested in my
criminal. For instance there is a geologist who suggests the theory that they belong to a prehistoric
creature. (The counter theories proposed by Einstein
and de Sitter and by Milne suppose that the large
velocities of the nebulae have existed from the beginning.) Another man thinks they are not footprints at
all, but depressions caused by something of unknown

—

.

—

nature.

To what extent is it incumbent on me to

justify myself by criticising these contrary opinions?

61

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
I do not think they concern me at all closely. Naturally
from the beginning I was awake to the possibility that
the footprints might not belong to the criminal the
question then to be decided was not whether the clue
was sufficient evidence to hang the criminal, but
whether it indicated a direction of inquiry which it
would be worth while devoting one’s energies to fol;

lowing up.

Of course, if either the geologist or the

depressionist claimed to be able to demonstrate that
his idea of the origin of the footprints

was correct,

I should pay grave attention; for such a demonstration

would show that I was altogether on the wrong tack
in my own inquiries. But that is not the position; no

one claims more for the counter suggestions than that
55
“for all we know, it might be so
That leaves the
investigation as open as when we started footprints
have been discovered on the scene of the crime; all
sorts of explanations are possible, and it may turn out
that they are of little importance but there is quite
a good chance that they were made by the criminal;
let us follow up the clue, and try to find out. I am
fairly satisfied now that they do belong to the criminal,
but that is because by pursuing the clue the further
evidence detailed in Chapter iv has come to light.
I have already commented on the theory that the
.

:

;

recession of the spiral nebulae is a misinterpretation

of the red shift of their light. We may class together
the remaining theories which accept the recession of
the spiral nebulae as genuine; these accordingly admit
the expansion of the universe (perhaps only as a temporary phenomenon) but do not connect it with
cosmical repulsion.

62

SPHERICAL SPACE

The keynote of many of these suggestions seems to
be, What is the most general deduction that can be

made from our observational knowledge of the positions and motions of the galaxies?

I think that those

who seek this extreme generality are following a
will-o’-the-wisp. The observational data give only the
positions and velocities at the present instant; so that

from the start that nothing can definitely be
deduced as to the law of force governing the motion.

it is clear

Any instantaneous distribution of velocities is compatible
with any law of force.

If then

anyone proposes to

treat the problem of the system of galaxies with wider

generality than we here attempt

—

as he would perhaps
any preconceptions we have to ask,
What problem? The motions in themselves do not
constitute a problem. We have to combine them with
other ideas, which we think justified, in order to create
a problem at all. It is the preconceptions imported
from other branches of science that can fertilise an

say, without

—

—

—

investigation otherwise doomed to barrenness.

Thus I find a difficulty in discussing the proposal of
and de Sitter, and some of de Sitter’s
separate proposals, because I do not see what are “ the
rules of the game”. These proposals are left as
Einstein

mathematical formulations, all doubtless compatible
with what we observe; but there seems nothing to
prevent such formulations being indefinitely multiplied. De Sitter has several times emphasised the
possibility that the cosmical constant A might be
negative. This gives cosmical attraction instead of
cosmical repulsion. Clearly the recession of the nebulae is not evidence in favour of cosmical attraction.
63

;

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
The most that, can be said is that it is not necessarily
fatal evidence against it.
It

should not be forgotten that an observational

test which is quite inadequate to demonstrate a theory

may yet afford welcome confirmation of it. Suppose
that by theoretical reasoning we have concluded that
the earth is surrounded by a field of force attracting
bodies towards it. To test this we are allowed one
brief glimpse of what is happening near the earth’s
surface. Our glimpse may reveal a display of rockets
soaring upwards. This is not incompatible with our
theory, but it is clearly no confirmation of it. On the
other hand we may see a shower of raindrops falling.

Nothing can strictly be deduced from this one glimpse
but to observe objects falling to the ground is a
tolerable confirmation of the theoretical prediction

that there is a force tending to make objects move that

way.
E. A. Milne* has pointed out that if initially the

endowed with their present speeds, were
concentrated in a small volume, those with highest
speed would by now have travelled farthest. If
gravitational and other forces are negligible, we obtain
in this way a distribution in which speed and distance
from the centre are proportional. Whilst accounting
for the dependence of speed on distance, this hypothesis
creates a new difficulty as to the occurrence of the
speeds. To provide a moderately even distribution of
nebulae up to 1 50 million light-years’ distance, high
speeds must be very much more frequent than low
speeds; this peculiar anti-Maxwellian distribution of
galaxies,

* Nature, July 2, 1932.

64

SPHERICAL SPACE
speeds becomes especially surprising when it is supposed to have occurred originally in a compact aggregation of galaxies.
I might discuss these suggestions more fully if they
were likely to be the last. But it would seem that,
unless we keep to a defined purpose, an unlimited
field of speculation is open; and by the time these
remarks are read, some other hypothesis may be in
vogue. I define my own purpose as being to find
what light (if any) the recession of the spiral nebulae
can throw on the problem of the cosmical constant.
Having regard to this purpose, it seems sufficient to
note that this is not the only direction in which we
might look for the explanation of the phenomenon
of the nebulae, and then proceed with our task.*
* Further reference to the rival theories is made on p. 86.

EEU

65

5

Chapter III

FEATURES OF THE EXPANDING
UNIVERSE
The world’s a bubble, and the life of man
Less than a span.
Francis Bacon
I

A. spherical world, closed but continually expanding, is a new playground for thought. Let us
play in it a little to familiarise ourselves with it. In
this chapter I shall mix together results which may
prove to be of scientific importance and results that
are probably no more than mathematical curiosities.
The plan is to set down anything that seems worthy
of note, even though we cannot see that it has any
ultimate importance in nature.
For a model of the universe let us represent spherical
space by a rubber balloon. Our three dimensions of
length, breadth and thickness ought all to lie in the
skin of the balloon; but there is only room for two, so
the model will have to sacrifice one of them. That
does not matter very seriously. Imagine the galaxies
to be embedded in the rubber. Now let the balloon
be steadily inflated. That’s the expanding universe.
The galaxies are supposed to be scattered more or
less evenly over the surface our observational knowledge, however, is limited to a portion which corresponds roughly to the size of France on a terrestrial
globe. The galaxies have individual motions, i.e.
motions with respect to the material of the balloon,
;

66

:

FEATURES OF THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
but these are comparatively small; in the main they
recede from one another simply by the stretching of
the rubber. The balloon, like the universe, is under
two opposing forces; so we may take the internal
pressure tending to inflate it to correspond to the
cosmical repulsion, and the tension of the rubber
trying to contract it to correspond to the mutual
attraction of the galaxies, although here the analogy
is not very close.
Initially there was a balance; but
a disturbance caused a slight expansion. This thinned
out the rubber and made it less able to resist expansion. The more it expanded the less opposition was
offered to expansion. The balloon is now probably
several times its original size, and the tension of the
rubber has decreased so much that it does little to
retard the expansion.
A certain amount of quantitative data as to the
dimensions, etc., of the universe can be obtained, and
these I give forthwith. The figures are not final, but
I think that (a), (6), (c), (d) are not likely to be in
error by more than a factor 2 and the other two
results by a factor 4
(a)

Speed of recession of distant objects (full value
if the mutual attraction of the galaxies is
negligible) = 528 kilometres per second per
megaparsec distance.

b)

Initial radius of the universe before it began to

(

expand = 328 megaparsecs = 1068 million
light-years.
(c)

Total mass of the universe = 2*14. io 55 gm.
= i*o8.io 22 x sun’s mass.

67

5-a

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
(d)

Number of protons in the universe = number
of electrons = 1-29. io 79

(e)

.

Initial mean density of matter in the universe

= 1*05. io~ 27 gm. per cu. cm. = 1 hydrogen
atom per 1580 cu. cm.
(/)

The cosmical constant (A) = 9*8. io~ 55 cm.~ 2

These results are interrelated when one of them is
known the others can all be deduced accurately. Thus
they all depend on the value 528 which we here adopt
as the speed of recession. From the observed speeds
;

of recession of the spiral nebulae values ranging from
450 to 550 have been published. Strictly speaking the
observed speed should be increased in order to obtain
44
55
the full value referred to in (0), because we want
to free the result from the drag of gravitational
attraction; but making the best estimate we can of
the masses of the nebulae, we judge that their mutual
gravitational attraction is not likely to make an important difference. Many astronomers would adopt
a value higher than 550, believing that Hubble’s scale
of distances of the nebulae is systematically too great.
For this reason it would not be very surprising if the
true value of the constant were as high as 1000 km.
per sec. per mp.
The value 528 which is here used was adopted for
the theoretical reasons discussed in Chapter iv. It
depended on a preliminary development of the theory,
and I can now see that it will be modified (probably
increased) in the final theory. I might perhaps make a
better shot at the value now; but it seems undesirable
to chop and change whilst the theory is still incom-

68

FEATURES OF THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
plete.

Thus at present both observational and theo-

retical values are subject to some uncertainty.

How-

ever, since 528 is nearly the lowest value suggested, we
shall

presumably not be exaggerating the effects of

the expansion if we adopt it.

The original radius of the universe is given under
(6), but we are unable to calculate the present radius.
It is rather tantalising not to know so important a
quantity; and unfortunately there is not much prospect of knowing it.
it

I have a faint hope that some day

will be revealed to us

by the cosmic rays, if these
Otherwise the

really are extra-terrestrial (see p. 80).

only method is to estimate the average density of
matter throughout the universe, and compare it with
the initial density given under (e); since the mass
cannot have changed importantly, the comparison
will give the expansion of volume and hence the expansion of radius. To find the present density we
should have to count the average number of galaxies
in a given volume, compute the average number of
stars per galaxy and the average mass of a star, and
allow also for the diffuse matter within the galaxies
and the still more diffuse matter between the galaxies.
I am afraid such an estimate can scarcely be trusted
to a factor of 100. The result, however, seems to come
out well below the value io~ 27 found for the initial
density.

There is a curious difference between measuring the
and
measuring the radius of the earth’s surface. The
earth’s radius gives no trouble provided that geodetic
measurements extend over a large enough area. It
radius of curvature of the expanding universe

69

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
might therefore be thought that our difficulty in
measuring the present radius of the universe is due
to the very small area of our survey, and will be
removed when the survey is sufficiently extended. But
the analogy fails because, owing to the delay of lightmessages from distant parts of the universe, the information they can bring us is so much out of date
that it would be useless as a guide to th t present radius.
When occasion arises I shall assume for illustration
that a 5-fold expansion of the original radius has
occurred; but this number is merely a guess.
The mass of our own galaxy is roughly estimated at
from io 10 to io 11 times the sun’s mass. The average
galaxy appears to be smaller. From the total mass of
the universe given in (c) we conclude that there is
enough material for at least a hundred thousand
million galaxies.
curious difficulty arises in stating the number of
electrons or protons in the universe. Even if we count
them one by one there is not a unique result, because
there are two ways of counting, and one way gives

A

twice as many as the other.

It cannot be said that
According to one view, when
we have counted the particles in one hemisphere of the
spherical world we have finished the count, and the
other hemisphere only gives us the same particles
over again.* When we take this view we are said to
use elliptical space (though the name “ elliptical” does

either way is wrong.

Take a long narrow strip of blotting-paper with a number of
If you proceed
continuously along the surface counting the blots you will after a
time find yourself counting the same blots over again from the other
*

blots on it and form it into a ring with a twist in it.

side.

70

FEATURES OF THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
not seem very appropriate) It does not really matter
which view we take, provided that we adhere to one
view consistently. I adopt the other view throughout,
and count both hemispheres of spherical space.
For those who care to examine the interrelation of
these results, I add the leading mathematical formulae
by which they are derived. The volume of a spherical
space of radius R is
2
z
7t
.

2

R

This is larger than the ordinary Euclidean volume of
a sphere. It is to be remembered that spherical space
is not a Euclidean sphere but the skin of a fourdimensional hypersphere.

We call the initial (Einstein) radius R e and the total
mass M. These are related to the cosmical constant by
A = i /R 2

GM/c 2 =

rRe

,

G being the constant of gravitation (6*66. io~

8
)

and

c the velocity of light. These results were obtained by

Einstein in 1916.

The distance round the world is 2ttR as though it
formed a circuit of radius R though physically the
bending must be regarded as a fictitious representation and we get “ round the world’ literally by going
straight on. It is only in an average sense that R is the
,

—

5

radius of curvature

;

if

we look at the universe micro-

scopically the empty regions have less curvature and

the regions occupied by matter have more curvature.

A special importance is attached to the radius of
curvature of the empty space, R s This is given by
.

Rs-ReV3

A = 3 IR*.

The radius of curvature of the empty regions remains
7i

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
constant, whilst the average radius expands. Thus the

above formula for R 3 holds at all times and not merely
in the initial equilibrium condition. This to

some

extent compensates us for our lack of knowledge of

the present radius of the universe; we do know
(approximately) the present radius of curvature of

any empty region.

The limiting speed of recession of the spiral nebulae
or other distant objects is
c/R s per unit distance.

This is attained when the expansion has proceeded so
far as to reduce the mutual attraction of the nebulae
to insignificance. If q is the expansion, i.e. the ratio
of the present radius to the original radius, the formula
which takes account of the mutual gravitation is

Thus when q — 2, the speed of recession is 70-7 per
cent, of the limiting value; when q = 5, it is 94*7 per
cent. The formula is due to Lemaitre.

The

precise definition

of

R

s

“the radius of

is

spherical curvature of any three-dimensional section

of the four-dimensional continuum of space and
For a non-expanding space it is
the radius of curvature as ordinarily pictured but the
geometry of expanding space is too complex to afford
a comprehensible picture of it. It might be thought
that when the universe expands its radius can never
become larger than the radius of curvature of empty
space; but this refers to a different component of
curvature from that measured by R $

imaginary time 55

.

;

.

72

FEATURES OF THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
II

One of the differences originally noticed between the
Einstein and de Sitter universes was that light could
go right round an Einstein universe but not round a
de Sitter universe. Our expanding universe is on its
way from the one condition to the other, and we ask
how light will behave in it.
In the course of the expansion there is a definite
moment after which circumambulation ceases to be
possible. It seems certain that we are well past this
moment, so that a ray of light emitted now will never
get round to its starting-point again. On the other
hand, light, which we now see, was emitted in the past.
It may therefore have been emitted before the critical
moment and have gone round the world before

reaching us. Thus ideally it is still possible for us to
see round the world; the events so seen must all have

happened before the critical moment.
This may seem mysterious, but the mystery largely
disappears when we remember that even at the beginning, when the circumference was at its smallest,
6700 million years to go round. Great
changes are now happening in that period; the
universe is doubling its radius every 1300 million
years. Light is like a runner on an expanding track
with the winning-post receding faster than he can run.
In the earliest days, when the universe was only
just disturbed from equilibrium and the rate of expansion was slow, light and other radiation went
light took

round and round the universe until it was absorbed.
This merry-go-round lasted until the universe had
73

;

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
expanded to 1*003 times its initial radius. Then the
bell rang for the last lap; light waves then running
will make just one more circuit during the rest of
eternity; those which started later will never get
round.

Somewhat

later,

when

the

expansion

reached

1*073,* the last half-lap began. After that moment it

became impossible for light to travel half-way round
so that corresponding to any star or system there is a

region of the universe which its light can now never

And if light cannot, no other causal influence
can reach it, for no kind of signal can travel faster
than light. I have sometimes pictured spherical space
as a bubble. Our expanding universe is an expanding
bubble. It seems fair to say that when the expansion
reached 1*073 the bubble burst. For regions between
which no causal influence can ever pass are as disconnected as the fragments of a bubble.
As I have alfeady said, it is still quite possible for
us to see things in or through the regions which are
now broken off from us, because there is a lag of lightmessages. In that case what we see refers to a time

reach.

before the bursting of the bubble; the light got across
before the breach occurred.

As light travels in the expanding universe it becomes
reddened. Lemaitre has shown that the reddening
follows a simple rule, viz. the wave-length is increased
in the ratio of the radius of the universe at the time of
observation to the radius at the time of emission of the
* The critical values i -003 and 1 *073 were worked out by de Sitter.
The critical moments are later in “elliptical” space (p. 70), because
the runners then take a short cut leaving out one hemisphere.

74

FEATURES OF THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
For light which has been half-way round the
world or more this reddening is considerable. We
have seen that such light must have been emitted
before the expansion reached 1*073, so that the radius
at the time of emission was not much different from
the Einstein radius. If the expansion is now 5, the
wave-length will be increased 5-fold this would shift
most stellar spectra almost wholly into the infra-red.
It has been suggested that a nebula seen in one direc55
tion in the sky might be the “ back of a nebula seen
in the opposite direction. Apart from general unlikelihood, the extreme reddening of one or other image

light.

;

spoils this entertaining conjecture.
I should explain that the Doppler shift to the red
due to the recession of the source of light is the same as
the reddening here described. We have to explain it in

different words, because

we are now contemplating

the passage of light over much greater distances.

If

the earth were to expand, the voyage between any

two ports would be lengthened, and a transatlantic
company might raise its fares on the ground that New
York had receded from Liverpool; but for a roundthe-world tour the statement that Liverpool had
receded from Liverpool, however justifiable, would
scarcely be an illuminating explanation. The reddening of light, like the raising of fares, is attributed
sometimes to recession and sometimes more directly
to the expansion, according to circumstances.
If you are in a spherical universe and look out in
any direction, then if there is no obstruction you ought
to see the back of your head. Well, not exactly. The
light has taken more than 6000 million years to go

—

75

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
round, and your head was not there so long ago; but
you ought to see what was in the position now occupied
by your head. You will not need to use a powerful
telescope to see it, because in fact you already have
the most powerful telescope imaginable exactly adjusted on it, an instrument of some thousand million
light-years’ aperture. For this purpose spherical space
is an optical instrument, neither lens nor mirror, but
equally effective in bringing rays to a focus.

am afraid, however, that you will not actually see
even if you can get rid of all obstruction. A large
telescope is not always a good telescope; its performance depends on the surfaces of the lenses or
mirrors being perfectly true. The actual universe was
not intended for an optical instrument, and it is not
a true enough sphere to give any noteworthy results.
This brings us to the theory of ghosts” an idea
developed more as a mathematical curiosity than as
a serious physical speculation. In a perfectly spherical
world rays of light emitted in all directions from a
point will after travelling round the world converge
to the same point; thus a real image is formed from
which light will again diverge in all directions. Such
an image might optically be mistaken for a substantial
body. Owing to the time taken in circumambulating
the world the image is not formed until at least
6000 million years later than its source. Other images
would be formed after two circuits, three circuits, etc.
We can thus imagine space to be populated not only
with real stars and galaxies but with ghosts of stars
which existed 6000 million, 12000 million, etc. years
I

it,

—

‘ 6

ago.

76

FEATURES OF THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
That would be a good practical joke for nature to
play on the astronomer, but I do not think he would
be taken in. The ghosts, being formed by light that
has been round the world, would be ruddier than the
genuine article, and so easily distinguished. Moreover,
the trick could only be performed in the ideal spherical
world of the mathematician; the actual universe is too
But the
idea has another kind of interest because it raises an

irregular to focus the rays after their circuit.

important question as to the meaning of relativity.
Considering a perfectly spherical transparent world,
it is evident that the ghost is formed at the place
occupied by the star when the light was emitted, not
at the place now occupied by the star. Indeed the
star may have since been scattered into many fragments. Thus if we observe simultaneously a star and
its ghost, there will in general be a considerable
distance between them due to the motion of the star
during the circuit of the light. A star which coincides
with its ghost has not moved. This gives us an ob55
which appears to
servational test of “ absolute rest
contradict the principle of relativity. We must admit
that a perfectly spherical universe provides a frame of
reference for distinguishing rest and motion, space and
time, which can be looked upon as ultimate and
absolute. It may be asked, Is not this precisely what
the absolutists have been contending? Even if it is,
I do not think they score very heavily by the admission
that an absolute frame would exist if the universe
were different from what it actually is The perfectly
spherical world is a mathematical invention, and any
slight deviations from the sphere will cause the ghost
77

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
to diffuse, so that absolute rest again

becomes an

indefinite conception. In a perfectly spherical universe

nothing ever happens for it is the irregularities that
constitute the events. Even the expansion of its radius
(by cosmical repulsion) means nothing, for there is no
standard with which to compare it. Thus our admission that there can be an absolute time is coupled
with the proviso that nothing ever happens in it.
Just as a frame of space and time defined with
reference to the sun is appropriate for dealing with
problems relating to the solar system, so a frame
defined with reference to the matter of the universe
as a whole is appropriate for dealing with the universe
as a whole. In a uniform spherical world the frame
appropriate to the universe as a whole is also appropriate to every part of it; thus the usual multiplicity
of frames of space and time is suppressed. The principle of relativity is that one man’s frame is as good as
another’s; it is not upset by imagining an ideal world
in which every man has hit on the same frame: and
to imagine circumstances in which there would be
no opportunity for applying the principle is a very
different thing from denying its validity.
In this book I speak of space and time as entirely
distinct, and treat simultaneity as uniquely defined;
it is to be understood that I am using a system of
reference given by the universe as a whole, the universe having for this purpose been smoothed in the
same way that in geodesy the earth is smoothed into
the geoid. I claim no more for this frame than that it
is convenient; in particular simultaneity (as defined
by it) has no particular philosophical significance,
;

78

FEATURES OF THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
III

I have been speaking of the propagation of light, since

the most familiar kind of radiation; but circumambulation becomes more of a practical possibility if
it is

we consider highly penetrating radiation, particularly
the cosmic rays which are believed to come into our
atmosphere from outside. The mean density of matter
in the initial state of the universe and the length of the
world-circumference are known (p. 67) ; hence it is
easy to calculate that the average amount of obstruction to a cosmic ray in going round the world is

equivalent to 7 cm. of water. It is well known that
the rays can penetrate a much greater depth, so that
possible for them to go many times round. It
would seem that the cosmic rays generated almost
from the beginning of time are still travelling through
space, only a relatively small loss having occurred by
it is

absorption.

This is in keeping with the observed symmetry of
their distribution, which otherwise seems inexplicable.

Astronomical interest in cosmic rays was first aroused
by the researches of Kolhorster; at that time it was
stated that they were observed to come predominantly
from directions in the plane of the Milky Way.
Accordingly they were supposed to originate in the
gaseous nebulae and diffuse matter occurring in our
galaxy. The later and more accurate work of Millikan
has proved, however, that there is no such galactic
preference, and the distribution is approximately uniform in all directions. If then they have an extraterrestrial origin the source must be distributed sym79

.

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
metrically round the earth. But proceeding outwards
from the earth, astronomy does not reveal anything
with the necessary symmetry until we take in the
whole universe. We might perhaps found on the
cosmic rays an argument in support of closed spherical
space; in an unclosed system it would be a strange
coincidence if the earth were so centrally placed as to
receive the rays equally from all directions.
The rays are generally supposed to be of sub-atomic
origin, and attempts have been made to infer the
exact origin from the wave-length (which is deduced
by mathematical theory from the penetrating power)
Just as the origin of a light ray is inferred from its
wave-length, so the sub-atomic process which originated
a cosmic ray might be inferred. But in these attempts
it has been assumed that the observed wave-length is
the original wave-length of the rays. One is reminded
of the American in Innocents Abroad who refused to take
any interest in a mummy and wanted to be shown a
55
‘‘nice fresh corpse
Those who are studying cosmic
rays have taken it for granted that they are dealing
with a nice fresh corpse, and are identifying the body
.

on that supposition.

I

suggest that it is not a fresh

corpse but a very ancient mummy. That will alter the
identification considerably.

mainly from

If the cosmic rays date

the relatively long period

universe was close to

its

initial

when the

Einstein state, the

wave-length has now increased perhaps 5-fold or
more.
If I am right, cosmic radiation is a museum a collection of relics of remote antiquity. These relics are
stamped with an inscription indicating the dimensions

—

80

FEATURES OF THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
of the world in its earliest ages. Whoever ultimately
identifies the sub-atomic process originating the rays

will be able to read the inscription and tell us just how

much the universe has expanded since then.
The intensity of cosmic radiation falling on the
earth is found to be not much less than the intensity
of starlight (i.e. the radiation from all the stars except
the sun). The earth, however, is in a privileged
position with regard to starlight, being in the midst
of one of the galaxies it has no advantage with regard
to cosmic rays which are presumed to have spread
more or less evenly over all space. Thus in a more
average region starlight is much less intense than
cosmic radiation; and in a general survey of radiation
in the universe only the cosmic radiation need be
considered. It can be verified that the mass and
energy of cosmic radiation throughout the universe is
small compared with the mass of matter, and does not
affect materially the formulae and calculations at the
beginning of this chapter.
It is sometimes asked, What becomes of all the
radiation which is continually being poured into
;

space ? A favourite speculation is that in some way it
is ultimately turned back into matter. This has never
seemed to me very likely, and it is discouraged by a
conclusion recently pointed out by de Sitter. The total
amount of radiation in the universe (measured by
mass or by energy) is actually decreasing. Omitting
for the moment changes by emission and absorption,
the number of quanta remains constant; but the
gradual increase of wave-length already discussed
means that the energy of each quantum diminishes;
EE U

81

6

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
in fact the energy of the radiation diminishes in just

the same proportion as the radius of the universe
expands. This rate of diminution is now much too
rapid to be compensated by fresh accessions from the
radiation poured out by stars and by nebulous matter.
We may mention here a result which, though it
refers to an entirely different topic, is closely related

mathematically.* We do not expect the rule that the
receding velocity of a spiral nebula is proportional to
its distance to be obeyed by every individual. The rule
refers to averages, and the nebulae will have individual velocities superposed on the systematic
velocity of recession. It has sometimes been thought
surprising that the individual deviations are not more
conspicuous. Theory, however, shows that with the
lapse of time the average individual velocity decreases
in the same proportion as the universe expands; for
example, if the expansion is now 5-fold, the nebulae
have on the average only one-fifth of the individual
velocities that they originally possessed.

IV
If the expanding universe is accepted, its most immediate reaction is on the time-scale of evolution. Three
different time-scales have been favoured at one time

or another, which we may distinguish as “ short”,
“ intermediate and “long”. No one now has a good
word for the short Kelvin time-scale, which allowed
5

’

* The connection is that both results assert the decrease of a form
of energy as the universe expands. They are comprised in a general
theorem of Lemaitre, that when the universe expands the pressure
changes adiabatically. This is applied both to radiation pressure and
to gas pressure, the “gas” in this case having galaxies for molecules.

82

FEATURES OF THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
not more than 50 million years for the whole life-time
of the sun and solar system; and practically our choice
lies between the intermediate scale giving the sun an
age of the order io 10 years, and the long scale which
gives its age fairly definitely as 5 io 12 years. Naturally
it is the policy of the evolutionist to grab as much time
as possible in order to give his processes a longer
opportunity to accomplish something. So when there
is no strong evidence one way or another, the longer
time-scale gets the preference. This, rather than any
striking success of the theory, accounts for the popularity of the long time-scale in recent years.
It is sometimes forgotten that of the two hypotheses,
“long” and “intermediate”, the long time-scale is
the older. It came about through Einstein’s theory
which gave the total amount of energy in any given
mass of matter. Knowing the mass of the sun, we
knew just how much energy it contained and could
calculate how long this would maintain the present
rate of radiation if it could all be released. If all the
energy of constitution of matter is released, the matter
must disappear so that it is necessary that the electrons
and protons should annihilate one another. At the
time of my first researches on the internal constitution
of the stars (1916-1917) the annihilation of electrons
and protons was the only source of energy known that
was adequate for stellar requirements, and it was the
only one that I then discussed; but in 1920 a possible
alternative was recognised in the energy released by
the transmutation of hydrogen into higher elements.
This releases rather less than 1 per cent, of the total
amount of energy contained in the matter, so that it
.

;

83

G-2

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
gives by no means so abundant a supply as the total

annihilation of matter.

Still it suffices

for the inter-

mediate time-scale, and we could perhaps make it do
at a pinch.

There is no direct evidence that the annihilation of
protons and electrons can occur unless we count the
evidence of the cosmic rays, which according to some
authorities are supposed to contain a wave-length
which indicates this source. If the long time-scale
could be established by astronomical researches it
would be good indirect evidence, for it seems clear
that there is no way of providing for it without annihilation of matter. Direct evidence for the building
up of complex elements out of hydrogen scarcely seems
to be required since the elements exist, there is presumably a way of forming them. But it may be remarked that the recent discovery of the neutron
makes it much easier to envisage the steps of this

—

;

process.
I do not think that anything very decisive has been
found for or against either theory (annihilation of
matter or transmutation of hydrogen) or for or against

Like other
time-grabbers I have generally adhered to the long
time-scale provisionally, since it affords more scope
for investigation. But two years ago I was much
shaken by a study of the dynamics of our Milky Way
system; its form and construction seem to be such
that it is impossible that it should have endured for
the period of the long time-scale.*
either time-scale (long or intermediate).

* Halley Lecture, The Rotation of the Galaxy (Oxford Univ. Press
1930).

84

FEATURES OF THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
In a universe doubling its radius every 1300 million
years, it is evident that the long time-scale of billions

of years is altogether incongruous. It is true that our
theory does not set any definite limit to past time.

There may have been a very long period of approximate equilibrium before any serious expansion began;
but this scarcely counts from the point of view of
stellar evolution.

Astronomical history may be said

to begin when the first condensations were fully formed

and the galaxies separated from one another; but by
time the expansion must have been well under
way. It is difficult to allow much more than io 10 years
between then and now.
Thus astronomers, who have been luxuriating in an

this

enormously long time-scale, are threatened with a
drastic cut. Even in these days of economy, a cut of
about 99 per cent, is not to be accepted lightly by the
department concerned. I confess that I do not quite
see how we are going to manage on the reduced
allowance; and I am not disposed to blame those
whose reaction is to try to seek for some loophole by
which the cut can be avoided.
If we find it hard to accept the speed at which the
universe is changing, acceptance is not made easier by
the consideration of what it is changing towards. The
fragments of the burst bubble will continually become
more numerous until each galaxy is a separate fragment. I suppose that the distance of one galaxy from
the next will ultimately become so great, and the
mutual recession so rapid, that neither light nor any
other causal influence can pass from one to another.
All connection between the galaxies will be broken;

85

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
each will be a self-contained universe uninfluenced by
anything outside it. Such a disintegration is rather
a nightmare to conceive; though it does not threaten

any particular disaster to human destiny (see p. 89).
But the difficulty as to the time-scale does not arise
from the more recondite parts of the present theory.
It remains whether we adopt spherical space or not.
It becomes more serious if we do not accept the relativity

explanation of the recession. Since the outward speed
of the nebulae is known by observation, it is a matter
of simple arithmetic to compute the date when they
were close together in a congested crowd. It was not
more than 1900 million years ago. This assumes that
in the past the speeds were as great as they are now.
The relativity explanation grants some reprieve, for it
postulates that the outward speeds have been gradually
produced by cosmical repulsion and were therefore
smaller in the past. The rival explanations, which do
not admit a repulsive force, refuse this extension, and
consequently accentuate the difficulty of the time-scale.
So I cannot see anything to be gained by discarding
the relativity explanation in favour of one of the other
theories. On the one point in which the present results

some difficulty, the other theories
I have much more
sympathy with those critics who deny the nebular

appear

to offer

greatly magnify the difficulty.

recession altogether, believing the observed radial
velocities to be spurious (p. 16).
all difficulty as to

They are relieved of

the time-scale.

Speaking on the de Sitter-Lemaitre theory in
September 1931, I said “But the theory of the expanding universe is in some respects so preposterous

—

86

FEATURES OF THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
that we naturally hesitate to commit ourselves to it.
It contains elements apparently so incredible that I
feel almost an indignation that anyone should believe

—except myself”.

in it

The reasons for the exception are dealt with in
Chapter iv.

v
Expansion is a relative term. When we assert that the
universe expands, what do we assume to be constant?
This question is often asked, but there is no subtlety
about the answer. The expansion is relative to the
standards of length ordinarily accepted the metre
bar for example. The wave-length of cadmium light
is sometimes adopted as the best available standard of
length; expressed in terms of the cadmium wave-

—

length, the radius of the universe is continually increasing.

By the same standard the radius of curvature of an

We

empty region of space remains constant (p. 72).
can easily see that whilst a surface as a whole

is

swelling the curvature of certain portions of it can

remain unchanged.

The fact that the expansion is relative to ordinary
standards is clear enough when we adopt the standpoint of Chapter 1 but the more recondite treatment,
in which the phenomenon is presented as a uniform
expansion of spherical space, seems to have confused
not only the casual reader but some of the experts.
Their idea is that, since every part of space is being
;

inflated uniformly, the inflation will affect distances

between electrons in the atom and between planets in
the solar system just as much as distances between
87

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
galaxies. This would mean that atoms, human beings,

the earth, the solar system, expand at the same rate as
the universe; there would be no change in the radius
of the universe expressed in metres, since the metre
bar is expanding at the same rate. Such an expansion
shared by everything alike would be undetectable, and
would in fact have no definable meaning.

The fallacy arises from forgetting that the expanding
spherical universe is a very much simplified model.

We cannot appeal to it to decide how atoms, measuring
rods and planets behave, because atoms, measuring
rods and planets have been smoothed

away into a

perfectly continuous and uniform distribution of mass.

The inflation is only uniform if the density is uniform.
If we consider a roughened or pimply sphere, it is
found mathematically that the roughened parts do
not expand at the same rate as the smooth intervals
between them.
Lemaitre designed his expanding spherical space for
the treatment of phenomena affecting the universe as

a whole. His approximation is grotesquely inadequate
for treating smaller scale phenomena such as the be-

haviour of measuring rods or the internal structure of
a galaxy. Within a galaxy the average world-curvature
is some thousands of times greater than Lemaitre’s
average for the universe as a whole, and his formulae
are inapplicable.

The result is that only the intergalactic distances
expand. The galaxies themselves are unaffected; and
all lesser systems

—star

clusters, stars,

and their apparatus, atoms
expansion.

human observers

—are entirely free from

Although the cosmical repulsion or ex88

;

FEATURES OF THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
pansive tendency is present in all these smaller systems,
it is checked

by much larger forces and no expansion

occurs. To see how this happens, suppose that the sun

and planets are given rather large electrical charges
of the same sign; that would introduce an expansive
tendency into the solar system, but it would not turn
it into an expanding system.
After an initial readjustment the planets would describe periodic orbits
as before in the modified field of force, and the solar
system would not grow any larger. This holds until
the charge on the planets is made so strong that the
repulsion outweighs gravitation; the planets then
abandon the periodic type of orbit and recede continually. Thus the demarcation between permanent
and dispersing systems is quite abrupt. It corresponds
to the distinction between periodic and aperiodic
phenomena.
It appears then that the “bursting of the bubble”
will end when each galaxy is a separate fragment. It
will not go on to disrupt the galaxies. These no doubt
contain their own seeds of decay, and cosmical re-

pulsion may ultimately help to scatter their fragments

but that concerns a much more distant future. If you
think that the shattering of the bubble universe is a
tragic outlook, it may be some consolation to reflect
that when the worst has happened our galaxy of about
a hundred thousand million stars will be left intact.
It is not so bad a prospect.

89

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
VI
All change
relatively to

is

relative.

our

The universe is expanding

common material standards; our

material standards are shrinking relatively to the size
of the universe. The theory of the “ expanding uni59

might also be called the theory of the “shrinking
atom”.
It is our instinctive outlook that we are always the
same; it is our environment that changes. As with
Anatole France’s dog Ricquet “Les hommes, les
animaux, les pierres grandissent en s’approchant et
deviennent enormes quand ils sont sur moi. Moi non.
Je demeure toujours aussi grand par tout ou je
verse

—

suis”.

not the expanding universe another example of
Surely the
universe should be the standard and we should
measure our own vicissitudes by it. We see a relative
change, and cry out that the universe is dissolving; as
well might the growing child, who sees the familiar
home becoming smaller, be dismayed at the vanishing
property of houses and furniture.
The argument sounds plausible, but I do not deem
it true. Even if our standards are held responsible for
the expanding of the universe, they cannot be held
responsible for its bursting. Moreover our constant
standards are not necessarily puny. I have mentioned
(p. 72) one cosmical dimension which remains constant, namely the radius of curvature R s of empty
regions of the universe. Since it stands in a constant
ratio to the metre, it can be used equivalently. This is
Is

distortion due to our egocentric outlook?

90

FEATURES OF THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
in fact the ideal cosmical standard, and judged by it

the universe changes whilst we remain true to size.

Although I do not think the suggestion goes very
deep or that it has any philosophical moral, I will
follow it for my last escapade in our new playground.
Let us then take the whole universe as our standard
of constancy, and adopt the view of a cosmic being
whose body is composed of intergalactic spaces and

Or rather we must now say it
keeps the same size, for he will not admit that it is he
swells as they swell.

who has changed. Watching us for a few thousand
million years, he sees us shrinking; atoms, animals,
planets, even the galaxies, all shrink alike; only the

intergalactic spaces remain the same. The earth spirals

round the sun in an ever-decreasing orbit. It would
be absurd to treat its changing revolution as a constant unit of time.

The cosmic being will naturally

relate his units of length and time so that the velocity

of light remains constant.

Our years will then de-

crease in geometrical progression in the cosmic scale

of time.

On that scale man’s life is becoming briefer;

and ten are an ever-decreasing
allowance. Owing to the property of geometrical
progressions an infinite number of our years will add

his threescore years

up to a finite cosmic time ; so that what we should call
the end of eternity is an ordinary finite date in the
cosmic calendar. But on that date the universe has
expanded to infinity in our reckoning, and we have
shrunk to nothing in the reckoning of the cosmic
being.

We walk the stage of life, performers of a drama for
the benefit of the cosmic spectator.
9i

As the scenes

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
proceed he notices that the actors are growing smaller
and the action quicker. When the last act opens the
curtain rises on midget actors rushing through their
parts at frantic speed. Smaller and smaller. Faster

One last microscopic blurr of intense
And then nothing.

and faster.
agitation.

92

!

Chapter IV

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
See Mystery to Mathematics fly
Pope, Dunciad
I

I have explained in the previous chapters that
theory led us to expect a systematic motion of recession
of remote objects, and that by astronomical observation the most remote objects known have been found
to be receding rapidly. The weak point in this triumph

gave no indication how large a velocity
of recession was to be expected. It is as though an
explorer were given instructions to look out for a
creature with a trunk; he has brought home an
elephant perhaps a white elephant The conditions
would equally well have been satisfied by a fly, with
much less annoyance to his next-door neighbour the
time-grabbing evolutionist. So there is great argu-

is that theory

—

.

ment about it.

way to remove the cloud of doubt
supplement the original prediction, and show
that physical theory demands not merely a recession
but a particular speed of recession. The theory of
relativity alone will not give any more information;
but we have other resources. I refer to the second
great modern development of physics— the quantum
theory, or (in its most recent form) wave-mechanics.
By combining the two theories we can make the
desired theoretical calculation of the speed of recession.
I think the only

is

to

93

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
This is a new adventure, and I do not wish to insist
on the accuracy or finality of the first attempt. I cannot see how there can be anything seriously wrong

with it; but then one never does see these faults until
some new circumstance arises or some ingenious person
comes along to show us how blind we have been. But
there are two kinds of scientific misadventure we may
start off on a false trail altogether, or we may make
temporary blunders in following the true path. I am
content if in this chapter I can justify my belief that
at any rate we are not committing the first error.
According to the argument here developed we can
calculate by pure theory what ought to be the speed
;

of recession of the spiral nebulae. (This is subject to
the reservation that the restraining effect of their

mutual gravitational attraction is

relatively

unim-

portant, a condition which appears to be satisfied in

the present state of the universe.) Since certain small
factors in the formulae are at present left in suspense,

there is a temporary indefiniteness; but we can say
provisionally that the result is between 500 and 1000
km. per sec. per megaparsec. No astronomical observations of any kind are used in this calculation, all

the data being found in the laboratory. Therefore

when we turn our telescopes and spectroscopes on the
and find them to be receding at a
speed within these limits the confirmation is striking.
The original prediction of de Sitter and Lemaitre
distant nebulae

gave no indication whether the phenomenon would
first become perceptible at nebular distances or at

We had not the
an effect would appear. By

distances io 6 or io 60 times greater.
faintest idea how large

94

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
the

new investigation, however, the amount is so

closely defined that there can be little doubt as to the

correspondence of the theoretical and observed effects.
Our astronomical explorer cannot be accused of
having brought home an elephant in mistake for a fly;
and (if I may further complicate the zoological metaphor) even if it is a white elephant it is not a mare’s
nest.

Any theoretical step requires testing in as many
directions as possible.

If the theoretical ideas here

employed had had only one application, viz. to calculate the recession of the nebulae, there might be a
certain amount of room for “ fudging”. As a matter
of fact the danger of unconscious fudging is greatly
exaggerated there is an artistry in these fundamental
equations of physics which one cannot trifle with. But
it naturally strengthens our confidence if the same
;

step also leads to the solution of another problem.

This happens in the present case, the associated
problem being the relation of the proton to the
electron and in particular the ratio of their masses.
Here a very delicate observational test of the theory
is

possible.

Thus we are not dealing with an isolated problem
but with a theory which determines at the same time
two of the leading constants of physics, viz. the
and through it the recession of the
nebulae, and the mass-ratio of the proton and electron.
I cannot give here the mathematical part of the
argument. I want rather to show that all the necessary

cosmical constant

physical ideas present themselves naturally, and are

waiting for the mathematician to express them in

95

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
symbols and work out the answer. By a preliminary
attempt at the latter task we gain fair assurance that

no serious difficulty is likely to arise.
II

We have been contemplating the system of the

—

phenomena on the grandest scale yet
imagined. I want now to turn to the other end of the
scale and look into the interior of an atom.
The connecting link is the cosmical constant.
Hitherto we have encountered it as the source of a
galaxies

scattering force, swelling the universe and driving the

nebulae far and wide. In the atom we shall find it in
a different capacity, regulating the scale of construction of the system of satellite electrons. I believe that
this wedding of great and small is the key to the understanding of the behaviour of electrons and protons.
You will see from the formulae on p. 71 that the
cosmical constant is equal in value to 1 JR 2 or to 3 /Rs 2 ,
so that it is really a measure of world-curvature; and
in place of it we can consider the initial radius of the
universe Re or better the steady radius of curvature
In the present chapter the unof empty space R s
qualified phrase “radius of curvature” or the symbol
,

.

R will be understood to refer to R
in

vacuo it has the

8 .

Being the radius

same kind of pre-eminence in

physical equations that the velocity of light in vacuo
has. I will first explain why the radius of curvature is

expected to play an essential part in the theory of the
atom.
Length is relative. That is one of the principles of
Einstein’s theory that has now become a common-

96

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
place of physics. But it was a far from elementary
kind of relativity that Einstein considered according
to him length is relative to a frame of reference moving
with the observer, so that as reckoned by an observer
moving with one star or planet it is not precisely equal
to the length reckoned by an observer moving with
another star. But besides this there is a much more
obvious way in which length is relative. Reckoning of
length always implies comparison with a standard of
length, so that length is relative to a comparison
standard. It is only the ratio of extensions that enters
into experience. Suppose that every length in the
universe were doubled; nothing in our experience
would be altered. We cannot even attach a meaning
to the supposed change. It is an empty form of words
as though an international conference should decree
that the pound should henceforth be reckoned as two
pounds, the dollar two dollars, the mark two marks,
;

—

and so on.
In Gulliver's Travels the Lilliputians were about six
inches high, their tallest trees about seven feet, their
cattle, houses, cities in corresponding proportion. In
Brobdingnag the folk appeared as tall as an ordinary
spire-steeple; the cat seemed about three times larger
than an ox the corn grew forty feet high. Intrinsically
Lilliput and Brobdingnag were just the same; that
indeed was the principle on which Swift worked out
an exhis story. It needed an intruding Gulliver
;

—

—

traneous standard of length to create a difference.
It is commonly stated in physics that all hydrogen
atoms in their normal state have the same size, or the
same spread of electric charge. But what do we mean

EEU

97

7

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
by their having the same size? Or to put the question
the other way round—What would it mean if we said
that two normal hydrogen atoms were of different
sizes, similarly constructed but on different scales?
That would be Lilliput and Brobdingnag over again;
to give meaning to the difference we need a Gulliver.
The Gulliver of physics is generally supposed to be

a certain bar of metal called the International Metre.
But he is not much of a traveller; I do not think he
has ever been away from Paris. We have, as it were,
our Gulliver but have left out his travels; and the
travels are, as Prof. Weyl was the first to show, an
essential part of the story.
It is evident that the metre bar in Paris is not the
It is one of those practical devices
which serve a useful purpose, but dim the clear light
of theoretical understanding. The real Gulliver must
be ubiquitous. So I adopt the principle that when we
come across the metre (or constants based on the
metre) in the present fundamental equations of
physics, our aim must be to eject it and to substitute
the natural ubiquitous standard. The equations put

real Gulliver.

into terms of the real standard will then reveal how

they have arisen.
It is not difficult to find the ubiquitous standard.
As a matter of fact Einstein told us what it was when
he gave us the law of gravitation G^ — Xg^. Some
years ago I showed that this law could be stated in
the form, “ What we call a metre at any place and in
any direction is a constant fraction (
A) of the
radius of curvature of space-time for that place and
In other words the metre is just a prac-

direction”.

98

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
tically convenient sub-multiple of the radius of curva-

ture at the place considered

;

so that measurement in

terms of the metre is equivalent to measurement in
terms of the radius of curvature.
The radius of world-curvature is the real Gulliver.
It is ubiquitous. Everywhere the radius of curvature
exists as a comparison standard indicating, if they
exist, such differences as Gulliver found between
Lilliput and Brobdingnag. If we like we can use its
sub-multiple the metre, remembering, however, that
the metre is ubiquitous only in its capacity as a submultiple of the radius. We should, if possible, try to
forget that in certain localities

we have crystallised

this metre into metallic bars for practical convenience.

We can now give a direct meaning to the statement
that two normal hydrogen atoms in any part of the

universe have the same size. We mean that the extent

of each of them is the same fraction of the radius of
curvature of space-time at the place where it lies. The
atom here is a certain fraction of the radius here, and
the atom on Sirius is the same fraction of the radius at
Sirius. Whether the length of the radius here is absolutely the same as that of the radius at Sirius does
not arise; and indeed I believe that such a comparison
would be without meaning. We say that it is always
the same number of metres; but we mean no more
by that than when we say that the metre is always
the same number of centimetres.
Thus it appears that in all our measures we are
really comparing lengths and distances with the radius
of world curvature at the spot. Provided that the law
of gravitation is accepted, this is not a hypothesis; it is

99

7-2

,

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
It is not
merely a suggestion for an ideal way of measuring
lengths; it reveals the basis of the system which we
have actually adopted, and to which the mechanical
and optical laws assumed in practical measurements
the translation of the law from symbols into words

.

and triangulations are referred.
It

is

not difficult to see how it happens that our

practical standard (the metre bar) is a crystallisation

of the ideal standard (the radius of curvature, or a
sub-unit thereof) Since the radius of curvature is the
unit referred to in our fundamental physical equations, anything whose extension is determined by
.

constant physical equations will have a constant
length in terms of that unit. Thus the physical theory
that provides that the normal hydrogen atom shall

have the same size in terms of the radius of curvature
wherever it may be, will also provide that a solid bar
in a specified state shall have the same size in terms of
the radius of curvature wherever it may be. The fact
that the

atom has a constant size in terms of the

practical metre is a case of “ things which are in a

constant ratio to the same thing are in a constant ratio
to one another

55

.*

The simplification obtained by using the actual
radius of curvature as unit of length (instead of using

a sub-unit) is that all lengths will then become angles
in our world-picture. The measure of any length will

be the “tilt of space 55 in passing from one extremity
to the other.

It

is

true that these angles are not in

actual space but in fictitious dimensions added for the
* For a fuller explanation see The Nature of the Physical World
Chapter vii.

IOO

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
purpose of obtaining a picture; but the justification
of the picture is that it illustrates the analytical relations, and these angles will behave analogously to
spatial angles in the mathematical equations.
To sum up this first stage of our inquiry If in the
most fundamental equations of physics we adopt the
:

radius of curvature R s as unit instead of the present
arbitrary units, we shall have at least made the first
step towards reducing them to a simpler form.

know

that

many

equations

are

simplified

We

when

velocities are expressed in terms of the velocity of

light in vacuo ; we expect a corresponding simplification

when lengths are expressed in terms of the radius of
world-curvature in vacuo. When the equation is in this
way freed from irrelevant complications it should be
easier to detect its true significance. We cannot make
this change of unit so long as the ratio of R s to our
ordinary unit is unknown; but observation of the
spiral nebulae has provided us with what we provisionally assume to be an approximate value of
so that it is now possible to go ahead with our plan.
HI*

In elementary geometry we generally think of space
as consisting of infinitely many points. We approach
nearer to the physical meaning of space if we think of
it as a network of distances. But this does not go far
enough, for we have seen that it is only the ratios of
distances which enter into physical experience. In
* This section is mainly an additional commentary on the principles
explained under II. If found too difficult, it can be omitted. The
main argument is resumed in IV.

101

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
order that a space may correspond exactly to physical
actuality it must be capable of being built up out of
ratios of distances.
The pure geometer is not bound by such considerations, and he freely invents spaces consisting only of
points without distances, or spaces built up out of
absolute distances. In adapting his work for application to space in the physical universe, we have to
select that part of it which conforms to the above
requirement. For that reason we must reject his first
offer
flat space. Flat space cannot be constructed
without absolute lengths, or at least without a conception of a priori comparability of lengths at a distance which can scarcely be distinguished from the
conception of absolute length.*
Flat space, being featureless, does not contain
within itself the requirement for reckoning length and
size, viz. a ubiquitous comparison standard. But what

—

* In pre-relativity theory, and in the original form of Einstein’s
theory, “comparison of lengths at a distance” was assumed to be
axiomatic; that is to say, there was a real difference of height between
the Lilliputian and the Brobdingnagian irrespective of any physical
connection between the islands. The fact that they were in the same
universe phenomena accessible to the same consciousness had
nothing to do with the comparison. Such a conception of unlimited
comparability is scarcely distinguishable from the conception of
absolute length. In a geometry based on this axiom, space only does
half its proper work; the purpose of a field-representation of the
relationships of objects is frustrated, if we admit that the most conspicuous spatial relationship, ratio of size, exists a priori and is not
analysable by field- theory in the way that other relationships are.
WeyPs theory rejected the axiom of comparability at a distance, and
it was at first thought that such comparability could not exist in his
scheme. But both in WeyPs theory and in the author’s extension of
it (affine field-theory) it is possible to compare lengths at a distance,
not as an extra-geometrical a priori conception, but by the aid of the
field which supplies the ubiquitous standard necessary.

—

—

102

—
THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
which does not fulfil the functions
of space, namely to constitute a scheme of reference

is the use of a space

for all those physical relations

—length, distance,

size

which are counted as spatial? Since it does not constitute a frame of reference for length, the name
55
“space is a misnomer. Whatever definition the pure
geometer may adopt, the physicist must define space as
something characterised at every point by an intrinsic
magnitude which can be used as a standard for
reckoning the size of objects placed there.
No question can arise as to whether the comparison
unit for reckoning of lengths and distances is a magnitude intrinsic in space, or in some other physical
quality of the universe, or is an absolute standard
outside the universe. F or whatever embodies this comparison unit is ipso facto the space of physics. Physical
space therefore cannot be featureless. As a matter of
geometrical terminology features of space are described as curvatures (including hypercurvatures) as
already explained, no metaphysical implication of
actual bending in new dimensions is intended. We
have therefore no option but to look for the natural
standard of length among the radii of curvature or
hypercurvature of space-time.
To the pure geometer the radius of curvature is an
incidental characteristic like the grin of the Cheshire
cat. To the physicist it is an indispensable characteristic. It would be going too far to say that to the
physicist the cat is merely incidental to the grin.
Physics is concerned with interrelatedness such as the
interrelatedness of cats and grins. In this case the
55
55
“cat without a grin and the “grin without a cat
;

—

103

^
THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
are equally set aside as purely mathematical phantasies.

When once it is admitted that there exists everywhere a radius of curvature ready to serve as comparison standard, and that spatial distances are
directly or indirectly expressed in terms of this stan-

dard, the law of gravitation ( G = A^ v ) follows
without further assumption; and accordingly the
existence of the cosmical constant A with the corresponding force of cosmical repulsion is established.
Being in this way based on a fundamental necessity
of physical space,* the position of the cosmical constant seems to me impregnable and if ever the theory
of relativity falls into disrepute the cosmical constant
will be the last stronghold to collapse. To drop the
cosmical constant would knock the bottom out of space
It would be a truism to say that space is not an
ultimate conception; for in the relativity view of
physics every conception is an intermediary between
other conceptions. As in the closed universe described
in Chapter n, where the galaxies form a system having
no centre and no outside, so the conceptions of physics
link into a system with no boundary ; our goal is not
to reach an ultimate conception but to complete the
;

.

*

The requirement is that the comparison standard shall be a

magnitude

—

for whatever the standard is
Space can have other characteristic
magnitudes besides the radius of curvature for example, magnitudes
measuring various kinds of hypercurvature. Although the suggestion
seems far-fetched, it is, I suppose, conceivable that one of these might
be substituted. That would give a different law of gravitation; but
there is still a cosmical constant, depending on the ratio of the metre
to the natural comparison standard. In fact the cosmical term A
remains unchanged; it is G^ v which is modified.
intrinsic

in

the space

intrinsic in, that ipso facto is space.

IO4

—

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM

We have concluded that the
ubiquitous comparison standard must be a characfull circle of relationship.

teristic of space,

because it is the function of space to

afford such a standard; but we can inquire further

how space and the standard contained in it themselves originate.

The space in which the atom is pictured as having
position and size is an intermediary conception used
to relate the atom to the “rest of the universe

55
.

It is

therefore no contradiction if we say sometimes that

the extension of the atom is controlled by the curvature of space, and sometimes that it is controlled by
forces of interaction proceeding from the rest of the

universe. It must be remembered that we are only
aware of an atom or any other object in so far as it
interacts with the rest of the universe, and thereby
gives rise to phenomena which ultimately reach our
senses. The position and dimensions which we attribute
to an atom are symbols associated with interaction
effects for there is no meaning in saying that an atom
is at A rather than at B unless it makes some difference
to something that it is at A not B. In considering this
;

interaction it is not necessary to deal separately with

every particle and every element of energy in the rest
of the universe; if it were, progress in physics would
be impracticable. For the most part it is sufficient to
take averages. The multitudinous particles of the
universe admit of an almost uncountable variety of
change of configuration; in considering their interaction with the atom we need preserve only a few
broad types of average change. The “rest of the
55
universe is thus idealised into something possessing

105

—
THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
only a few types of variation or degrees of freedom.
This is illustrated in electrical theory where the interactions of myriads of electrical particles are replaced
by the interaction of an electric field which is specified
uniquely by six numbers. In the same way another
part of the interaction of the rest of the universe on
the atom is idealised into interaction of a metrical field
or to give it its usual name space The few broad
types of variation which are not smoothed out by
averaging are retained in the curvatures of space.
We must distinguish in conception between space
which for certain purposes replaces the rest of the
universe and space which is occupied by the rest of
the universe, although the two spaces ultimately become identical. The distinction is easier if we use the
term “ metrical field” instead of “space”; for (by
analogy with electrical fields) we recognise that a field
has a dual relation to matter, viz. it is produced by
matter and it acts on matter.
The remainder of our task is to try to discover the
details of this idealisation of the “rest of the universe”
into a metrical field containing a radius of curvature.
,

—

.

IV

One of the most fundamental equations of physics is
the wave-equation for a hydrogen atom, that is to say
for a proton and electron. The equation determines

the size of the atom or the spread of its electric charge.
Clearly the ubiquitous standard of length

R must

come into this equation.

Now R does not appear in the equation as ordinarily
written. That is because the equation has been reached

106

;

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
through experiment, and is expressed in terms of
quantities such as the charge of an electron, Planck’s
constant, the velocity of light, etc.

The radius R

though present is in disguise. We must try to penetrate the disguise.

At first sight a formidable obstacle appears. The
radius of the hydrogen atom is of order io~ 8 cm., and

the natural unit R is of order io 27 cm. ; thus the radius

of the hydrogen atom in terms of the natural unit is of
order io~ 35 Our idea was that by introducing the
natural unit we should obtain a simplified equation
but can it be a very simple equation if its solution is
IO" 86 ? Clearly it must contain an enormous numerical
coefficient in one or more of its terms. If the equation
is really in its most elementary form, every coefficient
ought to have some simple meaning some obviously
appropriate reason for being what it is. We should not
be surprised to see the 477 type of coefficient, which
has a simple geometrical meaning; or a coefficient
equal to the number of dimensions or degrees of freedom concerned in the problem, which arises from
summing together a number of symmetrical terms.
But what simple meaning can be attached to an
.

—

enormously large number like io 35 ?
I can think of only one large number which is in
any way relevant to the problem, viz. the number of
particles (electrons or protons) in the universe. Indeed
there seems to be no other way of putting a large

number into

the structure of the physical world.
of course, to pure numbers, not to the kind
of number that we arbitrarily introduce by our
centimetre-gram-second system of reckoning. We
I refer,

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
shall find presently that there are direct reasons for

assuming that the number of particles in the universe
JV* will occur in the coefficients of the wave-equation;
but even without these reasons the enormous magnitude of the coefficients would be a sufficient indication
of the occurrence of jV*.

Another aspect of the same large ratio appears when
we compare the electric force between a proton and
electron with the gravitational force between them.
According to classical theory the ratio is 2-3. io 39
I have long thought that this must be related to the
.

number of electrons and protons in the universe* and
I

expect that the same view has been entertained by

others. Since
is

N

is

about io 79 (p. 68) the above ratio

of the order \/JSf

The direct reason for the appearance of W is that
jV* is actually an effective number of degrees of freedom
of the universe. On classical theory the number
would be greater than A, because each of the

W

particles would have several degrees of freedom; but

there is a well-known exclusion principle which limits
the freedom of a particle by forbidding it to go into

an orbit already occupied by another particle. Wavemechanics therefore approaches the problem from the
other end and defines Was the number of independent
wave-systems existing in the universe, and therefore
equal to the number of separate constituents of the
energy of the universe. It is quite possible that the
number
approached in this way will be found, not
to be arbitrary, but to have some definite theoretical
foundation; but that is pure conjecture, and for the

N

* Mathematical Theory of Relativity, p. 167.

I08

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
present we regard it as the one arbitrary element in
the design of the actual universe.

Our atom is situated in and interacting with a
universe containing JV degrees of freedom. We idealise
and simplify the problem by picturing it as situated
in and interacting with a space (or metrical field) of
radius of curvature R possessing a comparatively small

number of degrees of freedom, say n. In this simplified
’5

form “the rest of the universe comes into the equation of the hydrogen atom through the quantity R.
I think we must expect that the numbers JV and n will
also occur in the equation, as a memorandum of the
substitution of a space with n degrees of freedom for a

with JV degrees of freedom. For fourdimensional space-time the number n is found to be
io. We shall lose sight of it for the time being, but it
will turn up later.
Having decided that JV and R will enter into the
coefficients of the equation of the hydrogen atom, we
next inquire in what kind of association they will
occur. The factor JV, of course, arises from adding
together equal contributions from each of the particles or wave-systems; the question is, What is the
nature of the contributions to be added and how do
they contain R? I do not profess to have achieved the
universe

necessary physical insight to settle the question.

It

no doubt be much more satisfactory when we
have a picture in which we can, as it were, see these
entities adding themselves together, just as we can see
a hundred centimetres adding themselves to form a
metre. But when this kind of insight fails, we are not
without a guide. As conduct may be guided by ethics

will

109

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
or by “good form”, so

can

this

kind of investigation

by analytical

be guided by physical insight or

Both wave-mcchanics and

form.

relativity theory

Only certain kinds
are very strict on good form.
of entities are allowed to be added together. To
add anything else would be a solecism. “It isn’t
done.”
In relativity theory the only things that are additive
are action-invariants.* The action-invariant containing R is the Gaussian curvature, which is proportional to i/R 2
In quantum theory the entities
which may be added are the squares of momenta, or
as they are written symbolically d 2 /dx 2 To construct
a quantity of the same dimensions out of R we must
take i /R 2 f I take it therefore that the entities to be
added are, or are proportional to i/R 2 so that the
required combination is JV/R 2
This gives us what may be called an “adjusted
natural standard of length”, viz. Rjy/N. By using
Rj y'jV instead of R as our unit we absorb the factor
so that it will not trouble us any more. From the data
on p. 67 the length of the adjusted standard is about
13
cm., so that it is not unsuitable for dealing
3. io~
with phenomena of electrons.
Now we can go back to our problem, which was to
discover how the natural standard of length is disguised in the familiar wave-equation. But this time
.

.

.

;

.

* Other tensors may only be added if they are at the same point
a condition which is obviously not fulfilled here.
f The guidance of quantum theory is less obvious than that of
relativity theory because the former commonly adopts a mixed
system of units (dynamical and geometrical). Relativity theory being
purely geometrical avoids the complication.
of space

—

IIO

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
we look for the adjusted standard Rjy/N instead of the
original standard R.
I think I have identified the adjusted standard in
the wave-equation, disguised as the expression e*jmc 2
.

Here e is the charge of an electron or proton, m the
mass of an electron and c the velocity of light. This
expression is well known to be of the dimensions of a
length; in fact § e 2 /mc 2 used to be called the “ radius of

an electron” in the days when the electron was conceived more substantially than it is now. The identification accordingly gives the equation

A=

me 2

‘

cannot enter here into the justification of this
which would lead deeply into the
principles of quantum theory. But I may mention
that the identification is a very simple one. The
I

identification,

expression e^jmc 2 or rather its reciprocal, stands rather
^

disconsolately by itself in the wave-equation, forming

a separate term. Investigators, who are busy transforming, explaining, theorising on the other terms,
leave it alone; it has just been accepted as ballast. It
calls out for identification.

It

may be asked, Is not a straight identification too

simple? Granting the identification in principle, will
or 27r, or
there not be a numerical factor say
the
complicated
type of
more
perhaps something
reach
when
we
the
same
factor which usually appears

—

—

Perhaps there is; but at
present the simple identification looks to me to be
entity by different routes?

hi

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
correct.* I should add, however, that I am uncertain

N

is to be taken as the number
of electrons or the number of electrons and protons, so

whether in this formula

that a factor y/\2 is left in suspense.
I here take

For definiteness

N to be the number of electrons only; the

number of protons must be approximately, and
probably exactly, the same.

By the relativity theory of the expanding universe,
we have
’

jV
==

_ f

_Ir

2
__

R~~ 2V3 Gm v*
where m v is the mass of a proton. This follows readily
from the formulae given on p. 71 the only points to
notice are that the notation R s is here changed to R
and that the total mass
of the universe is approximately Nniv
Thus by relativity theory we find NjR and by wavemechanics we find y/NjR. Combining the two results
we find and R separately. The resulting value of
79
From R the limiting speed of recession
is about io
of the galaxies c/R is found immediately. All the
constants involved have been measured in the laboratory. The agreement of the result obtained in this way
;

,

M

.

,

N

N

.

with the observed recession of the nebulae has already

been described (p. 94).

The following summary of the theory is due to
Prof. Dingle:
* Except that there are certain corrections amounting altogether
i per cent, which are explained under V. The mathematical arguments on which the identification is based are given in
Proceedings of the Royal Society vol. gxxxiii A, p. 605, and Monthly
Notices of the R.A.S. vol. xcii, p. 3.
to less than

,

112

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
He thought he saw electrons swift
Their charge and mass combine.

He looked again and saw it was
The cosmic sounding line.
The population then, said he,
Must be io 79

.

V
Having, as we think, detected the adjusted natural
standard in the terms of the wave-equation, we have
next to inquire how our result affects the theory of
protons and electrons. For in identifying the standard
with e 2 /mc 2 we have taken a step which links the
universe to the atom; and we ought to verify the
observational consequences not only in the astronomical universe but also within the atom.
In wave-mechanics the momentum of a particle is
usually stated to be
g

27r dx*

The factor hj27r is an unnecessary complication due
to our haphazard choice of units of length and mass.

We shall adopt instead a natural unit of mass, which
is

related to the unit of length in such a way that the

momentum is simply idjdx. The meaning of i (literally
in an equation is that the two
the square root of —
i

)

sides of the equation represent waves which,

though

equal in amplitude, are a quarter-period different in
phase. When the mass of an electron is expressed in
terms of this natural unit we shall denote it by
e
Making the change of unit, the identification on

m

p.

hi becomes

he
2ire

EEU

2

m<!

_ yW
R

“3

(A).
8

.

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

We have taken the opportunity to turn both sides
upside down, since that is the
appear in the wave-equation.

way they actually

The coefficient hc/zne 2 which is sometimes called
,

the fine-structure constant

,

is

a pure number; and it is

well known that its value is close to 137. For my own

part I think that its value is exactly 137, that being
the number of degrees of freedom associated with the

wave-function for a pair of charges. There has been

much discussion whether the true value is 137-0 or
I

37"3 ^ both values claim to be derived from observaThe latter, called the “spectroscopic value”, is

tion.

preferred by many physicists. It is, however, misleading to call these determinations observational values
,

only a substratum; the
spectroscopic value in particular is based on a rather

for

the observations

are

complex theory and is certainly not to be treated as
a “hard fact” of observation.
Although I believe hcj 27re 2 to be 137, I shall take
the actual coefficient ofm e to be 136. This means that
I slightly amend the original identification by inserting a factor 136/137. The reason for this change is
that one of the 137 degrees of freedom, viz. that
corresponding to radial displacement, occurs in some
problems but not in others, and this appears to be a
problem in which it will not occur. The fine-structure
constant is introduced in the problem of interaction
of two electric charges, and there the 137 degrees of
freedom are all in play; a change of distance between
the two charges is recognisable because a comparison
standard for distances is furnished by the radius of
curvature i?. But now we are considering a formula
1

14

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
for the mass of an electron, which arises from its inter-

N

action with the “ rest of the universe
The particles
of the universe have been virtually simplified down to
one particle by introducing the adjusting factor y/N>
so that the problem is not dissimilar to that of two
interacting particles; but there is no longer an extraneous comparison standard of length. Tracing the
analogy between the two problems, we find that the
analogue of change of distance between the two
electrons would be change of the radius of curvature
of space. But by its very nature R cannot vary, since
it is the standard unit of distance. There is therefore
no analogue to the 137th degree of freedom; and we
conclude that our first identification, which did not
enter into such minutiae, ought to be amended so as
to show the correct number of degrees of freedom.
One might hesitate to introduce so odd-looking a
factor as 136/137 were it not that we know of another
case in which the radial degree of freedom is inhibited,
and there the factor has been verified by observation.
This occurs when a proton enters into the almost rigid
helium nucleus. Its mass or energy is found to be
reduced in a ratio which is very nearly 136/137; the
reduction is called the packing-fraction The disappearance of a degree of freedom is essentially the same
in the helium nucleus and in the metrical field; the
former cannot expand radially because it is rigid, the
latter cannot expand because its radius is the standard
.

of length.

Thus at present our result stands
136m. =
ri 5

^

(B).
8-2

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
But to this there is a serious objection. The result
shows an unfair discrimination in favour of the
electron, the proton not being mentioned. The proton
is

presumably as fundamental as the electron. But

what can we put in place of \/N/R which would give
an equally fundamental equation for the mass m P of
a proton?

With an electron and proton calling out for equal
treatment the only way to satisfy their claims impartially is to make the fundamental equation a
quadratic, so that there is one root for each. We do

not want to alter the part we have already got, after
taking so much trouble to justify it bit by bit; so we

assume that

136m — yjv/i? = o

(C)

gives correctly the last two terms of the equation, but

there is a term in

m to come on at the beginning.
2

It is well known that we can learn something about

the roots of a quadratic equation, even if only the last

two terms are given. The ratio of the last two coefficients is the sum of the roots divided by the product
of the roots. Since the equation is to have roots m a
and m p we must have
,

m -fjUp = 13 6 R
m mP
yW
e

e

i36m,mp = V^

or

(D)

.

This is another change in the identification equation;
but this time it is a very small change numerically.
Comparing (D) with (B) we see that a factor
mj,
(m P -f 6 ) has been inserted. We know that m*

m

116

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
about 1847 times m e so that the factor is 1847/1848
Numerically the change is insignificant;
but the proton no longer has any cause of complaint,
for proton and electron receive perfectly impartial

is

,

or *99946.

treatment in (D).
The next step is to complete the quadratic equation
of which the last two terms are given in (C). Since
we have finished with the problem of the identification
of the adjusted standard (our final equation giving it
in terms of known experimental quantities being (D))
we may as well now adopt it as our unit of length. As
already explained this choice of unit ought to reduce
the equations to their simplest possible form. This
means that Rj^N can now be taken as unity. The two
terms given in (C) are therefore 136m —1=0, and
the completed quadratic is
?

m — 136m +1=0.
2

What number must we put in place of the query?
You may remember that there was a number n = 10,
which we promised to bring into the wave-equation*
sometime. Here is our chance. We take the equation
to b e
10m 2 — 136m + 1 = o
(E).

For reference we write down the same equation, reintroducing the centimetre as the unit of length. It is

iom2 - 136111'^+'^ = 0

(F).

You see that the number n = 10 occurs in the first
term as a counterweight to
is

N in the last term, which

evidently their proper relation.
*

The wave-equation is formed by replacing the mass

differential operator.

m by a

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
Although we are not yet able to give a clear-cut
theory of this equation, the argument is further
advanced than might appear from this superficial
sketch. I think it will be agreed that, since the
coefficient 136 represents number of degrees of freedom, it is extremely probable that the remaining
coefficient in (E) will also represent number of degrees
of freedom. Presumably each degree of freedom
possesses a concealed energy or cyclic momentum
similar to that provided by the ignoration of coordinates in ordinary dynamics. Approaching the
problem from this dynamical point of view one
arrives almost immediately at the term 10m 2 but
there is more difficulty in seeing the reason for the
,

term 136m.
Thus, broadly speaking, we have two lines of
approach. They have not yet met and coalesced, as
they ultimately must do. But since one line of
approach gives the linear term and the other the
squared term, apparently quite definitely, the progress seems to be already sufficient to give the correct
equation.

We find the ratio of the two roots m P m ey by
,

solving equation (E) or (F).

The result is 1847*60.

The observed value* of the mass-ratio of the proton
* There is also a spectroscopic value about i o units lower, obtained
by adopting 137 3 instead of 137 for the fine-structure constant; but
this is irrelevant. We are already committed to the value 137 at an

earlier stage, so we do not want our computation to agree with a result

which would only be true if the value were not 137. To put it another

way

—Naturally our theory cannot agree with both deflection values

and spectroscopic values, since these differ; but it ought to agree
consistently with one set, and not sometimes with one and sometimes
with the other.
1

18

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
and electron is stated to be 1847*0 with a probable
error of half a unit. Thus the agreement is complete.

The solution of equation (F) gives

m

135*9264 e = VNjR\
0*07356901 p =V«A7^j

,

1

p

v
'

This is another form of our final identification of the
adjusted standard Rjy/N. The preliminary identification was 1371x4 = \IJV/R; so that there has not been
any change worth considering in the numerical
magnitude of y',NjR derived for the purpose of
predicting the speed of recession of the nebulae. The
formulae will work either way. Normally we apply
them to calculate the astronomical results, using
e
or
v determined by physicists but we can also use
them to give an astronomical method of measuring
the mass of an electron or proton.
To measure the mass of an electron, a suitable
procedure is to make astronomical observations of the
distances and velocities of spiral nebulae The result,
,

m

m

;

!

corrected if necessary for the mutual attraction of the
galaxies is, let us say, 600 km. per sec. per megaparsec.

This is c/R (p. 72) ; and since the velocity of light c is
300,000 km. per sec., we have R = 500 megaparsecs,
which is equal to 1*54. io 27 cm. The remaining steps,
which involve a little algebraic handling of the equations need not be described in detail as soon as R is
known, they become soluble and we can find JV, and
hence <\/N/R. The masses of the electron and proton
are then given by equations (G). They are there
expressed in terms of the natural unit of mass; we
can convert them into grams if we know Planck’s
;

119

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
constant h.

I

am afraid that the accuracy attainable

by this method would not satisfy the modern physicist,
but we shall not be out by more than a factor 2 or
thereabouts.

Perhaps you

will

object that this

is

not really

measuring the mass of an electron; even supposing it to

be right, it is a highly circuitous inference. But do
you suppose that a physicist puts an electron in the
scales and weighs it? If you will read an account of
how the spectroscopic value of the mass has been
determined, you will not think my method unduly
complicated. But, of course, I do not seriously put it
forward in rivalry; I only want to make vivid the
wide interrelatedness of things.
We can show that the two roots of the quadratic
represent electric charges of opposite sign. To test this

an electric field must be introduced into the problem.
Following Dirac’s theory, this is done by adding to
the equation a constant term (i.e. a term not involving
= id/ds) depending on the
the differential operator
electrical potential. Since this changes only the third
term of the quadratic, the sum of the roots e + P
is unchanged.
In other words, the mass or energy
added by the field to e is equal and opposite to the
mass or energy added by the field to P But that is
the definition of equal and opposite charges in the
same electric field they have equal and opposite

m

m

m

m

m

.

—

potential energy.

Our conclusion that the fundamental waveequation is really a quadratic has recently received
unexpected support by the discovery of the neutron.
It had been supposed that the wave-equation for two
120

1

—

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
charges (a proton and electron*) was a linear equation first given by Dirac. The complete set of solutions
was found to represent (approximately, if not exactly)

a hydrogen atom in its various possible states. But
from recent experiments it has been discovered that
there exists another state or group of states in which
the proton and electron are much closer together and
form a very minute kind of atom. This is called a
neutron. Clearly the present wave-equation for a
proton and electron cannot be correct, since its solutions do not give the neutron states. Just as for one
charge we require a quadratic wave-equation whose
two sets of solutions correspond to electrons and
protons, so for two charges we require a quadratic
wave-equation whose two sets of solutions correspond
to hydrogen atoms and neutrons. I expect that this
continues in more complicated systems, the two solutions then corresponding to extra-nuclear and nuclear
binding of the charges.
The support to the present theory is twofold.
Firsdy it indicates that the theory of two charges will
come into line with our theory of one charge as
regards the general form of the equation. Secondly,
since the “ spectroscopic values” of the physical
constants are based on an incomplete theory of two
charges, we should not attach overmuch importance
to a slight discrepancy between them and the values
found in our theory.
It is perhaps still more important that we can see
other problems ahead. Thus it will be necessary to
* Note that our quadratic equation {E) is for a proton or electron
not for two charges.
1 2

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
investigate the theory of the additional term in the

equation for the hydrogen atom and neutron, and to
show that the extra solutions agree with the observed
properties of the neutron.

This will give further

opportunities of testing, and if necessary revising, the

present conclusions.

VI

To those whose interest in modern science is directed
chiefly to the philosophical implications, the theory

of the expanding universe does not, I think, bring any
particularly new revelation.

Except for one lapse, I
have avoided questions savouring of philosophy.
I have rather taken it for granted that the reader’s
attention, like my own, is fixed on the strictly scientific
progress of the inquiry, and that he will suspend all
questions as to how the physical scheme, which is here
being developed, can be made to fit in with the
general outlook of life and consciousness. It would
be unfortunate to prejudice the inquiry by dragging
in such questions prematurely.

We may perhaps emerge with the uneasy feeling
that we no longer have vast domains of space

and

vast periods of time to dispose of. But the complaint

has often been made that astronomical measures are
too vast to conceive and if we have never been able
to conceive them, it scarcely affects our general outlook to have a few o’s lopped off here and there. In
fact I consider the man who is dissatisfied with a
universe containing ten thousand million million
million stars rather grasping. That is, if he wants
them merely for comfortable philosophic contemplation; in connection with scientific investigations the
;

122

.

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
cuts may, of course, be serious, as we have seen in the

case of the time-scale.

The new theory contains no obvious suggestion that
the world will come to an end sooner than we had
been expecting. The cosmical dispersal ignores the
smaller scale aggregations like our galaxy. We anticipate that there will ultimately be a complete
running-down of the universe by the slow degradation
of energy into unavailable form but that far distant
day is not brought noticeably nearer by the existence
;

of cosmical repulsion.
It would seem that the expansion of the universe is
another one-way process parallel with the thermodynamical running-down. One cannot help thinking
that the two processes are intimately connected; but,
if so, the connection has not yet been found.
The position with regard to the thermodynamical
running-down of the universe has not materially
altered since I discussed it four years ago.* The
impression has got abroad that the conclusions have
been shaken by recent work on cosmic rays. That
would be impossible, so far as I am concerned; for
the theory of cosmic rays that is being urged in this
connection happens to be the one that I was advocating at the time of writing, viz. that the cosmic rays
give evidence of the building up of higher elements
out of hydrogen in distant regions occupied by diffuse
matter, f I am not at all sure that the more recent
evidence should be interpreted as favourable to it;
but if it is favourable, as Dr Millikan maintains, I have
*

The Nature of the Physical Worlds Chapter iv ( 1 928)

f Internallponstitution of the Stars, p. 317 (1926).

123

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
the less reason to change my views. The coming
together of electric particles to form a complex atom,
and the consequent dispersal of some of the energy in
cosmic rays, is clearly a step in the same direction as
other energy-dissipating processes for example, the

—

coming together of nebulous matter to form a star,
and the consequent dispersal of energy as radiant
heat. It is one more contributor to the general
running-down towards an ultimate state of thermodynamic equilibrium. Millikan has sometimes called
the atom-building process a “ winding-up ” of the universe; but “up” and “down” are relative terms, and

a transformation of axes may be needed in comparing
his descriptions with mine.
It may be desirable to remind the philosophical
reader of the reason why the scientist indulges in these

extrapolations of our present imperfect knowledge to
regions remote from our experience why he writes

—

about the beginning and end of the world. It seems
to be gratuitously courting disaster to expose our
theories to conditions in which any slight weakness is
likely to become magnified without limit. But that is
just the principle of testing.

“The real justification

for making such forecasts is not that they are likely to

be realised ; but that they throw light upon the state
of contemporary science, and may indicate where it
requires supplementing.”*

The test of extrapolation to the most distant future
does not, I think, disclose any definite weakness in the
present system of science—in particular, in the second
law of thermodynamics on which physical science so
* Prof. H. T. H. Piaggio.

124

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
largely relies. It is true that the extrapolation foretells

that the material universe will some day arrive at a

sameness and so virtually come to an
end to my mind that is a rather happy avoidance of
a nightmare of eternal repetition. It is the opposite
extrapolation towards the past which gives real cause

state of dead
;

to suspect a weakness in the present conceptions of
science. The beginning seems to present insuperable
difficulties unless

supernatural.
I

we agree to look on it as frankly

We may have to let it go at that. But

have referred elsewhere to the danger of limiting

a bounded domain (p. 28).
Instead of honestly facing the intricacies of our problem, we may be led to think that its difficulties have
been solved when they have only been swept over the
boundary. Sweeping them back and back, the pile

scientific investigation to

until it forms an unclimbable barrier.
Perhaps it is this barrier that we call “ the beginning”.

increases

VII

Now I have told you “everything right as it fell out”.
How much of the story are we to believe?
Science has its showrooms and its workshops. The
public to-day, I think rightly, is not content to wander
round the showrooms where the tested products are
exhibited; the demand is to see what is going on in

the workshops. You are welcome to enter; but do not
judge what you see by the standards of the showroom.
We have been going round a workshop in the basement of the building of science. The light is dim, and
we stumble sometimes. About us is confusion and
mess which there has not been time to sweep away.

125

—

.

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
The workers and their machines are enveloped in
murkiness. But I think that something is being shaped
here perhaps something rather big. I do not quite
know what it will be when it is completed and polished
for the showroom. But we can look at the present
designs and the novel tools that are being used in
its manufacture; we can contemplate too the little

—

successes which make us hopeful.

A slight reddening of the light of distant galaxies,
an adventure of the mathematical imagination in
spherical space, reflections on the underlying principles implied in all measurement, nature’s curious
choice of certain numbers such as 137 in her scheme
these and many other scraps have come together
and formed a vision. As when the voyager sights a

—

distant shore, we strain our eyes to catch the vision.

Later we may more fully resolve its meaning. It
changes in the mist; sometimes we seem to focus the
substance of it, sometimes it is rather a vista leading
on and on till we wonder whether aught can be final.

Once more I have recourse to Bottom the weaver
I

have had a most rare vision.

I

have had a dream,

the wit of man to say what dream it was

:

—past

man is but an ass, if

Methought I was, and
he go about to expound this dream.
methought I had, but man is but a patched fool, if he will
offer to say what methought I had.
It shall be called Bottom’s dream, because it hath no bottom.
.

—

.

126

.

.

.

5

9

1

Index
Absolute length, 102
Adjusted standard, no

Gravitation, law of, 21, 98, 104
Gulliver of physics, 98

Beginning of universe, 6, 55, 125
Birkhoff, G. D., 52
Bubble, bursting of, 74, 89

Hubble, E. P., 8, 10

Individual velocities, 82
Instability of Einstein universe,
50, 5 8
Island galaxies, 3

Gepheid variables, 7
Closed space, 33, 42
Closed system, 40
Condensations
in

primordial
matter, 51
Contracting universe, 48, 51
Cosmical constant, 22, 68, 96,104

Gosmical repulsion, 23

Humason, M. L., 10

Kolhorster, W., 79

Lemaitre, G., 46, 52, 59, 72, 74,
82

Cosmic rays, 79, 123
Cosmic spectator, 91

Light, circumambulation of, 73

Curvature of space, 29, 103

McCrae, W. H., 52

de Sitter, W., 1, 47, 49, 63, 74, 81
de Sitter universe, 44, 48
Dingle, H., 1 12
Dirac, P. A. M., 20, 120, 121

Doppler effect, 15, 75
Einstein, A., 20, 24, 63, 71
Einstein universe, 44, 50, 58
Electron, mass of, 1 1
Elliptical space, 70
Ewing, J. A., 55
Expansion of space, 42
Extrapolation, 27, 124

Fine-structure constant, 114
Formulae, principal, 71
Four-dimensional pictures, 32
Friedmann, A., 46

McVittie, G. C., 52
Mass of universe, 67, 7
Mass-ratio of proton and electron,
95> 118
Milky Way system, 5, 84
Millikan, R. A., 79, 123
Milne, E. A., 64
Multiplication table, celestial, 4

Nebulae, 3

Nebular recession, 8, 11, 68, 94

Number of particles in the universe, 68, 107,

1

13

Numerical data, 67
Packing fraction, 1 1

Primum Mobile, 46
Proton, mass of, 116, 119

Quadratic wave-equation,
Ghosts of stars, 76

121

127

116,

INDEX
Recession of nebulae, 8, 1 1 68, 94
Relativity, principle of, 77, 90, 97
“Rest of the universe”, 105, 109
Robertson, H. P., 47
Running-down of universe, 57,
,

123
Sen, N. K., 52, 53
Shrinking atom, 90
Slipher, V. M., 7, 44
Space, physical, 29, 43, 102
Spherical space, 34, 77
Standard of length, 87, 90, 99, 1 10

Static universe, 45

Time-scale, 82

Ubiquitous standard, 98
Units, natural, 101, 113
Velocities of nebulae, 8

Wave-equation, 106
Weyl, H., 24, 98

Zwicky, F., 16

CAMBRIDGE! PRINTED BY W. LEWIS, M.A., AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS

