PUBLISHED BY PENGUIN BOOKS

THE EXPANDING
UNIVERSE
SIR ARTHUR
EDDINGTON

UNABRIDGED

PUBLISHED BY PENGUIN BOOKS

THE EXPANDING
UNIVERSE
SIR ARTHUR
EDDINGTON

COMPLETE

UNABRIDGED

22500702040

PELICAN BOOKS
Advisory Editors: h. L. beales, Reader in Economic
History, University of London; w. e. williams,
Secretary, the British Institute of Adult Education.

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
BY

SIR ARTHUR EDDINGTON
M.A., D.Sc., LL.D., F.R.S.

PUBLISHER’S NOTE
A list of Penguin and Pelican Books will be found
at the end of this volume. If you are not already
on our mailing list and would like to know when
new books are added, please send in your name
and address on a postcard. Suggestions for new
additions are welcomed.

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2018 with funding from
Wellcome Library

https://archive.org/details/b3001038x

PLATE

I

Ritchey

SPIRAL NEBULA
Messier 101 in Ursa Major. Receding velocity, 300 km. per sec.
Estimated distance, 1,300,000 light-years.

PELICAN BOOKS

THE
EXPANDING UNIVERSE
BY

SIR ARTHUR EDDINGTON
M.A., D.Sc., LL.D., F.R.S.
PLUMIAN PROFESSOR OF ASTRONOMY IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE

PUBLISHED BY

PENGUIN BOOKS LIMITED
HARMONDSWORTH MIDDLESEX ENGLAND
41 EAST 28TH STREET NEW YORK U.S.A.

Published in Pelican Books 1940

MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
HAZELL, WATSON & VINEY, LTD., LONDON AND AYLESBURY

PREFACE
This book is an expanded version of a public lecture

delivered at the meeting of the International Astro¬
nomical Union at Cambridge (Massachusetts) in
September 1932. It also furnished the subject-matter
of a series of three addresses which were broadcast in
the United States shortly afterwards.
I deal with the view now tentatively held that the
whole material universe of stars and galaxies of stars
is dispersing, the galaxies scattering apart so as to
occupy an ever-increasing volume. But I deal with it
not as an end in itself. To take an analogy from
detective fiction, it is the clue not the criminal. The
“ hidden hand ” in my story is the cosmical constant.
In Chapter IV we see that the investigation of the ex¬
panding universe falls into line with other methods
of inquiry, so that we appear to be closing down on the
capture of this most elusive constant of nature.
The subject is of especial interest, since it lies at the
meeting-point of astronomy, relativity and wavemechanics. Any genuine progress will have important
reactions on all three.
I am treating of very recent developments; and in¬
vestigations both on the theoretical and on the obser¬
vational side are still in progress which are likely to
teach us much more and may modify our views. It
might be argued that at this stage a book is premature;
but I have ventured to assume that in the mystery
stories of science the reader may be as much in¬
terested in the finding and weaving together of clues
for the detection of the criminal as in his final capture
and execution.
Suppose then that half-way through the chase one
5

6

THE EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

of the blundering detectives is here summing up what
has been found out and where the strongest suspicion
lies. You read his discussion, not because you have
confidence that he has reached the point of identifying
the criminal, but because it is presumably a necessary
stage in the solution of the mystery. In real life
(unlike the stories) it is possible that the suspicion
already rests on the right person; be that as it may,
it is worth while to set forth and analyse the present
state of the inquiry.
In the astronomical part of the book I follow
generally the theory of Lemaitre; there is a difference
in our views of evolution (see p. 61), but from my
point of view this is a very minor divergence. Several
counter theories of the apparent recession of the
nebulas have been proposed; an explanation of my
general attitude towards them is given on p. 62.
The book will be found to be of uneven difficulty;
and the reader who finds himself out of his depth in
Chapter II may discover that the going becomes easier
farther on. I have endeavoured to make the explana¬
tions as simple as possible; but the book is not in¬
tended solely as a semi-popular exposition, and I have
not hesitated to plunge into matters of extreme difficulty
when it seemed necessary for an adequate discussion of
the problem.
In remembrance of the occasion of its delivery, I
add here the opening words of the lecture:
This is an International Conference and I have chosen an
international subject. I shall speak of the theoretical work
of Einstein of Germany, de Sitter of Holland, Lemaitre of
Belgium. For observational data I turn to the Americans,
Slipher, Hubble, Humason, recalling, however, that the vitally
important datum of distance is found by a method which we
owe to Hertzsprung of Denmark. As I must not trouble you
with mathematical analysis, I have to pass over Levi-Civita of
Italy, whose methods and ideas we employ. But I must refer
especially to the new interest which arises in the subject
through its linkage to wave-mechanics; as a representative name

PREFACE

7

in wave-mechanics I mention that of its originator, de Broglie
of France.
My subject disperses the galaxies, but it unites the earth.
May no “ cosmical repulsion ” intervene to sunder us!
A. S. E.
CAMBRIDGE, ENGLAND,

October 1932.

CONTENTS
PACE

PREFACE

.

5

CHAPTER

I. THE RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES

11

II. SPHERICAL SPACE .

35

III.

FEATURES OF THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

67

IV.

THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM

90

INDEX

.

120

LIST OF PLATES
PACK

plate

i.

PLATE II.

spiral nebula

.

.

SPECTRA OF NEBULAE .

Frontispiece

.
.

facing p.\6

Masters, I am to discourse wonders: but ask me not what;
for if I tell you, I am no true Athenian.
I will tell you
everything, right as it fell out.
A Midsummer-Night’s Dream.

CHAPTER
THE

RECESSION

OF

I

THE

GALAXIES

Pricked out with less and greater lights, between the poles of
the universe, the Milky Way so gleameth white as to set very
sages questioning.—Dante, Paradiso.
I
The, first

hint of an “ expanding universe ” is con¬
tained in a paper published up November 1917 by Prof.
W. de Sitter. Einstein’s general theory of relativity
had been published two years before, but it had not yet
attained notoriety; it was not until the eclipse expedi¬
tions of 1919 obtained confirmation of its prediction
of the bending of light that public interest was aroused.
Meanwhile many investigators had been examining the
various consequences of the new theory. Prominent
among them was de Sitter who was interested especi¬
ally in the astronomical consequences. In the course
of a highly technical discussion he found that the rela¬
tivity theory led to an expectation that the most remote
celestial objects would be moving away from us, or at
least that they would deceive the observer into thinking
that they were moving away.
De Sitter was perhaps a tipster rather than a prophet.
He would not promise anything definitely; but he sug¬
gested that we ought to keep a look out for the reces¬
sion as a rather likely phenomenon. Theory was at
the cross-roads, and desired guidance from observation
as to which of two possible courses should be pursued.
If astronomers were to find a general motion of reces¬
sion of the most distant objects visible, it would be a
strong indication that the road rather fancied by de
Sitter was the one to follow. If not, the inference
11

12

THE

EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

was more doubtful; it might mean that the other road
should be followed, or it might only mean that our
astronomical survey had not yet been extended to suffi¬
cient distance.
Subsequent researches in the field opened up by de
Sitter’s pioneer investigation have developed and modi¬
fied his theory. A new point of view has been
discovered which renders the results less paradoxical
than they appeared originally.
We are still led to
expect a recession of remote objects, though the reces¬
sion now predicted is not the original de Sitter effect,
which has turned out to be of minor importance. It
varies with the distance according to a different law.
Moreover, it is a genuine receding motion of remote
objects, whereas the phenomenon predicted by de Sitter
might be regarded as an imitation recession, and gener¬
ally was so regarded.
We shall put aside theory for the present, and con¬
sider first what astronomical observation tells us.
Practically all that I have to relate has been discovered
since de Sitter’s forecast, much of it within the last four
years. These observational results are in some ways so
disturbing that there is a natural hesitation in accept¬
ing them at their face value. But they have not come
upon us like a bolt from the blue, since theorists for
the last fifteen years have been half expecting that a
study of the most remote objects of the universe might
yield a rather sensational development.
The spiral nebulae are the most remote objects known.
Rough measurements of their distances have been
made, and we place them from 1 million to 150 million
light-years away; they doubtless extend far beyond the
latter distance, but at present it is the limit of our sur¬
vey. The name “ nebula ” is applied to different classes
of astronomical objects which have nothing in common
except a cloudy appearance.
There are gaseous
nebula?, shown by their spectrum to be extremely rare-

RECESSION

OF

THE

GALAXIES

13

fied gas, either attached to and controlled by a single
star or spreading irregularly through a region contain¬
ing many stars; these are not particularly remote. The
spiral nebulce on the other hand are extra-galactic
objects; that is to say, they lie beyond the limits of the
Milky Way aggregation of stars which is the system to
which our sun belongs, and are separated from it by
wide gulfs of empty space. When we have taken to¬
gether the sun and all the naked-eye stars and many
hundreds of millions of telescopic stars, we have not
reached the end of things; we have explored only one
island—one oasis in the desert of space. Other islands
lie beyond. It is possible with the naked eye to make
out a hazy patch of light in the constellation Andromeda
which is one of the other islands. A telescope shows
many more—an archipelago of island galaxies stretch¬
ing away one behind another until our sight fails. It is
these island galaxies which appear to us as spiral
nebulae.
Each island system is believed to be an aggregation
of thousands of millions of stars with a general re¬
semblance to our own Milky Way system. As in our
own system there may be along with the stars great
tracts of nebulosity, sometimes luminous, sometimes
dark and obscuring. Many of the nearest systems are
seen to have a beautiful double-spiral form (see Frontis¬
piece); and it is believed that the coils of the Milky
Way would give the same spiral appearance to our
own system if it were viewed from outside. The term
“ spiral nebula ” is, however, to be regarded as a name
rather than a description, for it is generally applied to
all external galaxies whether they show traces of spiral
structure or not.
The island systems are exceedingly numerous. From
sample counts it is estimated that more than a million
of them are within reach of our present telescopes. If
the theory treated in this book is to be trusted, the total

14

THE

EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

number of them must be of the order 100,000,000,000.
In order to fix in our minds the vastness of the
system that we shall have to consider, I will give you
a “ celestial multiplication table.” We start with a star
as the unit most familiar to us, a globe comparable to
the sun. Then:
A hundred thousand million Stars make one
Galaxy;
A hundred thousand million Galaxies make one
Universe.
These figures may not be very trustworthy, but I think
they give a correct impression.
The lesson of humility has so often been brought
home to us in astronomy that we almost automatically
adopt the view that our* own galaxy is not specially
distinguished—not more important in the scheme of
nature than the millions of other island galaxies. But
astronomical observation scarcely seems to bear this
out. According to the present measurements the spiral
nebulae, though bearing a general resemblance to our
Milky Way system, are distinctly smaller. It has been
said that if the spiral nebulae are islands, our own
galaxy is a continent. I suppose that my humility has
become a middle-class pride, for I rather dislike the
imputation that we belong to the aristocracy of the
universe. The earth is a middle-class planet, not a
giant like Jupiter, nor yet one of the smaller vermin
like the minor planets. The sun is a middling sort of
star, not a giant like Capella but well above the lowest
classes. So it seems wrong that we should happen to
belong to an altogether exceptional galaxy. Frankly I
do not believe it; it would be too much of a coin¬
cidence. I think that this relation of the Milky Way
to the other galaxies is a subject on which more light
will be thrown by further observational research, and
that ultimately we shall find that there are many
galaxies of a size equal to and surpassing our own.

RECESSION

OF THE

GALAXIES

15

Meanwhile the question does not much affect the
present discussion. If we are in a privileged position,
we shall not presume upon it.
I promised to leave aside theory for the present, but
I must revert to it for a moment to try to focus our
conception of this super-system of galaxies. It is a
vista not only of space but of time. A faint cluster of
nebulas in Gemini, which at present marks the limit
of our soundings of space, takes us back 150 million
years into the past—to the time when the light now
reaching us started on its journey across the gulf of
space. Thus we can scarcely isolate the thought of vast
extension from the thought of time and change; and
the problem of form and organisation becomes merged
in the problem of origin and development. We must,
I suppose, imagine the island galaxies to have been
formed by gradual condensation of primordial matter.
Perhaps in the first stage only the rudiments of matter
existed—protons and electrons traversing the void—
and the evolution of the elements has progressed simul¬
taneously with the evolution of worlds. Slight con¬
densations occurring here and there by accident would
by their gravitating power draw more particles to them¬
selves. Some would quickly disperse again, but some
would become firmly established—
Champions fierce,
Strive here for mastery, and to battle bring
Their embryon atoms. . . . To whom these most adhere,
He rules a moment: Chaos umpire sits.
And by decision more embroils the fray
By which he reigns: next him, high arbiter,
Chance governs all.” 1

By such conflict the matter of the universe would
slowly be collected into islands, leaving comparatively
empty spaces from which it had been drained away.
We think that one of these original islands has become
1 Paradise Lost, Book II.

16

THE

EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

our Milky Way system, having subdivided again and
again into millions of stars. The other islands similarly
developed into galaxies, which we see to-day shining
as spiral nebulae. It is to these prime units of sub¬
division of the material universe that our discussion
here will relate.

n
If a spiral nebula is not too faint it is possible to
measure its radical velocity in the line of sight by
measuring the shift of the lines in its spectrum. A
valuable early series of such determinations was made
by Prof. V. M. Slipher at the Lowell Observatory.
More recently the distances of some of the spiral
nebulae have been determined by a fairly trustworthy
method. In the nearest spirals it is possible to make
out some of the individual stars; but only the most
luminous stars, some hundreds or thousands of times
brighter than the sun, can be seen at so great a dis¬
tance. Fortunately among the very brightest of the
stars there is a particularly useful class called the
Cepheid variables. They vary periodically in bright¬
ness owing to an actual pulsation or physical change
of the star, the period being anything from a few hours
to a few weeks. It has been ascertained from observa¬
tional study that Cepheids which have the same period
are nearly alike in their other properties—luminosity,
radius, spectral type, etc. The period is thus a badge,
easily recognisable at a distance, which labels the star
as having a particular luminosity. For example, if the
star is seen to have a period of 10 days, we imme¬
diately recognise it as a star of luminosity 950 times
greater than the sun. Knowing then its real brightness
we put the question, How far off must it be situated
so as to be reduced to the faint point of light which we

PLATE II

Humason

SPECTRA OF NEBUL/E
showing lines shifted to the red (to the right), interpreted
as velocity of recession. (See p. 20.)
(1) Sky; velocity, nil. (2) N.G.C. 221; velocity, —185 km.
per sec. (3) N.G.C. 385; velocity, +4,900 km. per sec.
(4) N.G.C. 4.884; velocity, +6,700 km. per sec.
(5) Nebula in Leo; velocity, +19,700 km. per sec.

RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES

17

see? The answer gives the distance of the star and of
the galaxy in which it lies. This method uses the
Cepheid variables as standard candles. If you see a
standard candle anywhere and note how bright it appears
to you, you can calculate how far off it is; in the same
way an astronomer observes his “ standard candle ” in
the midst of a nebula, notes its apparent brightness or
inagnitude, and deduces the distance of the nebula.
Dr. E. P. Hubble at Mount Wilson Observatory was
able to discover Cepheid variables in two or three of
the nearest spiral nebulae, and so obtained the first
real measurement of their distances. Unfortunately
this method is not available for the more distant
galaxies, and he has had to use more indirect devices
for extending the survey.
I think that, apart from
those distances actually determined by the Cepheid
method, we must regard the distances assigned to the
spiral nebulae as rather risky estimates; but there is
reason to believe that they cannot be entirely mis¬
leading, and we shall provisionally accept them here.
When the collected data as to radial velocities and
distances are examined a very interesting feature is
revealed. The velocities are large, generally very much
larger than ordinary stellar velocities. The more dis¬
tant nebulae have the bigger velocities; the results seem
to agree very well with a linear law of increase, the
velocity being simply proportional to the distance.
The most striking feature is that the galaxies are almost
unanimously running away from us.
Let us consider especially the last result and state
the observational evidence in more detail. The light
of the spiral nebulae, being compounded of the light of
a great variety of stars, does not give a good spectrum
for measurement. For this reason and because of its
faintness the deduced velocities are inaccurate as judged
by ordinary standards; but, except for the nearest
nebulae, the velocities are themselves so enormous that

18

THE EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

the error of measurement is comparatively unimpor¬
tant. Taking the results as published, the present posi¬
tion is that line-of-sight velocities of about 90 galaxies
have been measured, and of these only five are moving
towards us. At first sight it may seem wrong to pass
over the minority as insignificant. But the five ex¬
ceptions are confined to the very nearest of the nebulae,
and their approaching velocities are not large. Since
the phenomenon is one which depends on distance (the
effect increasing with distance), it is natural that we
should have to go out to a fair distance before we find
it strong enough to prevail over all other effects (in¬
cluding observational error) so as to display itself
uniformly. The five approaching velocities are at least
partly attributable to the use of an inappropriate
standard of reference. Line-of-sight velocities as pub¬
lished are relative to the sun; but it would be more
satisfactory to discuss the velocities relative to our
Milky Way system as a whole. It has been found that
the sun is pursuing an orbit round the centre of the
Milky Way system and has an orbital speed from 200
to 300 kilometres per second. When we correct for
this so as to obtain the velocities referred to our galaxy
as a whole, the approaching velocities are reduced or
disappear. I think it will turn out ultimately that, after
all corrections are applied, these nearest nebulae have
small receding velocities; for the existence of even one
genuine exception would be difficult to explain.
In saying that the speeds of the nebulae are large, the
velocities of ordinary stars are our standard of com¬
parison. For stars in our neighbourhood the individual
speed averages 10 to 50 km. per sec. If the speed
exceeds 100 km. per sec. the star is described as a
“ runaway.” (We do not here include the abovementioned orbital motion about the centre of the galaxy
which is shared by all stars in the neighbourhood of
the sun.) Slipher’s first determination of the radial

RECESSION

OF THE GALAXIES

19

velocities of 40 nebulae included a dozen with velocities
from 800-1,800 km. per sec. The survey has since
been extended to fainter and more distant nebulae by
M. L. Humason at Mount Wilson Observatory, and
much higher velocities have been found. The speed
record is continually being broken. The present holder
of the trophy is a nebula forming one of a faint cluster
in the constellation Gemini, which is receding with a
velocity of 25,000 km. per sec. (15,000 miles per
second). This is about the speed of an Alpha particle.
Its distance is estimated at 150,000,000 light-years.
Doubtless a faster and more distant nebula will have
been announced by the time these words are in print.
The simple proportionality of speed to distance was
first found by Hubble in 1929. This law is also pre¬
dicted by relativity theory. According to the original
investigation of de Sitter a velocity proportional to the'
square of the distance would have been expected; but
the theory had become better understood since then,
and it was already known (though perhaps only to a
few x) that simple proportionality to the distance was
the correct theoretical result.
According to Hubble’s most recent determination,
the speed of recession amounts to 550 km. per sec. per
megaparsec.1 2 That is to say, a nebula at 1 mega¬
parsec distance should have a speed of 550 km. per sec.;
at 10 megaparsecs distance, 5,500 km. per sec.; and so
on. It has been claimed that this determination is
accurate to 20 per cent., but I do not think many
astronomers take so optimistic a view. The uncertainty
lies almost entirely in the scale of nebular distances;
there are weak links in the long chain of connection
between these vast distances and our terrestrial stan¬
dard metre. Corrections which have been suggested
1 I was not myself aware of it in 1929. For the nature of
the change, see p. 52.
2 1 megaparsec = 3’26 million light-years.

20

THE EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

mostly tend to increase the result; and perhaps the
fairest statement is that the velocity of recession is
probably between 500 and 1,000 km. per sec. per mp.
Specimens of the spectra from which these radial
velocities are obtained are shown in Plate II. In the
lower four photographs the spectra of the nebulae are
the torpedo-shaped black patches; they have terrestrial
comparison spectra above and below, which are used
to place them in correct vertical alignment. Practically
the only recognisable features in the nebular spectra
are the H and K lines—two interruptions in the tail
of the torpedo where it is fading away. It will be seen
that these interruptions move to the right, i.e. to the
red end of the spectrum, as we go down the plate.
It is this displacement which is measured and gives
the receding velocities stated at the foot of the plate.
hi

We can exclude the spiral nebulae which are more or
less hesitating as to whether they shall leave us by
drawing a sphere of rather more than a million lightyears radius round our galaxy. In the region beyond,
more than 80 have been observed to be moving out¬
wards, and not one has been found coming in to take
their place.
The inference is that in the course of time all the
spiral nebulae will withdraw to a greater distance,
evacuating the part of space that we now survey.
Ultimately they will be out of reach of our telescopes
unless telescopic power is increased to correspond. I
find that the observer of nebulae will have to double
the aperture of his telescope every 1,300 million years
merely to keep up with their recession. If we have
been thinking that the human race has still billions of
years before it in which to find out all that can be
found out about the universe, we must count the

RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES

21

problem of the spiral nebulas as one of urgency. Let
us make haste to study them before they disappear
into the distance!
The unanimity with which the galaxies are running
away looks almost as though they had a pointed aver¬
sion to us. We wonder why we should be shunned as
though our system were a plague spot in the universe.
But that is too hasty an inference, and there is really
no reason to think that the animus is especially directed
against our galaxy. If this lecture-room were to expand
to twice its present size, the seats all separating from
each other in proportion, you would notice that every¬
one had moved away from you. Your neighbour who
was 2 feet away is now 4 feet away; the man over
yonder who was 40 feet away is now 80 feet away. It
is not you they are avoiding; everyone is having the
same experience. In a general dispersal or expansion
every individual observes every other individual to be
moving away from him. The law of a general uniform
expansion is that each individual recedes from you at a
rate proportional to his distance from you—precisely
the law which we observe in the receding motions of the
spiral nebulae.1
We shall therefore no longer regard the phenomenon
as a movement away from our galaxy. It is a general
scattering apart, having no particular centre of dispersal.
I do not wish to insist on these observational facts
dogmatically. It is granted that there is a possibility
of error and misinterpretation. The survey is just be¬
ginning, and things may appear in a different light as
it proceeds. But if you ask what is the picture of the
universe now in the minds of those who have been
engaged in practical exploration of its large-scale
features—men not likely to be moved overmuch by
1 Our observations determine the relative velocity of reces¬
sion of a nebula, i.e. the rate at which its distance from us is
increasing. They do not indicate whether the nebula is mov¬
ing away from us or we are moving away from the nebula.

22

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

ideas of bending of space or the gauge-invariance of
the Riemann-Christoffel tensor—I have given you their
answer. Their picture is the picture of an expanding
universe. The super-system of the galaxies is dispers¬
ing as a puff of smoke disperses. Sometimes I wonder
whether there may not be a greater scale of existence
of things, in which it is no more than a puff of smoke.
For the present I make no reference to any “ ex¬
pansion of space.” I am speaking of nothing more
recondite than the expansion or dispersal of a material
system. Except for the large scale of the phenomenon
the expansion of the universe is as commonplace as
the expansion of a gas. But nevertheless it gives very
serious food for thought. It is perhaps in keeping with
the universal change we see around us that time
should set a term even to the greatest system of all;
but what is startling is the rate at which it is found to
be melting away. We do not look for immutability,
but we had certainly expected to find a permanence
greater than that of terrestrial conditions. But it would
almost seem that the earth alters less rapidly than the
heavens. The galaxies separate to double their original
distances in 1,300 million years. That is only of the
order of geological time; it is approximately the age
assigned to the older rocks in the earth’s crust. This
is a rude awakening from our dream of leisured evolu¬
tion through billions of years.1
Such a conclusion is not to be accepted lightly; and
those who have cast about for some other interpreta¬
tion of what seems to have been observed have dis¬
played no more than a proper caution. If the apparent
recession of the spiral nebulas is treated as an isolated
discovery it is too slender a thread on which to hang
far-reaching conclusions; we can only state the bare
results of observation, contemplate without much con1 I may remind American readers that the English billion is
a million million.

RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES

23

viction the amazing possibility they suggest, and await
further information on the subject.
If that is not my own attitude, it is because the
motion of the remote nebulse does not present itself
to me as an isolated discovery. Following de Sitter,
I have for fifteen years been awaiting these observa¬
tional results to see how far they would fall into line
with and help to develop the physical theory, which
though at first merely suggestive has become much
more cogent in the intervening years. After Prof.
Weyl’s famous extension of the relativity theory I be¬
came convinced that the scale of structure of atoms
and electrons is determined by the same physical agent
that was concerned in de Sitter’s prediction. So that
hope of progress of a really fundamental kind in our
understanding of electrons, protons and quanta is
bound up with this investigation of the motions of
remote galaxies. Therefore when Dr. Hubble hands
over a key which he has picked up in intergalactic
space, I am not among those who are turning it over
and over unable to decide from the look of it whether
it is good metal or base metal. The question for me is.
Will it unlock the door?
If the observed radial velocities are accepted as
genuine, there is no evading the conclusion that the
nebulae are rapidly dispersing. The velocities are direct
evidence of a hustle which (according to the usual ideas
of the rate of evolutionary change) is out of keeping
with the character of our staid old universe. Thus
the only way of avoiding a great upset of ideas would
be to explain away these radial velocities as spurious.
What is actually observed is a shifting of the spectrum
of the nebula towards the red. Such a shift is com¬
monly caused by the Doppler effect of a receding
velocity, in the same way that the pitch of a receding
whistle is lowered; but other causes are imaginable.
The reddening signifies lower frequency of the light-

24

THE

EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

waves and (in accordance with quantum theory) lower
energy; so that if for any cause a light-quantum loses
some of its energy in travelling to reach us, the redden¬
ing is accounted for without assuming any velocity of
the source. For example, the light coming to us from
an atom on the sun uses up some of its energy in escap¬
ing from the sun’s gravitational attraction, and conse¬
quently becomes slightly reddened as compared with
the light of a terrestrial atom which does not suffer this
loss; this is the well-known red shift predicted by
Einstein.
In one respect this hypothesis of the loss of energy
of nebular light is attractive. If the lo& occurs during
the passage of the light from the nebula to the ob¬
server, we should expect it to be proportional to the
distance; thus the red shift, misinterpreted as a velocity,
should be proportional to the distance—which is the
law actually found. But on the other hand there is
nothing in the existing theory of light (wave theory or
quantum theory) which justifies the assumption of such
a loss. We cannot without undue dogmatism exclude
the possibility of modifications of the existing theory.
Light is a queer thing—queerer than we imagined
twenty years ago—but I should be surprised if it is as
queer as all that.
A theory put forward by Dr. Zwicky, that light, by
its gravitational effects, parts with its energy to the
material particles thinly strewn in intergalactic space
which it passes on its way, at one time attracted atten¬
tion. But the numerical accordance alleged to support
his theory turned out to be fallacious, and the sug¬
gestion seems definitely untenable.
I think then we have no excuse for doubting the
genuineness of the observed velocities—except in so
far as they share the general uncertainty that surrounds
all our attempts to probe into the secrets of nature.

RECESSION

OF THE GALAXIES

25

IV

Now let us turn to theory.
A scientist commonly professes to base his beliefs
on observations, not theories. Theories, it is said, are
useful in suggesting new ideas and new lines of in¬
vestigation for the experimenter; but “ hard facts ” are
the only proper ground for conclusion. I have never
come across anyone who carries this profession into
practice—certainly not the hard-headed experi¬
mentalist, who is the more swayed by his theories be¬
cause he is less accustomed to scrutinise them. Obser¬
vation is not sufficient. We do not believe our eyes
unless we are first convinced that what they appear to
tell us is credible.
It is better to admit frankly that theory has, and is
entitled to have, an important share in determining
belief. For the reader resolved to eschew theory and
admit only "definite observational facts, all astronomical
books are banned. There are no purely observational
facts about the heavenly bodies. Astronomical measure¬
ments are, without exception, measurements of
phenomena occurring in a terrestrial observatory or
station; it is only by theory that they are translated into
knowledge of a universe outside.
When an observer reports that he has discovered a
new star in a certain position, he is probably unaware
that he is going beyond the simple facts of observation.
But he does not intend his announcement to be taken
as a description of certain phenomena that have oc¬
curred in his observatory; he means that he has located
a celestial body in a definite direction in interstellar
space. He looks on the location as an observational
fact—on a surer footing therefore than theoretical
inferences such as have been deduced from Einstein’s
theory. We must break it to him that his supposed

26

THE EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

“ fact,” far from being purely observational, is actually
an inference based on Einsten’s theory—unless, in¬
deed, he has based it on some earlier theory which is
even more divorced from observational facts. The
observer has given a theoretical interpretation to his
measurements by assuming for theoretical reasons that
light travels through interstellar space approximately in
a straight line. Perhaps he will reply that, in assuming
the rectilinear propagation of light, he is not concerned
with any theory but is using a fact established by
direct experiment. That begs the question how far an
experiment under terrestrial conditions can be extra¬
polated to apply to interstellar space.
Surely a
reasoned theory is preferable to blind extrapolation.
But indeed the observer is utterly mistaken in supposing
that the straightness of rays of light assumed in
astronomy has been verified by terrestrial experiment.
If the rays in interstellar space were no straighter than
they are on the earth,1 the direction in which a star is
seen would be no guide to its actual position. Light
would in fact curl round and come back again before
traversing the distance to the nearest star.
Our warrant for concluding that the celestial body
is nearly in the direction in which it is seen is
Einstein’s theory, which determines the deviation of
light from a straight line. Coupled with other theoreti¬
cal deductions as to the density of matter in interstellar
space, it allows us to conclude that the deviation in this
case is inappreciable. So if we are willing to use both
fact and theory as a basis for belief, we can accept the
observer’s announcement; but it is not a “ hard fact of
observation.” Although it is a minor point, we may
also insist that the theory concerned is Einstein’s theory.
There was an earlier theory according to which light in
empty space travels in straight lines in all circum¬
stances; but since this has been found experimentally to
1 They are deflected by the earth’s gravitational field.

RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES

27

be untrue, it can scarcely be the basis of our observer’s
conclusion. Perhaps, however, the observer is one of
those who do not credit the eclipse observations of the
deflection of light, or who deem them insufficient ground
for quitting the old theory. If so, he illustrates my
dictum that with the hard-headed experimentalist the
basis of belief is often theory rather than observation.
My point is that in astronomy it is not a question of
whether we are to rely on observation or on theory.
The so-called facts are in any case theoretical inter¬
pretations of the observations. The only question is.
Shall we for this interpretation use the fullest resources
of modern theory? For my own part I can see no
more reason for preferring the theories of fifty years
ago than for preferring the observational data of fifty
years ago.
In turning now to the more theoretical side of the
problem of the expanding universe, I do not think that
we should feel that we are stepping from solid ground
into insecurity. Perhaps we are a little safer, for we no
longer depend on the interpretation of one type of obser¬
vation; and our theory comes from the welding together
of different lines of physical research. I do not, how¬
ever, promise security. An explorer is jealous of his
reputation for proper caution, but he can never aspire
to the quintessence of caution displayed by the man
who entrenches himself at home.
v
In 1915 Einstein had by his general theory of rela¬
tivity brought a large section of the domain of physics
into good order. The theory covered field-physics,
which includes the treatment of matter, electricity,
radiation, energy, etc., on the ordinary macroscopic
scale perceptible to our senses, but not the phenomena
arising from the minute subdivision into atoms, elec¬
trons, quanta. For the study of microscopic structure

28

THE EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

another great theory was being developed—the quantum
theory. At that time it lagged far behind, and even
now it has not reached the clearness and logical per¬
fection of the relativity theory. It is recognised that
the two theories will meet, and that they must ulti¬
mately coalesce into one comprehensive theory. The
first bridge between them was made by Prof. P. A. M.
Dirac in 1928 by his relativity wave-equation of an
electron. I hope to show in the last chapter that the
recession of the spiral nebulae leads us to the border¬
land territory between the two theories, where a num¬
ber of interesting problems await solution. At present,
however, we are concerned only with its relation to the
theory of relativity.
The central result of Einstein’s theory was his law
of gravitation, generally expressed in the form Gitv = 0,
which has the merit of brevity if not of lucidity. We
naturally hear most about those rare phenomena in
which Einstein’s law gives results appreciably different
from Newton’s law; but it is to be remembered that
for ordinary practical purposes the two laws come to
the same thing. So if we take G = 0 to be the law
governing the motions of the spiral nebulse, that is as
much as to say they exert the ordinary Newtonian
attraction on one another varying as the inverse square
of their distance apart. The law throws no light on
why the nebulas are running away from us and from
one another. The tendency would rather be for the
whole system to fall together—though this tendency to
collapse might be counteracted as it is in the solar
system, for example.
A year or so later Einstein made a slight amend¬
ment to his law to meet certain difficulties that he
encountered in his theory. There was just one place
where the theory did not seem to work properly, and
that was—infinity: I think Einstein showed his great¬
ness in the simple and drastic way in which he disposed

RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES

29

of difficulties at infinity. He abolished infinity. He
slightly altered his equations so as to make space at
great distances bend round until it closed up. So that,
if in Einstein’s space you keep going right on in one
direction, you do not get to infinity; you find yourself
back at your starting-point again. Since there was no
longer any infinity, there could be no difficulties at
infinity, q.e.d.
However, at present we are not concerned with this
new kind of space. I only mention it here because I
want to speak of the alteration that Einstein made in
his law of gravitation. The amended law is written
(? = Xg^, and contains a natural constant X called
the cosmical constant. The term Xg^ is called the
cosmical term. The constant is so small that in ordinary
applications to the solar system, etc., we set it equal to
zero, and so revert to the original law GfLV = 0. But
however small X may be, the amended law presents the
phenomenon of gravitation to us in a new light, and
has greatly helped to an understanding of its real
significance; moreover, we have now reason to think
that X is not so small as to be entirely beyond observa¬
tion. The nature of the alteration can be stated as
follows: the original law stated that a certain geo¬
metrical characteristic (G^) of empty space is always
zero; the revised law states that it is always in a con¬
stant ratio to another geometrical characteristic (gMJ/).
We may say that the first form of the law utterly dis¬
sociates the two characteristics by making one of
them zero and therefore independent of the other; the
second form intimately connects them. Geometers can
invent spaces which have not either of these properties;
but actual space, surveyed by physical measurement, is
not of so unlimited a nature.
We have already said that the original term in the
law gives rise to what is practically the Newtonian
attraction between material objects. It is found simi-

30

THE EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

larly that the added term
gives rise to a repul¬
sion directly proportional to the distance. Distance
from what? Distance from anywhere; in particular,
distance from the observer. It is a dispersive force like
that which I imagined as scattering apart the audience
in the lecture-room. Each thinks it is directed away
from him. We may say that the repulsion has no
centre, or that every point is a centre of repulsion.
Thus in straightening out his law of gravitation to
satisfy certain ideal conditions, Einstein almost in¬
advertently added a repulsive scattering force to the
Newtonian attraction of bodies. We call this force the
cosmical repulsion, for it depends on and is proportional
to the cosmical constant.
It is utterly imperceptible
within the solar system or between the sun and neigh¬
bouring stars. But since it increases proportionately
to the distance we have only to go far enough to find
it appreciable, then strong, and ultimately overwhelm¬
ing. In practical observation the farthest we have yet
gone is 150 million light-years. Well within that dis¬
tance we find that celestial objects are scattering apart
as if under a dispersive force. Provisionally we con¬
clude that here cosmical repulsion has become dominant
and is responsible for the dispersion.
We have no direct evidence of an outward accelera¬
tion of the nebulas, since it is only the velocities that
we observe. But it is reasonable to suppose that the
nebulae, individually as well as collectively, follow the
rule—the greater the distance the faster the recession.
If so, the velocity increases as the nebula recedes, so
that there is an outward acceleration. Thus from the
observed motions we can work backwards and calcu¬
late the repulsive force, and so determine observationally the cosmical constant X.
Much turns on whether Einstein was really justified
in making the change in his law of gravitation which
introduced this cosmical repulsion. His original reason

RECESSION

OF THE

GALAXIES

31

was not very convincing, and for some years the cosmical term was looked on as a fancy addition rather
than as an integral part of the theory. Einstein has
been as severe a critic of his own suggestion as anyone,
and he has not invariably adhered to it. But the cosmical constant has now a secure position owing to a
great advance made by Prof. Weyl, in whose theory it
plays an essential part.1 Not only does it unify the
gravitational and electromagnetic fields, but it renders
the theory of gravitation and its relation to space-time
measurement so much more illuminating, and indeed
self-evident, that return to the earlier view is unthink¬
able. I would as soon think of reverting to Newtonian
theory as of dropping the cosmical constant.
VI

Let us now review the position. According to rela¬
tivity theory the complete field of force contains besides
the ordinary Newtonian attraction a repulsive (scatter¬
ing) force varying directly as the distance. It is well
known that Einstein’s law differs slightly from New¬
ton’s, giving for example an extra effect which has been
detected in the orbit of the fast-moving planet Mercury;
the cosmical repulsion is another point of difference
between them, detectable only in the motions of remote
objects. From a theoretical standpoint I think there is
no more doubt about the cosmical repulsion than
about the force which perturbs Mercury; but it does
not admit of so decisive an observational test. As
regards Mercury the theoretical prediction was quanti¬
tative; but relativity theory does not indicate any par¬
ticular magnitude for the cosmical repulsion. A merely
qualitative test is never very conclusive.
However, so far as it goes, the test is satisfactory.
1 “ The cosmological factor which Einstein added to his
theory later is part of ours from the very beginning.” Raum.
Zeit. Materie, p. 297 (English Edition).

32

THE EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

We do find observationally a dispersion of the system
of the galaxies such as would be caused by the pre¬
dicted repulsion. The motions are extremely large and
the effect stands out clearly above all minor irregulari¬
ties. The theory thus clears its first hurdle with some
eclat; whether it will win the race is another question.
Although the test is not quantitative it is more farreaching than is sometimes supposed. There are only
two ways of accounting for large receding velocities of
the nebulae: (1) they have been produced by an out¬
ward directed force as we here suppose, or (2) as large
or larger velocities have existed from the beginning of
the present order of things.1 Several rival explanations
of the recession of the nebulae, which do not accept it
as evidence of repulsive force, have been put forward.
These necessarily adopt the second alternative, and
postulate that the large velocities have existed from the
beginning. This might be true; but it can scarcely be
called an explanation of the large velocities.
Our best hope of further progress is to discover some
additional test for the theory—if possible, a stringent
quantitative test. We want to predict the actual mag¬
nitude of the cosmical repulsion, and see if the observed
motions of the nebulae confirm the predicted value.
Relativity theory alone cannot do this, but when rela¬
tivity is combined with wave-mechanics the quantita¬
tive prediction seems possible. This development is
explained in Chapter IV.
Thus far we have been treating a fairly straight¬
forward subject. Apart from the vast magnitudes
involved there is nothing that particularly taxes the
1 For completeness we must add the possible hypothesis that
the system once extended much farther than now, that it
collapsed, and is now on the rebound. This allows the large
velocities to have been produced by inward directed force, the
inward velocities being turned into outward velocities by pas¬
sage though the centre. So far as I know, this is not advocated
by anyone. It does not seem capable of providing for the
distribution of velocities which we observe.

RECESSION OF THE GALAXIES

33

imagination. In the next chapter I shall present a
rather different view involving difficult conceptions.
I can imagine the reader saying, “ Why do you spoil
it all, just when I was beginning to see what it is all
about? ”
If I introduce a different kind of outlook it is because
I am going on to treat of regions of the universe beyond
those that we have hitherto considered. Primarily the
present chapter deals with the region actually explored,
up to 150 million light-years’ distance. If the galaxies
come to an end there, no more need be said; the points
discussed in the next chapter are scarcely relevant and
its outlook is unnecessarily pedantic. But there is no
sign that the system of the galaxies is coming to an
end, and presumably it extends considerably beyond
150 million light-years. It might extend to, say, five
times that distance without any important new feature;
but if we have to go much beyond that, there is trouble
in store. The appropriate speed of recession would be
beginning to approach the velocity of light—a point
which evidently requires looking into. We have a force
of cosmical repulsion, increasing with the distance,
which is already rather powerful; if we go on to a vastly
greater distance something must give way at last—only
Einstein has taken the precaution of closing up the
universe to prevent us from going too far.
The object of the ensuing development is to deal
with questions which arise as to the possible extension
of the system of the galaxies beyond the region at
present explored. We shall consider extrapolation in
time as well as in space, and discuss the history of
evolution of the system.
What is the object of making these risky extrapola¬
tions to regions of space and time remote from our
practical experience? It might be a sufficient answer
to say that we are explorers. But there is another and
more urgent reason. The man who for the first time
B

34

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

sees an aeroplane passing overhead doubtless wonders
how it goes. I do not think he can be accused of
eccentricity if he also wonders how it stops. It is true
that he sees no signs of its stopping; he is mentally
extrapolating the flight beyond the range that is visible.
He cannot be sure of his extrapolation; outside his
range of vision there may be conditions, of which lie is
unaware, which will stop the flight in a manner dif¬
ferent from his conjecture. But he will have much
more confidence in his conclusions as to the mechanism
of the aeroplane if they will explain the flight from
start to stop without postulating some unknown in¬
tervention. At first sight it seems a reasonable pro¬
gramme for science to tidy up the region of space and
time of which we have some experience and not to
theorise about what lies beyond; but the danger of
such a limitation is that the tidying up may consist in
taking the difficulties and inexplicabilities and dumping
them over the border instead of really straightening
them out.
We have seen that there is a force of cosmical repul¬
sion growing larger as the distance from us increases.
At the greatest distance yet explored it is still increas¬
ing. The foregoing theory explains how it goes. But
we have still a desire to understand how it stops.

CHAPTER II
SPHERICAL SPACE
I could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a king of
infinite space.—Hamlet.
I

When a physicist refers to curvature of space he at
once falls under suspicion of talking metaphysics. Yet
space is a prominent feature of the physical world;
and measurement of space—lengths, distances, volumes
—is part of the normal occupation of a physicist.
Indeed it is rare to find any quantitative physical
observation which does not ultimately reduce to
measuring distances. Is it surprising that the precise
investigation of physical space should have brought to
light a new property which our crude sensory perception
of space has passed over?
Space-curvature is a purely physical characteristic
which we may find in a region by suitable experiments
and measurements, just as we may find a magnetic
field. In curved space the measured distances ,and
angles fit together in a way different from that with
which we are familiar in the geometry of flat space;
for example, the three angles of a triangle do not add
up to two right angles. It seems rather hard on the
physicist, who conscientiously measures the three angles
of a triangle, that he should be told that if the sum
comes to two right angles his work is sound physics,
but if it differs to the slightest extent he is straying into
metaphysical quagmires.
In using the name “ curvature ” for this characteristic
of space, there is no metaphysical implication. The
35

36

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

nomenclature is that of the pure geometers who had
already imagined and described spaces with this charac¬
teristic before its actual physical occurrence was sus¬
pected.
Primarily, then, curvature is to be regarded as the
technical name for a property discovered observationally. It may be asked, How closely does “ curvature ”
as a technical scientific term correspond to the familiar
meaning of the word? I think the correspondence is
about as close as in the case of other familiar words,
such as Work, Energy, Probability, which have acquired
a specialised meaning in science.
We are familiar with curvature of surfaces; it is a
property which we can impart by bending and deform¬
ing a flat surface. If we imagine an analogous pro¬
perty to be imparted to space (three-dimensional) by
bending and deforming it, we have to picture an extra
dimension or direction in which the space is bent.
There is, however, no suggestion that the extra dimen¬
sion is anything but a fictitious construction, useful for
representing the property pictorially, and thereby show¬
ing its mathematical analogy with the property found
in surfaces. The relation of the picture to the reality
may perhaps best be stated as follows. In nature we
come across curved surfaces and curved spaces, i.e.
surfaces and spaces exhibiting the observational pro¬
perty which has been technically called “curvature.”
In the case of a surface we can ourselves remove this
property by bending and deforming it; we can therefore
conveniently describe the property by the operation
(bending or curving) which we should have to perform
in order to remove it. In the case of a space we can¬
not ourselves remove the property; we cannot alter
space artificially as we alter surfaces. Nevertheless we
may . conveniently describe the property by the
imaginary operation of bending or curving, which would
remove it if it could be performed; and in order to

SPHERICAL

SPACE

37

use this mode of description a fictitious dimension
is introduced which would make the operation
possible.
Thus if we are not content to accept curvature as
a technical physical characteristic but ask for a picture
giving fuller insight, we have to picture more than three
dimensions. Indeed it is only in simple and symmetri¬
cal conditions that a fourth dimension suffices; and the
general picture requires six dimensions (or, when we
extend the same ideas from space to space-time, ten
dimensions are needed). That is a severe stretch on
our powers of conception. But I would say to the
reader, do not trouble your head about this picture
unduly; it is a stand-by for very occasional use. Nor¬
mally, when reference is made to space-curvature,
picture it as you picture a magnetic field. Probably
you do not picture a magnetic field; it is something
(recognisable by certain tests) which you use in your
car or in your wireless apparatus, and all that is
needed is a recognised name for it. Just so; spacecurvature is something found in nature with which we
are beginning to be familiar, recognisable by certain
tests, for which ordinarily we need not a picture but a
name.
It is sometimes said that the difference between the
mathematician and the non-mathematician is that the
former can picture things in four dimensions. I sup¬
pose there is a grain of truth in this, for after working
for some time in four or more dimensions one does
involuntarily begin to picture them after a fashion.
But it has to be added that, although the mathematician
visualises four dimensions, his picture is wrong in
essential particulars—at least mine is.
I see our
spherical universe like a bubble in four dimensions;
length, breadth, and thickness, all lie in the skin of the
bubble. Can I picture this bubble rotating? Why, of
course I can. I fix on one direction in the four dimen-

38

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

sions as axis, and I see the other three dimensions
whirling round it. Perhaps I never actually see more
than two at a time; but thought flits rapidly from one
pair to another, so that all three seem to be hard at it.
Can you picture it like that? If you fail, it is just as
well. For we know by analysis that a bubble in four
dimensions does not rotate that way at all. Three
dimensions cannot spin round a fourth. They must
rotate two round two; that is to say, the bubble does
not rotate about a line axis but about a plane. I know
that that is true; but I cannot visualise it.
I need scarcely say that our scientific conclusions
about the curvature of space are not derived from the
false involuntary picture, but by algebraic working
out of formulas which, though they may be to some
extent illustrated by such pictures, are independent of
pictures. In fact, the pictorial conception of spacecurvature falls between two stools; it is too abstruse
to convey much illumination to the non-mathemati¬
cian, whilst the mathematician practically ignores it
and relies on the more dependable and more powerful
algebraic methods of investigating this property of
physical space.
Having said so much in disparagement of the picture
of our three-dimensional space contorted by curvature
in fictitious directions, I must now mention one appli¬
cation in which it is helpful. We are assured by
analysis that in one important respect the picture is not
misleading. The curvature, or bending round of space,
may be sufficient to give a “ closed space ”—space in
which it is impossible to go on indefinitely getting
farther and farther from the starting-point. Closed
space differs from an open infinite space in the same
way that the surface of a sphere differs from a plane
infinite surface.

SPHERICAL

SPACE

39

II

We may say of the surface of a sphere (1) that it is a
curved surface, (2) that it is a closed surface. Similarly
we have to contemplate two possible characteristics of
our actual three-dimensional space, curvature and
closure. A closed surface or space must necessarily be
curved, but a curved surface or space need not be
closed. Thus the idea of closure goes somewhat beyond
the idea of curvature; and, for example, it was not
contemplated in the first announcement of Einstein’s
general relativity theory which introduced curved space.
In the ordinary application of Einstein’s theory to
the solar system and other systems on a similar scale
the curvature is small and amounts only to a very
slight wrinkling or hummocking.
The distortion is
local, and does not affect the general character of space
as a whole. Our present subject takes us much farther
afield, and we have to apply the theory to the great
super-system of the galaxies. The small local distor¬
tions now have cumulative effect. The new investigations
suggest that the curvature actually leads to a complete
bending round and closing up of space, so that if
becomes a domain of finite extent. It will be seen that
this goes beyond the original proposal; and the evidence
for it is by no means so secure. But all new explora¬
tion passes through a phase of insecurity.
For the purpose of discussion this closed space is
generally taken to be spherical. The presence of matter
will cause local unevenness; the scale that we are now
contemplating is so vast that we scarcely notice the
stars, but the galaxies change the curvature locally 1

,

1 Einstein’s law of gravitation connects the various com¬
ponents of curvature of space with the density, momentum,
and stress of the matter occupying it. I would again remind
the reader that space-curvature is the technical name for an
obsolete physical property, so that there is nothing metaphysical
in the idea of matter producing curvature any more than in a
magnet producing a magnetic field.

40

THE EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

and so pull the sphere rather out of shape. The ideal
spherical space may be compared to the geoid used to
represent the average figure of the earth with the moun¬
tains and ocean beds smoothed away. It may be,
however, that the irregularity is much greater, and the
universe may be pear-shaped or sausage-shaped; the
150 million light-years over which our observational
survey extends is only a small fraction of the whole
extent of space, so that we are not in a position to
dogmatise as to the actual shape. But we can use the
spherical world as a typical model, which will illustrate
the peculiarities arising from the closure of space.
In spherical space, if we go on in the same direction
continually, we ultimately reach our starting-point
again, having “gone round the world.” The same
thing happens to a traveller on the earth’s surface who
keeps straight on, bearing neither to the left nor to the
right. Thus the closure of space may be thought of as
analogous to the closure of a surface, and generally
speaking it has the same connection with curvature.
The whole area of the earth’s surface is finite, and so
too the whole volume of spherical space is finite. It
is “ finite but unbounded
we never come to a
boundary, but owing to the re-entrant property we can
never be more than a limited distance away from our
starting-point.
In the theory that I am going to describe the galaxies
are supposed to be distributed throughout a closed
space of this kind. As there is no boundary—no point
at which we can enter or leave the closed space—this
constitutes a self-contained finite universe.
Perhaps the most elementary characteristic of a
spherical universe is that at great distances from us
there is not so much room as we should have antici¬
pated. On the earth’s surface the area within 2 miles
of Charing Cross is very nearly 4 times the area within
1 mile; but at a distance of say 4,000 miles this simple

SPHERICAL

SPACE

41

progression has broken down badly. Similarly in the
universe the volume, or amount of room, within 2
light-years of the sun is very nearly 8 times the volume
within 1 light-year; but the volume within 4,000 million
light-years of the sun is considerably less than 8 times
the volume within 2,000 million light-years. We have
no right to be surprised. How could we have expected
to know how much room there would be out there
without examining the universe to see? It is a com¬
mon enough experience that simple rules, which hold
well enough for a limited range of trial, break down
when pushed too far. There is no juggling with words
in these statements; the meaning of distance and volume
in surveying the earth or the heavens is not ambiguous;
and although there are practical difficulties in measuring
these vast distances and volumes there is no uncertainty
as to the ideal that is aimed at. I do not suggest that
we have checked by direct measurement the falling off
of volume at great distances; like many scientific con¬
clusions, it is a very indirect inference. But at least it
has been reached by examining the universe; and,
however shaky the deduction, it has more weight than
a judgment formed without looking at the universe at
all.
Much confusion of thought has been caused by the
assertion so often made that we can use any kind of
space we please (Euclidean or non-Euclidean) for re¬
presenting physical phenomena, so that it is impossible
to disprove Euclidean space observationally. We can
graphically represent (or misrepresent) things as we
please. It is possible to represent the curved surface of
the earth in* a flat space as, for example, in maps on
Mercator’s projection; but this does not render mean¬
ingless the labours of geodesists as to the true figure
of the earth. Those who on this ground defend belief in
a flat universe must also defend belief in a flat earth.
B*

42

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

‘

III

There is a widespread impression, which has been
encouraged by some scientific writers, that the con¬
sideration of spherical space in this subject is an un¬
necessary mystification, and that we could say all we
want to say about the expanding system of the galaxies
without using any other conception than that of
Euclidean infinite space. It is suggested that talk about
expanding space is mere metaphysics, and has no real
relevance to the expansion of the material universe
itself, which is commonplace and easily comprehensible.
This is a mistaken idea. The general phenomenon of
expansion, including the explanation provided by rela¬
tivity theory, can be expounded up to a certain point
without any recondite conceptions of space, as has
been done in Chapter I; but there are other conse¬
quences of the theory which cannot be dealt with so
simply. To consider these we have to change the
method, and partly transfer our attention from the pro¬
perties and behaviour of the material system to the
properties and behaviour of the space which it occupies.
This is necessary because the properties attributed to
the material system by the theory are so unusual that
they cannot even be described without self-contradic¬
tion if we continue to picture the system in flat (i.e.
Euclidean) space. This does not constitute an objec¬
tion to the theory, for there is, of course, no reason
for supposing space to be flat unless our observations
show it to be flat; and there is no reason why we should
be able to picture or describe the system in flat space
if it is not in flat space. It is no disparagement to a
square peg to say that it will not fit into a round hole.
I will liken the super-system of galaxies (the uni¬
verse) to a peg which is fitted into a hole—space. In
Chapter I we were only concerned with a little bit of

SPHERICAL

SPACE

43

the peg (the 150 million light-years surveyed) and the
question of fit scarcely arose. When we turn to con¬
sider the whole peg we find mathematically that, unless
something unforeseen occurs beyond the region ex¬
plored, it is (for the purposes of this analogy) a square
peg. Immediately there is an outcry: “ That is an
impossible sort of peg—not really a peg at all.” Our
answer is that it is an excellent peg, as good as any on
the market, provided that you do not want to fit it into
a round hole, “ But holes are round. It is the nature
of holes to be round. A Greek two thousand years ago
said that they are round.” And so on. So whether I
want it or not, the argument shifts from the peg to
the hole—the space into which the material universe is
fitted. It is over the hole that the battle has been fought
and won; I think now that every authority admits, if
only grudgingly, that the square hole—by which I here
symbolise closed space—is a physical possibility.
The issue that I am here dealing with is not whether
the theory of a closed expanding universe is right or
wrong, probable or improbable, but whether, if we
hold the theory, spherical space is necessary to the
statement of it. I am not here replying to those who
disbelieve the theory, but to those who think its strange¬
ness is due to the mystifying language of its exponents.
The following will perhaps show that there has been
no gratuitous mystification:
I want you to imagine a system of say a billion stars
spread approximately uniformly so that each star has
neighbours surrounding it on all sides, the distance of
each star from its nearest neighbours being approxi¬
mately the same everywhere. (Lest there be any doubt
as to the meaning of distance, I define it as the dis-tance found by parallax observation, or by any other
astronomical method accepted as equivalent to actually
stepping out the distance.) Can you picture this?
— Yes. Except that you forgot to consider that the

44

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

system will have a boundary; and the stars at the edge
will have neighbours on one side only, so that they
must be excepted from your condition of having neigh¬
bours on all sides.
— No; I meant just what I said. I want all the stars
to have neighbours surrounding them. If you picture
a place where the neighbours are on one side only—
what you call a boundary—you are not picturing the
system I have in mind.
— But your system is impossible; there must be a
boundary.
— Why is it impossible? I could arrange a billion
people on the surface of the earth (spread over the
whole surface) so that each has neighbours on all
sides, and no question of a boundary arises. I only
want you to do the same with the stars.
— But that is a distribution over a surface. The
stars are to be distributed in three-dimensional space,
and space is not like that.
— Then you agree that if space could be “ like
that” my system would be quite possible and natural?
— I suppose so. But how could space be like that?
— We will discuss space if you wish. But just now
when I was trying to explain that according to present
theory space does behave “ like that,” I was told that
the discussion of space was an unnecessary mystifica¬
tion, and that if I would stick to a description of my
material system it would be seen to be quite common¬
place and comprehensible. So I duly described my
material system; whereupon you immediately raised
questions as to the nature of space.
In the spherical universe the character of the
material system is as peculiar as the character of the
space. The material system, like the space, exhibits
closure; so that no galaxy is more central than another,
and none can be said to be at the outside. Such a dis¬
tribution is at first sight inconceivable, but that is

SPHERICAL

SPACE

45

because we try to conceive it in flat space. The space
and the material system have to fit one another. It is
no use trying to imagine the system of galaxies con¬
templated in Einstein’s and Lemaitre’s theories of the
universe, if the only kind of space in our minds is one
in which such a system cannot exist.
In the foregoing conversation I have credited the
reader with a feeling which instinctively rejects the
possibility of a spherical space or a closed distribution
of galaxies. But spherical space does not contradict
our experience of space, any more than the sphericity
of the earth contradicts the experience of those who
have never travelled far enough to notice the curvature.
Apart from our reluctance to tackle a difficult and
unfamiliar conception, the only thing that can be urged
against spherical space is that more than twenty cen¬
turies ago a certain Greek published a set of axioms
which (inferentially) stated that spherical space is im¬
possible. He had perhaps more excuse, but no more
reason, for his statement than those who repeat it to¬
day.
Few scientific men nowadays would reject spherical
space as impossible, but there are many who take the
attitude that it is an unlikely kind of hypothesis only
to be considered as a last resort. Thus, in support of
some of the proposed explanations of the motions of
the spiral nebuls, it is claimed that they have the
“ advantage ” of not requiring curved space. But
what is the supposed disadvantage of curved space?
I cannot remember that any disadvantage has ever
been pointed out. On the other hand it is well known
that the assumption of flat physical space leads to very
serious theoretical and logical difficulties, as will be
explained later (p. 98).
A closed system of galaxies requires a closed space.
If such a system expands, it requires an expanding
space. This can be seen at once from the analogy that

46

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

we have already used, viz. human beings distributed
evenly over the surface of the earth; clearly they can¬
not scatter apart from one another unless the earth’s
surface expands.
This should make clear how the present theory of
the expanding universe stands in relation to (a) the
expansion of a material system, and (b) the expansion
of space. The observational phenomenon chiefly con¬
cerned (recession of the spiral nebulas) is obviously
expansion of a material system; and the onlooker is
often puzzled to find theorists proclaiming the doctrine
of an expanding space. He suspects that there has
been confusion of thought of a rather elementary kind.
Why should not the space be there already, and the
material system expand into it, as material systems
usually do? If the system of galaxies comes to an end
not far beyond the greatest distance we have plumbed,
then I agree that that is what happens. But the
system shows no sign of coming to an end, and, if it
goes on much farther, it will alter its character. This
change of character is a matter of mathematical com¬
putation which cannot be discussed here; I need only
say that it is connected with the fact that, if the speed
of recession continues to increase outwards, it will ere
long approach the speed of light, so that something
must break down. The result is that the system be¬
comes a closed system; and we have seen that such a
system cannot expand without the space also expand¬
ing. That is how expansion of space comes in. I dare¬
say that (for historical reasons) expansion of space has
often been given too much prominence in expositions
of the subject, and readers have been led to think that
it is more directly concerned in the explanation of the
motions of the nebulae than is actually the case.
But
if we are to give a full account of the view to which
we are led by theory and observation, we must not
omit to mention it.

SPHERICAL

SPACE

47

What I have said has been mainly directed towards
removing preliminary prejudices against a closed space
or a closed system of galaxies. I do not suggest that
the reasons for adopting closed space are overwhelm¬
ingly strong;1 but even slight advantages may be of
weight when there is nothing to place in the opposite
scale. If we adopt open space we encounter certain
difficulties (not necessarily insuperable) which closed
space entirely avoids; and we do not want to divert the
inquiry into a speculation as to the solution of diffi¬
culties which need never arise. If we wish to be non¬
committal, we shall naturally work in terms of a closed
universe of finite radius R, since we can at any time
revert to an infinite universe by making R infinite.
There is one other type of critic to whom a word
may be said. He feels that space is not solely a matter
that concerns the physicists, and that by their technical
definitions and abstractions they are making of it some¬
thing different from the common man’s space. It
would be difficult to define precisely what is in his
mind. Perhaps he is not thinking especially of space
as a measurable constituent of the physical universe,
and is imagining a world order transcending the de¬
lusions of our sensory organs and the limitations of our
micrometers—a space of “things as they really are.”
It is no part of my present subject to discuss the
relation of the world as conceived in physics to a wider
interpretation of our experience; I will only say that
that part of our conscious experience representable by
physical symbols ought not to claim to be the whole.
As a conscious being you are not one of my symbols;
your domain is not circumscribed by my spatial
measurements. If, like Hamlet, you count yourself
king of an infinite space, I do not challenge your
Curved space is fundamental in relativity theory, and the
argument for adopting it is generally considered to be over¬
whelming. It is closed space which needs more evidence.
1

48

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

sovereignty. I only invite attention to certain dis¬
quieting rumours which have arisen as to the state of
Your Majesty’s nutshell.

IV

The immediate results of introducing the cosmical
term into the law of gravitation was the appearance
(in theory) of two universes—the Einstein universe and
the de Sitter universe. Both were closed spherical
universes; so that a traveller going on and on in the
same direction would at last find himself back at the
starting-point, having made a circuit of space. Both
claimed to be static universes which would remain
unchanged for any length of time; thus they provided
a permanent framework within which the small-scale
systems—galaxies and stars—could change and evolve.
There were, however, certain points of difference be¬
tween them.
An especially important difference,
because it might possibly admit of observational test,
was that in de Sitter’s universe there would be an
apparent recession of remote objects, whereas in Ein¬
stein’s universe this would not occur. At that time
only three radial velocities of spiral nebulae were
known, and these somewhat lamely supported de
Sitter’s universe by a majority of 2 to 1. There the
question rested for a time. But in 1922 Prof. V. M.
Slipher furnished me with his (then unpublished)
measures of 40 spiral nebulae for use in my book
Mathematical Theory of Relativity. As the majority
had become 36 to 4, de Sitter’s theory began to appear
in a favourable light.
The Einstein and de Sitter universes were two alter¬
natives arising out of the same theoretical basis. To
give an analogy—suppose that we are transported to
a new star, and that we notice a number of celestial
bodies in the neighbourhood. We should know from

SPHERICAL

SPACE

49

gravitational theory that their orbits must be either
ellipses or hyperbolas; but only observation can decide
which. Until the observational test is made there are
two alternatives; the objects may have elliptic orbits
and constitute a permanent system like the solar system,
or they may have hyperbolic orbits and constitute a
dispersing system. Actually the question whether the
universe would follow Einstein’s or de Sitter’s model
depended on how much matter was present in the
universe,—a question which could scarcely be settled
by theory—and is none too easy to settle by observa¬
tion.
We have now realised that the changelessness of
de Sitter’s universe was a mathematical fiction. Taken
literally his formulae described a completely empty uni¬
verse; but that was meant to be interpreted generously
as signifying that the average density of matter in it,
though not zero, was low enough to be neglected in
calculating the forces controlling the system. It turned
out, however, that the changelessness depended on
there being literally no matter present. In fact the
“ changeless universe ” had been invented by the simple
expedient of omitting to put into it anything that could
exhibit change. We therefore no longer rank de Sitter’s
as a static universe; and Einstein’s is the only form of
material universe which is genuinely static or motion¬
less.
The situation has been summed up in the statement
that Einstein’s universe contains matter but no motion
and de Sitter’s contains motion but no matter. It is
clear that the actual universe containing both matter
and motion does not correspond exactly to either of
these abstract models. The only question is. Which
is the better choice for a first approximation? Shall
we put a little motion into Einstein’s world of inert
matter, or shall we put a little matter into de Sitter’s
Primum Mobile?

50

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

The choice between Einstein’s and de Sitter’s models
is no longer urgent because we are not now restricted
to these two extremes; we have available the whole
chain of intermediate solutions between motionless
matter and matterless motion, from which we can pick
out the solution with the right proportion of matter
and motion to correspond with what we observe. These
solutions were not sought earlier, because their appro¬
priateness was not realised; it was the preconceived
idea that a static solution was a necessity in order that
everything might be referred to an unchanging back¬
ground of space. We have seen that this requirement
should strictly have barred out de Sitter’s solution, but
by a fortunate piece of gate-crashing it gained admis¬
sion; it was the precursor of the other non-static solu¬
tions to which attention is now mainly directed.
The deliberate investigation of non-static solutions
was carried out by A. JFnedmann in 1922. His solu¬
tions were rediscovered in 1927 by Abbe G. Lemaitre,
who brilliantly developed the astronomical theory re¬
sulting therefrom. His work was published in a rather
inaccessible journal, and seems to have remained un¬
known until 1930 when attention was called to it by
de Sitter and myself. In the meantime the solutions
had been discovered for the third time by H. P. Robert¬
son, and through him their interest was beginning to be
realised. The astronomical application, stimulated by
Hubble and Humason’s observational work on the
spiral nebulas, was also being rediscovered, but it had
not been carried so far as in Lemaitre’s paper.
The intermediate solutions of Friedmann and
Lemaitre are “ expanding universes.” Both the
material system and fhe closed space, in which it exists,
are expanding. At one end we have Einstein’s universe
with no motion and therefore in equilibrium. Then,
as we proceed along the series, we have model universes
showing more and more rapid expansion until we reach

#

SPHERICAL

SPACE

51

de Sitter’s universe at the other end of the series. The
rate of expansion increases all the way along the series
and the density diminishes; de Sitter’s universe is the
limit when the average density of celestial matter
approaches zero. The series of expanding universes
then stops, not because the expansion becomes too
rapid, but because there is nothing left to expand.
We can better understand this series of models by
starting at the de Sitter end. As explained in Chapter I
there are two forces operating, the ordinary New¬
tonian attraction between the galaxies and the cosmical
repulsion. In the de Sitter universe the density of
matter is infinitely small so that the Newtonian attrac¬
tion is negligible. The cosmical repulsion acts without
check, and we get the greatest possible rate of ex¬
pansion of the system. When more matter is inserted,
the mutual gravitation tends to hold the mass together
and opposes the expansion. The more matter put in,
the slower the expansion. There will be a particular
density at which the Newtonian attraction between the
galaxies is just strong enough to counterbalance the
cosmical repulsion, so that the expansion is zero. This
is Einstein’s universe. If we put in still more matter,
attraction outweighs repulsion and we obtain a model
of a contracting universe.
Primarily this series of models is a series of alter¬
natives, one of which has to be selected to represent
our actual universe. But it has a still more interesting
application. As time goes on the actual universe travels
along the series of models, so that the whole series
gives a picture of its life-history. At the present
moment the universe corresponds to a particular model;
but since it is expanding its density is diminishing.
Therefore a million years hence we shall need a model
of lower density, i.e. nearer to the de Sitter end of the
series.
Tracing this progression as far back as possible we

52

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

reach the conclusion that the world started as an
Einstein universe; it has passed continuously along the
series of models having more and more rapid expan¬
sion; and it will finish up as a de Sitter universe.
Allusion has been made to the fact that the recession
of the galaxies in the present theory of the expanding
universe is not precisely the effect foreseen by de Sitter.
It may be well to explain the manner of the transition.
The phenomenon that is generally called the “ de Sitter
effect ” was a rather mysterious slowing down of time
at great distances from the observer; atomic vibrations
would be executed more slowly, so that their light
would be shifted to the red and imitate the effect of a
receding velocity.
But besides discovering this,
de Sitter examined the equations of motion and
noticed that the real velocities of distant objects would
probably be large; he did not, however, expect these
real velocities to favour recession rather than approach.
I am not sure when it was first recognised that the
complication in the equations of motion was neither
more nor less than a repulsive force proportional to the
distance; but it must have been before 1922. Sum¬
marising the theory at that date, I wrote—“ De Sitter’s
theory gives a double explanation of this motion of
recession: first, there is the general tendency to scatter
according to the equation d2r/ds2 = jXr; second, there
is the general displacement of spectral lines to the red
in distant objects due to the slowing down of atomic
vibrations which would be erroneously interpreted as
a motion of recession.” 1 I also pointed out that it was
a question of definition whether the latter effect should
be regarded as a spurious or a genuine velocity. Dur¬
ing the time that its light is travelling to us, the nebula
is being accelerated by the cosmical repulsion and
acquires an additional outward velocity exceeding the
amount in dispute; so that the velocity, which was
1 Mathematical Theory of Relativity, p. 161.

SPHERICAL

SPACE

53

spurious at the time of emission of the light, has become
genuine by the time of its arrival. Xnferentially this
meant that the slowing down of time had become a very
subsidiary effect compared with cosmical repulsion;
but this was not so clearly realised as it might have
been. The subsequent developments of Friedmann
and Lemaitre were geometrical and did not allude to
anything so crude as “ force
but, examining them to
see what has happened, we find that the slowing down
of time has been swallowed up in the cosmical repul¬
sion; it was a small portion of the whole effect (a
second-order term) which had been artificially detached
by the earlier methods of analysis.

V

An Einstein universe is in equilibrium, but its equili¬
brium is unstable. The Newtonian attraction and the
cosmical repulsion are in exact balance. Suppose that
a slight disturbance momentarily upsets the balance;
let us say that the Newtonian attraction is slightly
weakened. Then repulsion has the upper hand, and a
slow expansion begins. The expansion increases the
average distance apart of the material bodies so that
their attraction on one another is lessened.
This
widens the difference between attraction and repulsion,
and the expansion becomes faster. Thus the balance
becomes more and more upset until the universe be¬
comes irrevocably launched on its course of expansion.
Similarly if the first slight disturbance were a
strengthening of the Newtonian attraction, this would
cause a small contraction. The material systems would
be brought nearer together and their mutual attraction
further increased. The contracting tendency thus be¬
comes more and more reinforced. Einstein’s universe
is delicately poised so that the slightest disturbance will

54

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

cause it to topple into a state of ever-increasing ex¬
pansion or of ever-increasing contraction.
The original unstable Einstein universe might have
turned into an expanding universe or into a contracting
universe. Apparently it has chosen expansion. The
question arises. Can we explain this choice? I do not
think it will be any grave discredit if we fail, for I
cannot recall any other case in which theory has suc¬
ceeded in predicting which way an unstable body will
fall. However, we shall try. We have to consider what
kind of spontaneous disturbance could occur in the
primordial distribution of matter from which our
galaxies and stars have been evolved; for definiteness
I picture it as a motionless uniform nebula filling the
spherical world. Two kinds of spontaneous change
have been suggested:
(1) The matter will form local condensations so as
to become unevenly distributed.
(2) Material mass may become converted into radia¬
tion, either in the process of building up complex atoms
(e.g. the formation of helium from hydrogen) or in the
mutual annihilation of electrons and protons.
It can be shown that the conversion of material
mass into radiation would start a contraction. Mass
for mass, radiation is more effective than matter in
exerting gravitational attraction; hence the conversion
tips the balance in favour of contraction. Accordingly
our hopes of explaining the decision to expand must
rest on process (1). The investigation is peculiarly
difficult, because it turns out that to a first approxima¬
tion the redistribution of matter in condensations makes
no difference to the balance, and it is necessary to carry
the calculation to a high approximation to obtain the
deciding term. The problem has been treated by
McVittie, McCrae, Lemaitre and Sen—not always with
accordant results; and I doubt whether I am qualified
to judge on so technical a question. I am inclined

SPHERICAL

SPACE

55

to think, however, that Lemaitre’s treatment goes to
the root of the matter.1
It has been mentioned that, although we often con¬
sider models of the universe which are perfectly
spherical, the actual universe must be more irregular.
A better approximation would be a pimply sphere—
the pimples corresponding to the galaxies; for wherever
there is matter, the curvature is locally increased.
Whilst a “ pimply Einstein world ” would have approxi¬
mately the same properties as an ideal Einstein world,
it was at first thought that exact equilibrium was only
possible for the exact sphere. It is found, however,
that a pimply sphere can also be in exact equilibrium
and form a static universe. This was pointed out ex¬
plicitly by Prof. N. K. Sen, who has given a simple
and elegant treatment; but it appears to have been
implicit in the earlier work of Lemaitre.
Suppose for a moment that, when a condensation is
formed, the condensation separates completely from
the surrounding matter and leaves an empty crack all
round. We imagine that a sphere of gas is separated in
this way, and continues to condense more and more.
Lemaitre (by extending a theorem due to Birkhoff)
has shown that after the separation the gradual con¬
densation of the matter can make no difference what¬
ever to the gravitational force exerted by the sphere on
its surroundings; so that, if the universe outside the
condensation was originally in equilibrium, its equili¬
brium will remain undisturbed. In these conditions the
formation of condensations will start neither contrac¬
tion nor expansion of the universe as a whole.
The actual conditions differ from the foregoing in
that no empty crack is formed, the condensation merg¬
ing gradually into its surroundings. The crack, by
1 Lemaitre’s paper (Monthly Notices, vol xci, p. 490) seems
to me very obscure, but I have had the advantage of verbal
explanations from the author.

56

THE EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

isolating the condensation from its surroundings, would
have prevented any pressure of one on the other; in
the absence of a crack there will be a pressure (prob¬
ably exceedingly small) which will change as the con¬
densation proceeds. It is this change of pressure,
neglected in the preceding paragraph, that is the pos¬
sible cause of expansion or contraction; for we have
see/i that the mere rearrangement of matter in a more
condensed form has no effect. Lemaitre describes the
change which occurs as a “ stagnation ” of energy. It
is not difficult to see that it is really the converse kind
of change to that which occurs when energy of con¬
stitution of matter is liberated as radiation; energy is
taken away from the transmissible form (pressure) and
immobilised in the constitution of the condensation.
Its effect is therefore opposite to that of conversion of
material mass into radiation, and it tends to make the
universe expand.
Sen’s procedure is different. Having found the
equations for a “ pimply Einstein world ” in static
equilibrium, he calculates the total mass of such a
world, and finds that it is always greater than that of
a uniform Einstein world. It follows that, if the matter
of the original uniform Einstein world is rearranged
in condensations, there is not quite enough mass to
form an equilibrium distribution. If we could artifi¬
cially add a little mass to each condensation, we should
obtain one of Sen’s pimply spheres in equilibrium;
the absence of this mass leaves the gravitational attrac¬
tion in defect of the amount required to maintain
equilibrium. Consequently cosmical repulsion has the
upper hand and the universe expands.
Although both Lemaitre and Sen agree that expan¬
sion (not contraction) ensues, there is a discrepancy
between them; for Sen obtains it as the direct result
of the rearrangement of matter, whereas Lemaitre
claims that the direct result is nil, and that the expan-

SPHERICAL

SPACE

57

sion is an indirect result dependent on the existence
of a small pressure in the primordial nebula. Lemaitre’s
investigation has the advantage that it avoids a very
tricky calculation of the mass of the condensations,
and seems to offer less likelihood of error.
It is only at the very beginning that we have to look
for a cause of expansion or contraction; once started,
the expansion or contraction continues and increases
automatically. If there were causes of contraction and
causes of expansion, victory went to the one which got
its shove in first. Thus the formation of condensations
must have had the start of the conversion of mass into
radiation, since the latter would (as we have seen)
have brought about a contracting universe. To my
mind this rather suggests that the primordial material
consisted of hydrogen (or equivalently free protons and
electrons) since there would then be less opportunity
for the conversion of mass into radiation than if more
complex atoms were present. So long as they are not
combined in complex nuclei, protons and electrons are
immune from annihilation. The reason for this security
is that the photon or quantum of radiation, which
results from the annihilation of a proton and electron,
has to be provided with momentum, which must be
balanced by a recoil momentum. But in hydrogen
there is nothing left to recoil. Annihilation of a proton
and electron (if it ever occurs) can happen only when
they form part of a complex system which will leave a
residuum to carry the recoil.1

VI

We have been led almost inevitably to the considera¬
tion of the beginning of the universe, or at least to the
1 I am indebted to Sir Alfred Ewing for calling my attention
to this.

58

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

beginning of the present order of physical law. This
always happens when we treat of an irreversible one¬
way process; and the continual expansion of the world
raises the same kind of question of an ultimate be¬
ginning as has been raised by the continual increase
of entfopy in the world.
Views as to the beginning of things lie almost beyond
scientific argument. We cannot give scientific reasons
why the world should have been created one way rather
than another. But I suppose that we all have an
aesthetic feeling in the matter. The solar system must
have started somehow, and I do not know why it should
not have been started by projecting nine planets in
orbits going in the same direction round the sun. But
we have a feeling that that is not the way in which it
would naturally be done; and we turn in preference
to attempts—none too successful—to account for it by
evolution from a nebula. Similarly the theory recently
suggested by Einstein and de Sitter, that in the beginning
all the matter created was projected with a radial
motion so as to disperse even faster than the present
rate of dispersal of the galaxies,1 leaves me cold. One
cannot deny the possibility, but it is difficult to see what
mental satisfaction such a theory is supposed to afford.
Since I cannot avoid introducing this question of a
beginning, it has seemed to me that the most satis¬
factory theory would be one which made the beginning
not too uncesthetically abrupt. This condition can only
be satisfied by an Einstein universe with all the major
forces balanced. Accordingly the primordial state of
things which I picture is an even distribution of protons
and electrons, extremely diffuse and filling all (spherical)
space, remaining nearly balanced for an exceedingly
long time until its inherent instability prevails. We
shall see later that the density of this distribution can
1 They do not state this in words, but it is the meaning of
their mathematical formulae.

SPHERICAL

SPACE

59

be calculated; it was about one proton and electron per
litre. There is no hurry for anything to begin to hap¬
pen. But at last small irregular tendencies accumulate,
and evolution gets under way. The first stage is the
formation of condensations ultimately to become the
galaxies; this, as we have seen, started off an ex¬
pansion, which then automatically increased in speed
until it is now manifested to us in the recession of the
spiral nebulae.
As the matter drew closer together in the condensa¬
tions, the various evolutionary processes followed—
evolution of stars, evolution of the more complex
elements, evolution of planets and life. Doubtless in
this as in other theories there are serious difficulties of
timing, so that one process should not go too fast com¬
pared with another. These difficulties of time-scale
will be mentioned again later.
Perhaps it will be objected that, if one looks far
enough back, this theory does not really dispense with
an abrupt beginning; the whole universe must come
into being at one instant in order that it may start in
balance. I do not regard it in that way. To my mind
undifferentiated sameness and nothingness cannot be
distinguished philosophically. The realities of physics
are unhomogeneities, happenings, change. Our initial
assumption of a homogeneous static medium is no
more than a laying out in order of the conceptions to
be used in our analytical description of the distinguish¬
able objects and events whose history we are going to
relate. So far as these realities are concerned, the
theory achieves its aim of providing an imperceptible
and gradual beginning. When at last, by the thermo¬
dynamic degradation of energy, the universe with the
same gradualness again reaches undifferentiated same¬
ness, that is the end of the physical universe. I do not
picture a worn-out world careering forlornly through
the rest of eternity. What is left is only a few con-

60

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

ceptions which we forgot to put away after we had
finished using them.
To illustrate the instability of an Einstein universe 1
will liken it to a pin standing on its point, which may
fall either to the left or to the right into two horizontal
positions A or B. Position A corresponds to a universe
expanded to infinity, and position B to a universe con¬
tracted to a point or as nearly to a point as quantum
conditions allow. As the only way of avoiding an
abrupt beginning, I have supposed the pin to be vertical
initially. Its balance then is not quite so precarious as
it seems; it would be at the mercy of the slightest
disturbance from outside—but there is nothing outside.
So the fall must come from a slight “ decay ” in the
material of the pin. According to Lemaitre and Sen
the decay is such as to make it fall towards A, and we
now observe it midway in the fall.
If we do not mind a sudden, or even violent, be¬
ginning, many other experiments with the pin are
possible. We may drop it from an inclined position,
or in letting go give it a projection upwards or down¬
wards. Starting from the horizontal position B, we
may project it so that it rises and falls again; or, if
projected with greater force, it may pass through the
vertical position and fall on the other side into posi¬
tion A. Similarly if it is projected from A. The be¬
haviour of a universe is precisely the same; to every
adventure of the pin there corresponds a similar adven¬
ture of a universe and vice versa. These adventures
have been treated at length by some writers, and the
appropriate formulas calculated. Whilst such a mathe¬
matical study is proper in its own sphere, it is liable to
give a misleading impression of the complexity of the
problem before us. When the different projections are
enumerated and presented as though they were all dif¬
ferent “ theories ” of the universe, it looks as though
we had come across a bewildering maze of possibilities.

SPHERICAL

SPACE

61

But all it amounts to is that the universe is just like
any other system that has a position of unstable equili¬
brium.
At first sight there is a curious difference between
the universe and a pin. If the universe has a given
mass we cannot project it just how we please; in fact
the circumstances of projection determine its mass.
But this is explicable when we recollect that energy
and mass are equivalent. The total energy, of the pin
varies according to the way it is projected, and strictly
speaking its mass changes in the same way. The mass
of the universe behaves analogously. To suppose that
velocity of expansion in the (fictitious) radial direction
involves kinetic energy, may seem to be taking our
picture of spherical space too literally; but the energy
is so far real that it contributes to the mass of the
universe. In particular a universe projected from B
to reach A necessarily has greater mass than one which
falls back without reaching the vertical (Einstein) posi¬
tion.
Lemaitre does not share my idea of an evolution of
the universe from the Einstein state. His theory of the
beginning is a fireworks theory—to use his own descrip¬
tion of it. The world began with a violent projection
from position B, i.e. from the state in which it is con¬
densed to a point or atom; the projection was strong
enough to carry it past the Einstein state, so that it is •
now falling down towards A as observation requires.
This makes the mass of the universe somewhat greater
than in my theory (as explained in the last paragraph);
but the change is scarcely important at the present stage
of our progress. I cannot but think that my “ placid
theory ” is more likely to satisfy the general sentiment
of the reader; but if he inclines otherwise, I would say
—“ Have it your own way. And now let us get away
from the Creation back to problems that we may
possibly know something about.”

62

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

The Einstein configuration was the one escape from
an expanding or contracting universe; by proving it
to be unstable, we show that it is no more than a tem¬
porary escape. Whether the original state was Einstein
equilibrium or not, at the date when astronomers
arrive on the scene they must be faced with an ex¬
panding or contracting universe. This result makes
the theory of the expanding universe much more
cogent. Ip 1917 theory was at the cross-roads (p. 11);
that is no longer true, and by its own resources it has
been guided into the road to a non-static universe.
Realising that some degree of expansion (or contrac¬
tion) is inevitable, we are much more inclined to admit
the recession of the spiral nebulae as an indication of
its magnitude.1
VII

Several counter theories of the observed recession of
the nebulae have been proposed and I would like to
make clear my general attitude to such theories.
I am a detective in search of a criminal—the cosmical constant. I know he exists, but I do not know
his appearance; for instance I do not know if he is a
little man or a tall man. Naturally the first move of
my chief (de Sitter) was to order a search for foot¬
prints on the scene of the crime. The search has re¬
vealed footprints, or what look like footprints—the
recession of the spiral nebulas. Of course, I am
tremendously interested in this possible clue to the
criminal. From the length of the stride I calculate the
presumed height of the criminal (in approved detective
fashion). Having gained this important information as
1 I may mention that the proof of the instability of the
Einstein configuration was the turning-point in my own out¬
look. Previously the expanding universe (as it appeared in de
Sitter’s theory) had appealed to me as a highly interesting
possibility, but I had no particular preference for it.

SPHERICAL

SPACE

63

to his appearance, I can now turn to my other clues—
in relativity and wave-mechanics—and checking one
against the other I think I have now about enough
evidence to justify an arrest.
It happens that there are other persons interested in
the footprints, who are not in the least interested in my
criminal, tor instance there is a geologist who sug¬
gests the theory that they belong to a prehistoric
creature. (The counter theories proposed by Einstein
and de Sitter and by Milne suppose that the large
velocities of the nebulas have existed from the begin¬
ning.) Another man thinks they are not footprints at
all, but depressions caused by something of unknown
nature. To what extent is it incumbent on me to
justify myself by criticising these contrary opinions?
I do not think they concern me at all closely. Naturally
from the beginning I was awake to the possibility that
the footprints might not belong to the criminal; the
• question then to be decided was not whether, the clue
was sufficient evidence to hang the criminal, but
whether it indicated a direction of inquiry which it
would be worth while devoting one’s energies to fol¬
lowing up. Of course, if either the geologist or the
depressionist claimed to be able to demonstrate that
his idea of the origin of the footprints was correct, I
should pay grave attention; for such a demonstration
would show that I was altogether on the wrong tack
in my own inquiries. But that is not the position; no
one claims more for the counter suggestions than that
“ for all we know, it might be so.” That leaves the
investigation as open as when we started: footprints
have been discovered on the scene of the crime; all
sorts of explanations are possible, and it may turn out
that they are of little importance; but there is quite
a good chance that they were made by the criminal;
let us follow up the clue, and try to find out. I am
fairly satisfied now that they do belong to the criminal.

64

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

but that is because by pursuing the clue the further
evidence detailed in Chapter IV has come to light.
I have already commented on the theory that the
recession of the spiral nebulae is a misinterpretation of
the red shift of their light. We may class together the
remaining theories which accept the recession of
the spiral nebulae as genuine; these accordingly admit
the expansion of the universe (perhaps only as a tem¬
porary phenomenon) but do not connect it with cosmical repulsion.
The keynote of many of these suggestions seems to
be. What is the most general deduction that can be
made from our observational knowledge of the posi¬
tions and motions of the galaxies? I think that those
who seek this extreme generality are following a willo’-the-wisp. The observational data give only the posi¬
tions and velocities at the present instant; so that it is
clear from the start that nothing can definitely be de¬
duced as to the law of force governing the motion.
Any instantaneous distribution of velocities is compat¬
ible with any law of force. If, then, anyone proposes to
treat the problem of the system of galaxies with wider
generality than we here attempt—as he would perhaps
say, without any preconceptions—we have to ask.
What problem? The motions in themselves do not
constitute a problem. We have to combine them with
other ideas, which we think justified, in order to create
a problem at all. It is the preconceptions—imported
from other branches of science—that can fertilise an
investigation otherwise doomed to barrenness.
Thus I find a difficulty in discussing the proposal of
Einstein and de Sitter, and some of de Sitter’s
separate proposals, because I do not see what are “ the
rules of the game.” These proposals are left as mathe¬
matical formulations, all doubtless compatible with
what we observe; but there seems nothing to prevent
such formulations being indefinitely multiplied. De

SPHERICAL

SPACE

65

Sitter has several times emphasised the possibility that
the cosmical constant X might be negative. This gives
cosmical attraction instead of cosmical repulsion.
Clearly the recession of the nebulas is not evidence in
favour of cosmical attraction. The most that can be
said is that it is not necessarily fatal evidence against it.
It should not be forgotten that an observational test
which is quite inadequate to demonstrate a theory may
yet afford welcome confirmation of it. Suppose that
by theoretical reasoning we have concluded that the
earth is surrounded by a field of force attracting bodies
towards it. To test this we are allowed one brief
glimpse of what is happening near the earth’s surface.
Our glimpse may reveal a display of rockets soaring
upwards. This is not incompatible with our theory,
but it is clearly no confirmation of it. On the other
hand we may see a shower of raindrops falling. Nothing
can strictly be deduced from this one glimpse; but to
observe objects falling to the ground is a tolerable con¬
firmation of the theoretical prediction that there is a
force tending to make objects move that way.
E. A. Milne 1 has pointed out that if initially the
galaxies, endowed with their present speeds, were con¬
centrated in a small volume, those with highest speed
would by now have travelled farthest. If gravitational
and other forces are negligible, we obtain in this way
a distribution in which speed and distance from the
centre are proportional. Whilst accounting for the
dependence of speed on distance, this hypothesis creates
a new difficulty as to the occurrence of the speeds. To
provide a moderately even distribution of nebulas up to
150 million light-years’ distance, high speeds must be
very much more frequent than low speeds; this peculiar
anti-Maxwellian distribution of speeds becomes especi¬
ally surprising when it is supposed to have occurred
originally in a compact aggregation of galaxies.
1 Nature, July 2, 1932.

r

66

THE EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

I might discuss these suggestions more fully if they
were likely to be the last. But it would seem that,
unless we keep to a defined purpose, an unlimited field
of speculation is open; and by the time these remarks
are read, some other hypothesis may be in vogue. I
define my own purpose as being to find what light (if
any) the recession of the spiral nebulae can throw on
the problem of the cosmical constant. Having regard
to this purpose, it seems sufficient to note that this is
not the only direction in which we might look for the
explanation of the phenomenon of the nebulae, and
then proceed with our task.1
1 Further reference to the rival theories is made on p. 84.

CHAPTER III
FEATURES OF THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE
The world’s a bubble, and the life of man
Less than a span.
—Francis Bacon.
I

A spherical world, closed but continually expanding,
is a new playground for thought. Let us play in it a
little to familiarise ourselves with it. In this chapter I
• shall mix together results which may prove to be of
scientific importance and results that are probably no
more than mathematical curiosities. The plan is to
set down anything that seems worthy of note, even
though we cannot see that it has any ultimate import¬
ance in nature.
For a model of the universe let us represent spherical
space by a rubber balloon. Our three dimensions of
length, breadth, and thickness ought all to lie in the
skin of the balloon; but there is only room for two, so
the model will have to sacrifice one of them. That
does not matter very seriously. Imagine the galaxies
to be embedded in the rubber. Now let the balloon
be steadily inflated. That’s the expanding universe.
The galaxies are supposed to be scattered more or
less evenly over the surface; our observational know¬
ledge, however, is limited to a portion which corre¬
sponds roughly to the size of France on a terrestrial
globe. The galaxies have individual motions, i.e.
motions with respect to the material of the balloon,
but these are comparatively small; in the main they
recede from one another simply by the stretching of
the rubber. The balloon, like the universe, is under
two opposing forces; so we may take the internal pres67

68

THE EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

sure tending to inflate it to correspond to the cosmical
repulsion, and the tension of the rubber trying to con¬
tract it to correspond to the mutual attraction of the
galaxies, although here the analogy is not very close.
Initially there was a balance; but a disturbance caused
a slight expansion. This thinned out the rubber and
made it less able to resist expansion. The more it ex¬
panded the less opposition was offered to expansion.
The balloon is now probably several times its original
size, and the tension of the rubber has decreased so
much that it does little to retard the expansion.
A certain amount of quantitative data as to the
dimensions, etc., of the universe can be obtained, and
these I give forthwith. The figures are not final, but
I think that (a), (/?), (c), (d) are not likely to be in
error by more than a factor 2 and the other two
results by a factor 4:
(a) Speed of recession of distant objects (full

value if the mutual attraction of the galaxies is
negligible) — 528 kilometres per second per
megaparsec distance.
(b) Initial radius of the universe before it began
to expand = 328 megaparsecs = 1,068 million lightyears.
(c) Total mass of the universe = 2 1 4.1055 gm.
= T08.1022 x sun’s mass.
(d) Number of protons in the universe = number
of electrons = T29.1079.
(e) Initial mean density of matter in the universe
= T05.10~27 gm. per cu. cm. = l hydrogen atom
per 1,580 cu. cm.
(/) The cosmical constant (X) = 9-8.10~55 cm.'2.
These results are interrelated; when one of them is
known the others can all be deduced accurately. Thus
they all depend on the value 528 which we here adopt

FEATURES

OF

THE

UNIVERSE

69

as the speed of recession. From the observed speeds
of recession of the spiral nebulas values ranging from
450 to 550 have been published. Strictly speaking the
observed speed should be increased in order to obtain
the “ full value ” referred to in (a), because we want
to free the result from the drag of gravitational attrac¬
tion; but making the best estimate we can of the masses
of the nebulas, we judge that their mutual gravitational
attraction is not likely to make an important difference.
Many astronomers would adopt a value higher than
550, believing that Hubble’s scale of distances of the
nebulas is systematically too great. For this reason it
would not be very surprising if the true value of the
constant were as high as 1,000 km. per sec. per mp.
The value 528 which is here used was adopted for
the theoretical reasons discussed in Chapter IV. It de¬
pended on a preliminary development of the theory,
and I can now see that it will be modified (probably
increased) in the final theory. I might perhaps make a
better shot at the value now; but it seems undesirable
to chop and change whilst the theory is still incomplete.
Thus at present both observational and theoretical
values are subject to some uncertainty. However, since
528 is nearly the lowest value suggested, we shall pre¬
sumably not be exaggerating the effects of the expansion
if we adopt it.
The original radius of the universe is given under
(b), but we are unable to calculate the present radius.
It is rather tantalising not to know so important a
quantity; and unfortunately there is not much prospect
of knowing it. I have a faint hope that some day it
will be revealed to us by the cosmic rays, if these really
are extra-terrestrial (see p. 79). Otherwise the only
method is to estimate the average density of matter
throughout the universe, and compare it with the initial
density given under (e); since the mass cannot have
changed importantly, the comparison will give the ex-

70

THE EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

pansion of volume and hence the expansion of radius.
To find the present density we should have to count
the average number of galaxies in a given volume, com¬
pute the average number of stars per galaxy and the
average mass of a star, and allow also for the diffuse
matter within the galaxies and the still more diffuse
matter between the galaxies. I am afraid such an
estimate can scarcely be trusted to a factor of 100.
The result, however, seems to come out well below
the value 10~27 found for the initial density.
There is a curious difference between measuring the
radius of curvature of the expanding universe and
measuring the radius of the earth’s surface.
The
earth’s radius gives no trouble provided that geodetic
measurements extend over a large enough area. It
might therefore be thought that our difficulty in measur¬
ing the present radius of the universe is due to the
very small area of our survey, and will be removed
when the survey is sufficiently extended.
But the
analogy fails because, owing to the delay of lightmessages from distant parts of the universe, the in¬
formation they can bring us is so much out of date
that it would be useless as a guide to the present radius.
When occasion arises I shall assume for illustration
that a 5-fold expansion of the original radius has
occurred; but this number is merely a guess.
The mass of our own galaxy is roughly estimated at
from 1010 to 1011 times the sun’s mass. The average
galaxy appears to be smaller. From the total mass of
the universe given in (c) we conclude that there is
enough material for at least a hundred thousand
million galaxies.
A curious difficulty arises in stating the number of
electrons or protons in the universe. Even if we count
them one by one there is not a unique result, because
there are two ways of counting, and one way gives
twice as many as the other. It cannot be said that

FEATURES

OF

THE

UNIVERSE

71

either way is wrong. According to one view, when
we have counted the particles in one hemisphere of the
spherical world we have finished the count, and the
other hemisphere only gives us the same particles over
again.1 When we take this view we are said to use
elliptical space (though the name “ elliptical ” does not
seem very appropriate). It does not really matter which
view we take, provided that we adhere to one view
consistently. I adopt the other view throughout, and
count both hemispheres of spherical space.
For those who care to examine the interrelation of
these results, I add the leading mathematical formulae
by which they are derived. The volume of a spherical
space of radius R is
2tz2R3.

This is larger than the ordinary Euclidean volume of
a sphere. It is to be remembered that spherical space
is not a Euclidean sphere but the skin of a four¬
dimensional hypersphere.
We call the initial (Einstein) radius Re and the total
mass M. These are related to the cosmical constant by
X - 1 !R*

GMjc» = inRe9

G being the constant of gravitation (6 66.10~8) and
c the velocity of light. These results were obtained by

Einstein in 1916.
The distance round the world is 2ttR, as though it
formed a circuit of radius R—though physically the
bending must be regarded as a fictitious representa¬
tion and we get “ round the world ” literally by going
straight on. It is only in an average sense that R is the
radius of curvature; if we look at the universe micro¬
scopically the empty regions have less curvature and
1 Take a long narrow strip of blotting-paper with a number
of blots on it and form it into a ring with a twist in it. If you
proceed continuously along the surface counting the blots you
will after a time find yourself counting the same blots over
again from the other side.

72

THE EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

the regions occupied by matter have more curvature.
A special importance is attached to the radius of curva¬
ture of the empty space, Rs. This is given by
Rs = ReV3

X = 3jRf.

The radius of curvature of the empty regions remains
constant, whilst the average radius expands. Thus the
above formula for Ra holds at all times and not merely
in the initial equilibrium condition. This to some extent
compensates us for our lack of knowledge of the present
radius of the universe; we do know (approximately) the
present radius of curvature of any empty region.
The limiting speed of recession of the spiral nebulae
or other distant objects is
c/Rs per unit distance.

This is attained when the expansion has proceeded so
far as to reduce the mutual attraction of the nebulae
to insignificance. If q is the expansion, i.e. the ratio
of the present radius to the original radius, the formula
which takes account of the mutual gravitation is

Thus when q = 2, the speed of recession is 70 7 per cent,
of the limiting value; when q — 5, it is 94 7 per cent.
The formula is due to Lemaitre.
The precise definition of Rs is “ the radius of spherical
curvature of any three-dimensional section of the four¬
dimensional continuum of space and imaginary time.”
For a non-expanding space it is the radius of curvature
as ordinarily pictured; but the geometry of expanding
space is too complex to afford a comprehensible picture
of it. It might be thought that when the universe
expands its radius can never become larger than the
radius of curvature of empty space; but this refers to a
different component of curvature from that measured
by Rs.

FEATURES

OF

THE

UNIVERSE

73

JI

One of the differences originally noticed between the
Einstein and de Sitter universes was that light could
go right round an Einstein universe but not round a
de Sitter universe. Our expanding universe is on its
way from the one condition to the other, and we ask
how light will behave in it.
In the course of the expansion there is a definite
moment after which circumambulation ceases to be pos¬
sible.
It seems certain that we are well past this
moment, so that a ray of light emitted now will never
get round to its starting-point again. On the other
hand, light, which we now see, was emitted in the past.
It may therefore have been emitted before the critical
moment and have gone round the world before reach¬
ing us. Thus ideally it is still possible for us to see
round the world; the events so seen must all have
happened before the critical moment.
This may seem mysterious, but the mystery largely
disappears when we remember that even at the begin¬
ning, when the circumference was at its smallest, light
took 6,700 million years to go round. Great changes
are now happening in that period; the universe is
doubling its radius every 1,300 million years. Light is
like a runner on an expanding track with the winningpost receding faster than he can run.
In the earliest days, when the universe was only just
disturbed from equilibrium and the rate of expansion
was slow, light and other radiation went round and
round the universe until it was absorbed. This merrygo-round lasted until the universe had expanded to 1 -003
times its initial radius. Then the bell rang for the last
lap; light waves then running will make just one more
circuit during the rest of eternity; those which started
later will never get round,
c*

74

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

Somewhat later, when the expansion reached 1 073,1
the last half-lap began. After that moment it became
impossible for light to travel half-way round; so that
corresponding to any star or system there is a region of
a universe which its light can now never reach. And if
light cannot, no other causal influence can reach it, for
no kind of signal can travel faster than light. I have
sometimes pictured spherical space as a bubble. Our
expanding universe is an expanding bubble. It seems
fair to say that when the expansion reached 1 073 the
bubble burst. For regions between which no causal
influence can ever pass are as disconnected as the
fragments of a bubble.
As I have already said, it is still quite possible for
us to see things in or through the regions which are
now broken off from us, because there is a lag of lightmessages. In that case what we see refers to a time
before the bursting of the bubble; the light got across
before the breach occurred.
As light travels in the expanding universe it becomes
reddened.
Lemaitre has shown that the reddening
follows a simple rule, viz. the wave-length is increased
in the ratio of the radius of the universe at the time of
observation to the radius at the time of emission of the
light. For light which has been half-way round the
world or more this reddening is considerable. We have
seen that such light must have been emitted before the
expansion reached 1 073, so that the radius at the time
of emission was not much different from the Einstein
radius. If the expansion is now 5, the wave-length will
be increased 5-fold; this would shift most stellar spectra
almost wholly into the infra-red. It has been suggested
that a nebula seen in one direction in the sky might be
1 The critical values 1 003 and 1-073 were worked out by de
Sitter. The critical moments are later in “ elliptical ” space
(p. 70), because the runners then take a short cut leaving out
one hemisphere.

FEATURES

OF

THE

UNIVERSE

75

the “ back ” of a nebula seen in the opposite direction.
Apart from general unlikelihood, the extreme reddening
of one or other image spoils this entertaining conjecture.
I should explain that the Doppler shift to the red due
to the recession of the source of light is the same as the
reddening here described. We have to explain it in dif¬
ferent words, because we are now contemplating the
passage of light over much greater distances. If the
earth were to expand, the voyage between any two ports
would be lengthened, and a transatlantic company might
raise its fares on the ground that New York had receded
from Liverpool; but for a round-the-world tour the
statement that Liverpool had receded from Liverpool,
however justifiable, would scarcely be an illuminating
explanation. The reddening of light, like the raising of
fares, is attributed sometimes to recession and some¬
times more directly to the expansion, according to cir¬
cumstances.
If you are in a spherical universe and look out in any
direction, then if there is no obstruction you ought to
see—the back of your head. Well, not exactly. The
light has taken more than 6,000 million years to go
round, and your head was not there so long ago; but
you ought to see what was in the position now occupied
by your head. You will not need to use a powerful
telescope to see it, because in fact you already have the
most powerful telescope imaginable exactly adjusted on
it, an instrument of some thousand million light-years’
aperture. For this purpose spherical space is an optica!
instrument, neither lens nor mirror, but equally effective
in bringing rays to a focus.
I am afraid, however, that you will not actually see
it, even if you can get rid of all obstruction. A large
telescope is not always a good telescope; its perform¬
ance depends on the surfaces of the lenses or mirrors
being perfectly true. The actual universe was not in¬
tended for an optical instrument, and it is not a true

76

THE

EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

enough sphere to give any noteworthy results.
This brings us to the “ theory of ghosts ”—an idea
developed more as a mathematical curiosity than as
a serious physical speculation. In a perfectly spherical
world rays of light emitted in all directions from a point
will after travelling round the world converge to the
same point; thus a real image is formed from which
light will again diverge in all directions. Such an image
might optically be mistaken for a substantial body.
Owing to the time taken in circumambulating the world
the image is not formed until at least 6,000 million years
later than its source. Other images would be formed
after two circuits, three circuits, etc.
We can thus
imagine space to be populated not only with real stars
and galaxies, but with ghosts of stars which existed
6,000 million, 12,000 million, etc., years ago.
That would be a good practical joke for nature to
play on the astronomer, but I do not think he would be
taken in. The ghosts, being formed by light that has
been round the world, would be ruddier than the
genuine article, and so easily distinguished. Moreover,
the trick could only be performed in the ideal spherical
world of the mathematician; the actual universe is too
irregular to focus the rays after their circuit. But the
idea has another kind of interest because it raises an
important question as to the meaning of relativity.
Considering a perfectly spherical transparent world,
it is evident that the ghost is formed at the place occu¬
pied by the star when the light was emitted, not at the
place now occupied by the star. Indeed the star may
have since been scattered into many fragments. Thus
if we observe simultaneously a star and its ghost, there
will in general be a considerable distance between them
due to the motion of the star during the circuit of the
light. A star which coincides with its ghost has not
moved. This gives us an observational test of “ absolute
rest ” which appears to contradict the principle of rela-

FEATURES

OF

THE

UNIVERSE

77

tivity.
We must admit that a perfectly spherical
universe provides a frame of reference for distinguishing
rest and motion, space and time, which can be looked
upon as ultimate and absolute. It may be asked. Is not
this precisely what the absolutists have been contend¬
ing? Even if it is, I do not think they score very heavily
by the admission that an absolute frame would exist if
the universe were different from what it actually is. The
perfectly spherical world is a mathematical invention,
and any slight deviations from the sphere will cause the
ghost to diffuse, so that absolute rest again becomes an
indefinite conception. In a perfectly spherical universe
nothing ever happens; for it is the irregularities that
constitute the events. Even the expansion of its radius
(by cosmical repulsion) means nothing, for there is no
standard with which to compare it. Thus our admis¬
sion that there can be an absolute time is coupled with
the proviso that nothing ever happens in it.
Just as a frame of space and time defined with
reference to the sun is appropriate for dealing with
problems relating to the solar system, so a frame de?
fined with reference to the matter of the universe as a
whole is appropriate for dealing with the universe as a
whole. In a uniform spherical world the frame appro¬
priate to the universe as a whole is also appropriate to
every part of it; thus the usual multiplicity of frames of
space and time is suppressed. The principle of relativity
is that one man’s frame is as good as another’s; it is not
upset by imagining an ideal world in which every man
has hit on the same frame: and to imagine circum¬
stances in which there would be no opportunity for
applying the principle is a very different thing from
denying its validity.
In this book I speak of space and time as entirely
distinct, and treat simultaneity as uniquely defined; it is
to be understood that I am using a system of reference
given by the universe as a whole, the universe having

78

THE

EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

for this purpose been smoothed in the same way that
in geodesy the earth is smoothed into the geoid. I claim
no more for this frame than that it is convenient; in
particular simultaneity (as defined by it) has no par¬
ticular philosophical significance.
in
I have been speaking of the propagation of light, since
it is the most familiar kind of radiation; but circumambulation becomes more of a practical possibility if
we consider highly penetrating radiation, particularly
the cosmic rays which are believed to come into our
atmosphere from outside. The mean density of matter
in the initial state of the universe and the length of the
world-circumference are known (p. 68); hence it is
easy to calculate that the average amount of obstruc¬
tion to a cosmic ray in going round the world is equiva¬
lent to 7 cm. of water. It is well known that the rays
can penetrate a much greater depth, so that it is pos¬
sible for them to go many times round. It would seem
that the cosmic rays generated almost from the begin¬
ning of time are still travelling through space, only a
relatively small loss having occurred by absorption.
This is in keeping with the observed symmetry of
their distribution, which otherwise seems inexplicable.
Astronomical interest in cosmic rays was first aroused
by the researches of Kolhorster; at that time it was
stated that they were observed to come predominantly
from directions in the plane of the Milky Way. Accord¬
ingly they were supposed to originate in the gaseous
nebulas and diffuse matter occurring in our galaxy. The
later and more accurate work of Millikan has proved,
however, that there is no such galactic preference, and
the distribution is approximately uniform in all direc¬
tions. If, then, they have an extraterrestrial origin the
source must be distributed symmetrically round the
earth.
But proceeding outwards from the earth,

FEATURES

OF

THE

UNIVERSE

79

astronomy does not reveal anything with the necessary
symmetry until we take in the whole universe. We
might perhaps found on the cosmic rays an argument
in support of closed spherical space; in an unclosed
system it would be a strange coincidence if the earth
were so centrally placed as to receive the rays equally
from all directions.
The rays are generally supposed to be of sub-atomic
origin, and attempts have been made to infer the exact
origin from the wave-length (which is deduced by
mathematical theory from the penetrating power). Just
as the origin of a light-ray is inferred from its wave¬
length, so the sub-atomic process which originated a
cosmic ray might be inferred. But in these attempts
it has been assumed that the observed wave-length is
the original wave-length of the rays. One is reminded
of the American in Innocents Abroad who refused to
take any interest in a mummy and wanted to be shown
a “ nice fresh corpse.” Those who are studying cosmic
rays have taken it for granted that they are dealing with
a nice fresh corpse, and are identifying the body on that
supposition. I suggest that it is not a fresh corpse but
a very ancient mummy. That will alter the identifica¬
tion considerably. If the cosmic rays date mainly from
the relatively long period when the universe was close
to its initial Einstein state, the wave-length has now
increased perhaps 5-fold or more.
If I am right, cosmic radiation is a museum—a col¬
lection of relics of remote antiquity. These relics are
stamped with an inscription indicating the dimensions
of the world in its earliest ages. Whoever ultimately
identifies the sub-atomic process originating the rays
will be able to read the inscription and tell us just how
much the universe has expanded since then.
The intensity of cosmic radiation falling on the earth
is found to be not much less than the intensity of star¬
light (i.e. the radiation from all the stars except the

80

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

sun). The earth, however, is in a privileged position
with regard to starlight, being in the midst of one of the
galaxies; it has no advantage with regard to cosmic
rays which are presumed to have spread more or less
evenly over all space. Thus in a more average region
starlight is much less intense than cosmic radiation; and
in a general survey of jradiation in the universe only the
cosmic radiation need be considered. It can be verified
that the mass and energy of cosmic radiation through¬
out the universe is small compared with the mass of
matter, and does not affect materially the formulas and
calculations at the beginning of this chapter.
It is sometimes asked. What becomes of all the radia¬
tion which is continually being poured into space? A
favourite speculation is that in some way it is ultimately
turned back into matter. This has never seemed to me
very likely, and it is discouraged by a conclusion
recently pointed out by de Sitter. The total amount of
radiation in the universe (measured by mass or by
energy) is actually decreasing. Omitting for the moment
changes by emission and absorption, the number of
quanta remains constant; but the gradual increase of
wave-length already discussed means that the energy
of each quantum diminishes; in fact the energy of the
radiation diminishes in just the same proportion as the
radius of the universe expands. This rate of diminution
is now much too rapid to be compensated by fresh
accessions from the radiation poured out by stars and
by nebulous matter.
We may mention here a result which, though it refers
to an entirely different topic, is closely related mathe¬
matically.1 We do not expect the rule that the receding
1 The connection is that both results assert the decrease of a
form of energy as the universe expands. They are comprised
in a general theorem of Lemaitre, that when the universe ex¬
pands the pressure changes adiabatically. This is applied both
to radiation pressure and to gas pressure, the “ gas ” in this
case having galaxies for molecules.

FEATURES

OF

THE

UNIVERSE

81

velocity of a spiral nebula is proportional to its distance
to be obeyed by every individual. The rule refers to
averages, and the nebulas will have individual velocities
superposed on the systematic velocity of recession. It
has sometimes been thought surprising that the indivi¬
dual deviations are not more conspicuous. Theory,
however, shows that with the lapse of time the average
individual velocity decreases in the same proportion as
the universe expands; for example, if the expansion is
now 5-fold, the nebulae have on the average only onefifth of the individual velocities that they originally
possessed.

IV

If the expanding universe is accepted, its most im¬
mediate reaction is on the time-scale of evolution.
Three different time-scales have been favoured at one
time or another, which we may distinguish as “ short,”
“ intermediate,” and “ long.” No one now has a good
word for the short Kelvin time-scale, which allowed
not more than 50 million years for the whole life-time
of the sun and solar system; and practically our choice
lies between the intermediate scale giving the sun an
age of the order 1010 years, and the long scale which
gives its age fairly definitely as 5.1012 years. Naturally
it is the policy of the evolutionist to grab as much time
as possible in order to give his processes a longer oppor¬
tunity to accomplish something. So when there is no
strong evidence one way or another, the longer timescale gets the preference. This, rather than any striking
success of the theory, accounts for the popularity of the
long time-scale in recent years.
It is sometimes forgotten that of the two hypotheses,
“ long ” and “ intermediate,” the long time-scale is the
older. It came about through Einstein’s theory which
gave the total amount of energy in any given mass of

82

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

matter. Knowing the mass of the sun, we knew just
how much energy it contained and could calculate how
long this would maintain the present rate of radiation if
it could all be released. If all the energy of constitution
of matter is released, the matter must disappear; so that
it is necessary that the electrons and protons should
annihilate one another. At the time of my first re¬
searches on the internal constitution of the stars (1916—
1917) the annihilation of electrons and protons was the
only source of energy known that was adequate for stellar
requirements, and it was the only one that I then dis¬
cussed; but in 1920 a possible alternative was recognised
in the energy released by the transmutation of hydrogen
into higher elements. This releases rather less than
1 per cent, of the total amount of energy contained in
the matter, so that it gives by no means so abundant a
supply as the total annihilation of matter. Still it suffices
for the intermediate time-scale, and we could perhaps
make it do at a pinch.
There is no direct evidence that the annihilation of
protons and electrons can occur—unless we count the
evidence of the cosmic rays, which according to some
authorities are supposed to contain a wave-length which
indicates this source. If the long time-scale could be
established by astronomical researches it would be good
indirect evidence, for it seems clear that there is no way
of providing for it without annihilation of matter.
Direct evidence for the building up of complex elements
out of hydrogen scarcely seems to be required; since
the elements exist, there is presumably a way of forming
them. But it may be remarked that the recent discovery
of the neutron makes it much easier to envisage the
steps of this process.
I do not think that anything very decisive has been
found for or against either theory (annihilation of matter
or transmutation of hydrogen) or for or against either
time-scale (long or intermediate). Like other time-

FEATURES

OF

THE

UNIVERSE

83

grabbers I have generally adhered to the long time-scale
provisionally, since it affords more scope for investiga¬
tion. But two years ago I was much shaken by a study
of the dynamics of our Milky Way system; its form and
construction seem to be such that it is impossible that
it should have endured for the period of the long timescale.1
In a universe doubling its radius every 1,300 million
years, it is evident that the long time-scale of billions
of years is altogether incongruous. It is true that our
theory does not set any definite limit to past time.
There may have been a very long period of approxi¬
mate equilibrium before any serious expansion began;
but this scarcely counts from the point of view of
stellar evolution. Astronomical history may be said to
begin when the first condensations were fully formed
-and the galaxies separated from one another; but by
this time the expansion must have been well under
way. It is difficult to allow much more than 1010 years
between then and now.
Thus astronomers, who have been luxuriating in an
enormously long time-scale, are threatened with a
drastic cut. Even in these days of economy, a cut of
about 99 per cent, is not to be accepted lightly by the
department concerned. I confess that I do not quite see
how we are going to manage on the reduced allowance;
and I am not disposed to blame those whose reaction
is to try to seek for some loophole by which the cut
can be avoided.
If we find it hard to accept the speed at which the
. universe is changing, acceptance is not made easier by
the consideration of what it is changing towards. The
fragments of the burst bubble will continually become
more numerous until each galaxy is a separate frag¬
ment. I suppose that the distance of one galaxy from
1 Halley Lecture, The Rotation of the Galaxy (Oxford Univ.
Press, 1930).

84

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

the next will ultimately become so great, and the mutual
recession so rapid, that neither light nor any other
causal influence can pass from one to another. All
connection between the galaxies will be broken; each
will be a self-contained universe uninfluenced by any¬
thing outside it. Such a disintegration is rather a night¬
mare to conceive; though it does not threaten any
particular disaster to human destiny (see p. 87).
But the difficulty as to the time-scale does not arise
from the more recondite parts of the present theory. It
remains whether we adopt spherical space or not. It
becomes more serious if we do not accept the relativity
explanation of the recession. Since the outward speed
of the nebulae is known by observation, it is a matter
of simple arithmetic to compute the date when they
were close together in a congested crowd. It was not
more than 1,900 million years ago. This assumes that
in the past the speeds were as great as they are now.
The relativity explanation grants some reprieve, for it
postulates that the outward speeds have been gradually
produced by cosmical repulsion and were therefore
smaller in the past. The rival explanations, which do
not admit a repulsive force, refuse this extension, and
consequently accentuate the difficulty of the time-scale.
So I cannot see anything to be gained by discarding
the relativity explanation in favour of one of the other
theories. On the one point in which the present results
appear to offer some difficulty, the other theories greatly
magnify the difficulty. I have much more sympathy
with those critics who deny the nebular recession alto¬
gether, believing the observed radial velocities to be
spurious (p. 24). They are relieved of all difficulty as
to the time-scale.
Speaking on the de Sitter-Lemaitre theory in
September 1931, I said; “But the theory of the ex¬
panding universe is in some respects so preposterous
that we naturally hesitate to commit ourselves to it.

FEATURES

OF

THE

UNIVERSE

85

•It contains elements apparently so incredible that I
feel almost an indignation that anyone should believe
in it—except myself.”
The reasons for the exception are dealt with in
Chapter IV.
v
Expansion is a relative term. When we assert that
the universe expands, what do we assume to be con¬
stant? This question is often asked, but there is no
subtlety about the answer. The expansion is relative to
the standards of length ordinarily accepted—the metre
bar for example. The wave-length of cadmium light
is sometimes adopted as the best available standard of
length—expressed in terms of the cadmium wave-length,
the radius of the universe is continually increasing.
By the same standard the radius of curvature of an
empty region of space remains constant (p. 72). We
can easily see that whilst a surface as a whole is swell¬
ing the curvature of certain portions of it can remain
unchanged.
The fact that the expansion is relative to ordinary
standards is clear enough when we adopt the stand¬
point of Chapter I; but the more recondite treatment,
in which the phenomenon is presented as a uniform
expansion of spherical space, seems to have confused
not only the casual reader but some of the experts.
Their idea is that, since every part of space is being
inflated uniformly, the inflation will affect distances
between electrons in the atom and between planets in
the solar system just as much as distances between
galaxies. This would mean that atoms, human beings,
the earth, the solar system, expand at the same rate as
the universe; there would be no change in the radius
of the universe expressed in metres, since the metre
bar is expanding at the same rate. Such an expansion

86

THE

EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

shared by everything alike would be undetectable, and
would in fact have no definable meaning.
The fallacy arises from forgetting that the expanding
spherical universe is a very much simplified model. We
cannot appeal to it to decide how atoms, measuring
rods and planets behave, because atoms, measuring rods
and planets have been smoothed away into a perfectly
continuous and uniform distribution of mass. The in¬
flation is only uniform if the density is uniform. If we
consider a roughened or pimply sphere, it is found
mathematically that the roughened parts do not expand
at the same rate as the smooth intervals between them.
Lemaitre designed his expanding spherical space for
the treatment of phenomena affecting the universe as
a whole. His approximation is grotesquely inadequate
for treating smaller scale phenomena such as the be¬
haviour of measuring rods or the internal structure of
a galaxy. Within a galaxy the average world-curvature
is some thousands of times greater than Lemaitre’s
average for the universe as a whole, and his formulae
are inapplicable.
The result is that only the intergalactic distances
expand. The galaxies themselves are unaffected; and
all lesser systems—star clusters, stars, human observers
and their apparatus, atoms—are entirely free from ex¬
pansion. Although the cosmical repulsion or expansive
tendency is present in all these smaller systems, it is
checked by much larger forces and no expansion occurs.
To see how this happens, suppose that the sun and
planets are given rather large electrical charges of the
same sign; that would introduce an expansive tendency
into the solar system, but it would not turn it into an
expanding system. After an initial readjustment the
planets would describe periodic orbits as before in the
modified field of force, and the solar system would not
grow any larger. This holds until the charge on the
planets is made so strong that the repulsion outweighs

FEATURES

OF

THE

UNIVERSE

87

gravitation; the planets then abandon the periodic type
of orbit and recede continually. Thus the demarcation
between permanent and dispersing systems is quite
abrupt. It corresponds to the distinction between
periodic and aperiodic phenomena.
It appears then that the “ bursting of the bubble ”
will end when each galaxy is a separate fragment. It
will not go on to disrupt the galaxies. These no doubt
contain their own seeds of decay, and cosmical re¬
pulsion may ultimately help to scatter their fragments;
but that concerns a much more distant future. If you
think that the shattering of the bubble universe is a
tragic outlook, it may be some consolation to reflect
that when the worst has happened our galaxy of about
a hundred thousand million stars will be left intact. It
is not so bad a prospect.
VI

All change is relative. The universe is expanding
relatively to our common material standards; our
material standards are shrinking relatively to the size
of the universe.
The theory of the “ expanding
universe ” might also be called the theory of the
“ shrinking atom.”
It is our instinctive outlook that we are always the
same; it is our environment that changes. As with
Anatole France’s dog Ricquet—“ Les hommes, les
animaux, les pierres grandissent en s’approchant et
deviennent enormes quand ils sont sur moi. Moi non.
Je demeure toujours aussi grand partout ou je suis.”
Is not the expanding universe another example of
distortion due to our egocentric outlook? Surely the
universe should be the standard and we should
measure our own vicissitudes by it. We see a relative
change, and cry out that the universe is dissolving; as
well might the growing child, who sees the familiar

88

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

home becoming smaller, be dismayed at the vanishing
property of houses and furniture.
The argument sounds plausible, but I do not deem
it true. Even if our standards are held responsible for
the expanding of the universe, they cannot be held
responsible for its bursting.
Moreover our constant
standards are not necessarily puny. I have mentioned
(p. 72) one cosmical dimension which remains con¬
stant, namely the radius of curvature Rs of empty
regions of the universe. Since it stands in a constant
ratio to the metre, it can be used equivalently. This is
in fact the ideal cosmical standard, and judged by it
the universe changes whilst we remain true to size.
Although I do not think the suggestion goes very deep
or that it has any philosophical moral, I will follow it
for my last escapade in our new playground. Let us then
take the whole universe as our standard of constancy,
and adopt the view of a cosmic being whose body is
composed of intergalactic spaces and swells as they
swell. Or rather we must now say it keeps the same
size, for he will not admit that it is he who has changed.
Watching us for a few thousand million years, he sees
us shrinking; atoms, animals, planets, even the galaxies,
all shrink alike; only the intergalactic spaces remain
the same. The earth spirals round the sun in an everdecreasing orbit. It would be absurd to treat its chang¬
ing revolution as a constant unit of time. The cosmic
being will naturally relate his units of length and time
so that the velocity of light remains constant. Our
years will then decrease in geometrical progression in
the cosmic scale of time. On that scale man’s life is
becoming briefer; his threescore years and ten are an
ever-decreasing allowance. Owing to the property of *
geometrical progressions an infinite number of our years
will add up to a finite cosmic time; so that what we
should call the end of eternity is an ordinary finite date
in the cosmic calendar. But on that date the universe

FEATURES

OF

THE

UNIVERSE

89

. has expanded to infinity in our reckoning, and we have
shrunk to nothing in the reckoning of the cosmic being.
We walk the stage of life, performers of a drama for
the benefit of the cosmic spectator. As the scenes pro¬
ceed he notices that the actors are growing smaller and
the action quicker. When the last act opens the curtain
rises on midget actors rushing through their parts at
frantic speed. Smaller and smaller. Faster and faster.
One last microscopic blurr of intense agitation. And
then nothing.

CHAPTER IV
THE UNIVERSE AND THE ATOM
See Mystery to Mathematics fly!—Pope, Dunciad.
I

I have explained in the previous chapters that theory
led us to expect a systematic motion of recession of
remote objects, and that by astronomical observation
the most remote objects known have been found to be
receding rapidly. The weak point in this triumph is
that theory gave no indication how large a velocity of
recession was to be expected. It is as though an ex¬
plorer were given instructions to look out for a creature
with a trunk; he has brought home an elephant—per¬
haps a white elephant. The conditions would equally
well have been satisfied by a fly, with much less annoy¬
ance to his next-door neighbour the time-grabbing
evolutionist. So there is great argument about it.
I think the only way to remove the cloud of doubt
is to supplement the original prediction, and show
that physical theory demands not merely a recession
but a particular speed of recession. The theory of
relativity alone will not give any more information;
but we have other resources. I refer to the second
great modern development of physics—the quantum
theory, or (in its most recent form) wave-mechanics.
By combining the two theories we can make the desired
theoretical calculation of the speed of recession.
This is a new adventure, and I do not wish to insist
on the accuracy or finality of the first attempt. I can¬
not see how there can be anything seriously wrong with
it; but then one never does see these faults until some
90

THE

UNIVERSE

AND

THE

ATOM

91

new circumstance arises or some ingenious person
conies along to show us how blind we have been. But
there are two kinds of scientific misadventure; we may
start off on a false trail altogether, or we may make
temporary blunders in following the true path. I am
content if in this chapter I can justify my belief that
at any rate we are not committing the first error.
According to the argument here developed we can
calculate by pure theory what ought to be the speed
of recession of the spiral nebulse. (This is subject to
the reservation that the restraining effect of their mutual
gravitational attraction is relatively unimportant, a con¬
dition which appears to be satisfied in the present state
of the universe.) Since certain small factors in the
formulae are at present left in suspense, there is a tem¬
porary indefiniteness; but we can say provisionally that
the result is between 500 and 1,000 km. per sec. per
megaparsec. No astronomical observations of any kind
are used in this calculation, all the data being found in
the laboratory. Therefore when we turn our telescopes
and spectroscopes on the distant nebulas and find them
to be receding at a speed within these limits the con¬
firmation is striking.
The original prediction of de Sitter and Lemaitre
gave no indication whether the phenomenon would first
become perceptible at nebular distances or at distances
106 or 1060 times greater. We had not the faintest idea
how large an effect would appear. By the new investi¬
gation, however, the amount is so closely defined that
there can be little doubt as to the correspondence of the
theoretical and observed effects. Our astronomical ex¬
plorer cannot be accused of having brought home an
elephant in mistake for a fly; and (if I may further com¬
plicate the zoological metaphor) even if it is a white
elephant it is not a mare’s nest.
Any theoretical step requires testing in as many
directions as possible. If the theoretical ideas here em-

92

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

ployed had had only one application, viz. to calculate
the recession of the nebulas, there might be a certain
amount of room for “ fudging.” As a matter of fact
the danger of unconscious fudging is greatly exagger¬
ated; there is an artistry in these fundamental equations
of physics which one cannot trifle with. But it naturally
strengthens our confidence if the same step also leads
to the solution of another problem. This happens in
the present case, the associated problem being the re¬
lation of the proton to the electron and in particular
the ratio of their masses. Here a very delicate observa¬
tional test of the theory is possible.
Thus we are not dealing with an isolated problem,
but with a theory which determines at the same time
two of the leading constants of physics, viz. the cosmical
constant and through it the recession of the nebulae,
and the mass-ratio of the proton and electron.
I cannot give here the mathematical part of the
argument. I want rather to show that all the necessary
physical ideas present themselves naturally, and are
waiting for the mathematician to express them in
symbols and work out the answer. By a preliminary
attempt at the latter task we gain fair assurance that
no serious difficulty is likely to arise.
II

We have been contemplating the system of the
galaxies—phenomena on the grandest scale yet
imagined. I want now to turn to the other end of
the scale and look into the interior of an atom.
The connecting link is the cosmical constant.
Hitherto we have encountered it as the source of a
scattering force, swelling the universe and driving the
nebulae far and wide. In the atom we shall find it in
a different capacity, regulating the scale of construction
of the system of satellite electrons. I believe that this

THE

UNIVERSE

AND

THE

ATOM

93

wedding of great and small is the key to the under¬
standing of the behaviour of electrons and protons.
You will see from the formulae on p. 71 that the
cosmical constant is equal in value to 1 / Re2 or to 3 /Rs2,
so that it is really a measure of world-curvature; and
in place of it we can consider the initial radius of the
universe Re, or better the steady radius of curvature
of empty space Rs. In the present chapter the un¬
qualified phrase “ radius of curvature ” or the symbol
R will be understood to refer to Rs. Being the radius
in vacuo it has the same kind of pre-eminence in
physical equations that the velocity of fight in vacuo
has. I will first explain why the radius of curvature is
expected to play an essential part in the theory of the
atom.
Length is relative. That is one of the principles of
Einstein’s theory that has now become a commonplace
of physics. But it was a far from elementary kind of
relativity that Einstein considered; according to him
length is*relative to a frame of reference moving with
the observer, so that as reckoned by an observer moving
with one star or planet it is not precisely equal to the
length reckoned by an observer moving with another
star. But besides this there is a much more obvious
way in which length is relative. Reckoning of length
always implies comparison with a standard of length,
so that length is relative to a comparison standard. It
is only the ratio of extensions that enters into experi¬
ence. Suppose that every length in the universe v/ere
doubled; nothing in our experience would be altered.
We cannot even attach a meaning to the supposed
change. It is an empty form of words—as though an
international conference should decree that the pound
should henceforth be reckoned as two pounds, the
dollar two dollars, the mark two marks, and so on.
In Gulliver’s Travels the Lilliputians were about six
inches high, their tallest trees about seven feet, their

94

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

cattle, houses, cities in corresponding proportion. In
Brobdingnag the folk appeared as tall as an ordinary
spire-steeple; the cat seemed about three times larger
than an ox; the corn grew forty feet high. Intrinsically
Lilliput and Brobdingnag were just the same; that
indeed was the principle on which Swift worked out
his story. It needed an intruding Gulliver—an ex¬
traneous standard of length—to create a difference.
It is commonly stated in physics that all hydrogen
atoms in their normal state have the same size, or the
same spread of electric charge. But what do we mean
by their having the same size? Or to put the question
the other way round—What would it mean if we said
that two normal hydrogen atoms were of different sizes,
similarly constructed but on different scales?
That
would be Lilliput and Brobdingnag over again; to give
meaning to the difference we need a Gulliver.
The Gulliver of physics is generally supposed to be
a certain bar of metal called the International Metre.
But he is not much of a traveller; I do noLthink he
has ever been away from Paris. We have, as it were,
our Gulliver, but have left out his travels; and the
travels are, as Prof. Weyl was the first to show, an
essential part of the story.
It is evident that the metre bar in Paris is not the
real Gulliver. It is one of those practical devices which
serve a useful purpose, but dim the clear light of
theoretical understanding. The real Gulliver must be
ubiquitous. So I adopt the principle that when we
come across the metre (or constants based on the metre)
in the present fundamental equations of physics, our
aim must be to eject it and to substitute the natural
ubiquitous standard. The equations put into terms of
the real standard will then reveal how they have arisen.
It is not difficult to find the ubiquitous standard.
As a matter of fact Einstein told us what it was when
he gave us the law of gravitation
—
Some

THE UNIVERSE

AND

THE

ATOM

95

years ago I showed that this law could be stated in the
form, “ What we call a metre at any place and in any
direction is a constant fraction (y'jX) of the radius
curvature of space-time for that place and direction.”
In other words the metre is just a practically con¬
venient sub-multiple of the radius of curvature at the
place considered; so that measurement in terms of the
metre is equivalent to measurement in terms of radius
of curvature.
The radius of world-curvature is the real Gulliver.
It is ubiquitous. Everywhere the radius of curvature
exists as a comparison standard indicating, if they
exist, such differences as Gulliver found between Lilliput and Brobdingnag. If we like we can use its sub¬
multiple the metre, remembering, however, that the
metre is ubiquitous only in its capacity as a sub¬
multiple of the radius. We should, if possible, try to
forget that in certain localities we have crystallised this
metre into metallic bars for practical convenience.
We can now give a direct meaning to the statement
that two normal hydrogen atoms in any part of the
universe have the same size. We mean that the extent
of each of them is the same fraction of the radius of
curvature of space-time at the place where it lies. The
atom here is a certain fraction of the radius here, and
the atom on Sirius is the same fraction of the radius at
Sirius. Whether the length of the radius here is abso¬
lutely the same as that of the radius at Sirius does not
arise; and indeed I believe that such a comparison
would be without meaning. We say that it is always
the same number of metres; but we mean no more
by that than when we say that the metre is always the
same number of centimetres.
Thus it appears that in all our measures we are
really comparing lengths and distances with the radius
of world curvature at the spot. Provided that the law
of gravitation is accepted, this is not a hypothesis; it is

96

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

the translation of the law from symbols into words. It
is not merely a suggestion for an ideal way of measur¬
ing lengths; it reveals the basis of the system which we
have actually adopted, and to which the mechanical
and optical laws assumed in practical measurements
and triangulations are referred.
It is not difficult to see how it happens that our
practical standard (the metre bar) is a crystallisation
of the ideal standard (the radius of curvature, or a
sub-unit thereof). Since the radius of curvature is the
unit referred to in our fundamental physical equations,
anything whose extension is determined by constant
physical equations will have a constant length in terms
of that unit. Thus the physical theory that provides
that the normal hydrogen atom shall have the same size
in terms of the radius of curvature wherever it may be,
will also provide that a solid bar in a specified state
shall have the same size in terms of the radius of
curvature wherever it may be. The fact that the atom
has a constant size in terms of the practical metre is a
case of “ things which are in a constant ratio to the
same thing are in a constant ratio to one another.” 1
The simplification obtained by using the actual radius
of curvature as unit of length (instead of using a sub¬
unit) is that all lengths will then become angles in our
world-picture. The measure of any length will be the
“ tilt of space ” in passing from one extremity to the
other. It is true that these angles are not in actual
space but in fictitious dimensions added for the pur¬
pose of obtaining a picture; but the justification of the
picture is that it illustrates the analytical relations, and
these angles will behave analogously to spatial angles
in the mathematical equations.
To sum up this first stage of our inquiry: If in the
most fundamental equations of physics we adopt the
1 For a fuller explanation see The Nature of the Physical
World, Chapter VII.

THE

UNIVERSE

AND

THE

ATOM

97

radius of curvature Rs as unit instead of the present
arbitrary units, we shall have at least made the first
step towards reducing them to a simpler form. We
know that many equations are simplified when velocities
are expressed in terms of the velocity of light in vacuo\
we expect a corresponding simplification when lengths
are expressed in terms of the radius of world-curvature
in vacuo. When the equation is in this way freed
from irrelevant complications it should be easier to
detect its true significance. We cannot make this
change of unit so long as the ratio of Rs to our ordinary
unit is unknown; but observation of the spiral nebulae
has provided us with what we provisionally assume to
be an approximate value of Rs, so that it is now pos¬
sible to go ahead with our plan.

ill1

In elementary geometry we generally think of space
as consisting of infinitely many points. We approach
nearer to the physical meaning of space if we think of
it as a network of distances. But this does not go far
enough, for we have seen that it is only the ratios of
distances which enter into physical experience. In order
that a space may correspond exactly to physical actu¬
ality it must be capable of being built up out of ratios
of distances.
The pure geometer is not bound by such considera¬
tions, and he freely invents spaces consisting only of
points without distances, or spaces built up out of
absolute distances. In adapting his work for applica¬
tion to space in the physical universe, we have to select
that part of it which conforms to the above require¬
ment. For that reason we must reject his first offer—
This section is mainly an additional commentary on the
principles explained under II. If found too difficult, it can be
omitted. The main argument is resumed in IV.
1

D

98

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

flat space. Flat space cannot be constructed without
absolute lengths, or at least without a conception of a
priori comparability of lengths at a distance which can
scarcely be distinguished from the conception of abso¬
lute length.1
Flat space, being featureless, does not contain within
itself th£ requirement for reckoning length and size,
viz. a ubiquitous comparison standard. But what is
the use of a space which does not fulfil the functions of
space, namely to constitute a scheme of reference for
all those physical relations—length, distance, size—
which are counted as spatial? Since it does not con¬
stitute a frame of reference for length, the name
“ space ” is a misnomer. Whatever definition the pure
geometer may adopt, the physicist must define space as
something characterised at every point by an intrinsic
magnitude which can be used as a standard for reckon¬
ing the size of objects placed there.
No question can arise as to whether the comparison
unit for reckoning of lengths and distances is a magni¬
tude intrinsic in space, or in some other physical quality
1 In pre-relativity theory, and in the original form of
Einstein’s theory, “ comparison of lengths at a distance ” was
assumed to be axiomatic; that is to say, there was a real dif¬
ference of height between the Lilliputian and the Brobdingnagian irrespective of any physical connection between the
islands. The fact that they were in the same universe—
phenomena accessible to the same consciousness—had nothing
to do with the comparison. Such a conception of unlimited
comparability is scarcely distinguishable from the conception of
absolute length. In a geometry based on this axiom, space
only does half its proper work; the purpose of a field-repre¬
sentation of the relationships of objects is frustrated, if we
admit that the most conspicuous spatial relationship, ratio of
size, exists a priori and is not analysable by field-theory in the
way that other relationships are. Weyl’s theory rejected the
axiom of comparability at a distance, and it was at first thought
that such comparability could not exist in his scheme. But
both in Weyl’s theory and in the author’s extension of it (affine
field-theory) it is possible to compare lengths at a distance, not
as an extra-geometrical a priori conception, but by the aid of
the field which supplies the ubiquitous standard necessary.

THE

UNIVERSE

AND

THE

ATOM

99

of the universe, or is an absolute standard outside the
universe. For whatever embodies this comparison
unit is ipso facto the space of physics. Physical space
therefore cannot be featureless. As a matter of geo¬
metrical terminology features of space are described as
curvatures (including hypercurvatures); as already ex¬
plained, no metaphysical implication of actual bending
in new dimensions is intended. We have therefore no
option but to look for the natural standard of length
among the radii of curvature or hypercurvature of
space-time.
To the pure geometer the radius of curvature is an
incidental characteristic—like the grin of the Cheshire
cat. To the physicist it is an indispensable charac¬
teristic. It would be going too far to say that to the
physicist the cat is merely incidental to the grin.
Physics is concerned with interrelatedness such as the
interrelatedness of cats and grins. In this case the
“ cat without a grin ” and the “ grin without a cat ”
are equally set aside as purely mathematical phantasies.
When once it is admitted that there exists everywhere
a radius of curvature ready to serve as comparison
standard, and that spatial distances are directly or
indirectly expressed in terms of this standard, the law
of gravitation (G^ = XgMJ/) follows without further
assumption; and accordingly the existence of the cosmical constant X with the corresponding force ofl
cosmical repulsion is established. Being in this way
based on a fundamental necessity of physical space,1
The requirement is that the comparison standard shall be
a magnitude intrinsic in the space—for whatever the standard is
intrinsic in, that ipso facto is space. Space can have other
characteristic magnitudes besides the radius of curvature—for
example, magnitudes measuring various kinds of hypercurva¬
ture. Although the suggestion seems far-fetched, it is, I suppose,
conceivable that one of these might be substituted.
That
would give a different law of gravitation; but there is still a
cosmical constant, depending on the ratio of the metre to the
natural comparison standard.
In fact the cosmical term
remains unchanged; it is G^v which is modified.
1

100

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

the position of the cosmical constant seems to me im¬
pregnable; and if ever the theory of relativity falls into
disrepute the cosmical constant will be the last strong¬
hold to collapse. To drop the cosmical constant would
knock the bottom out of space.
It would be a truism to say that space is not an
ultimate conception; for in the relativity view of physics
every conception is an intermediary between other con¬
ceptions.
As in the closed universe described in
Chapter II, where the galaxies form a system having
no centre and no outside, so the conceptions of physics
link into a system with no boundary; our goal is not
to reach an ultimate conception but to complete the
full circle of relationship. We have concluded that the
ubiquitous comparison standard must be a charac¬
teristic of space, because it is the function of space to
afford such a standard; but we can inquire further
how space and the standard contained in it themselves
originate.
The space in which the atom is pictured as having
position and size is an intermediary conception used
to relate the atom to the “ rest of the universe.” It is
therefore no contradiction if we say sometimes that the
extension of the atom is controlled by the curvature
of space, and sometimes that it is controlled by forces
of interaction proceeding from the rest of the universe.
It must be remembered that we are only aware of an
atom or any other object in so far as it interacts with
the rest of the universe, and thereby gives rise to
phenomena which ultimately reach our senses. The
position and dimensions which we attribute to an atom
are symbols associated with interaction effects; for
there is no meaning in saying that an atom is at A
rather than at B unless it makes some difference to
something that it is at A not B. In considering this
interaction it is not necessary to deal separately with
every particle and every element of energy in the rest

THE UNIVERSE

AND

THE

ATOM

101

of the universe; if it were, progress in physics would
be impracticable. For the most part it is sufficient to
take averages. The multitudinous particles of the
universe admit of an almost uncountable variety of
change of configuration; in considering their interaction
with the atom we need preserve only a few broad types
of average change. The “ rest of the universe ” is thus
idealised into something possessing only a few types
of variation or degrees of freedom. This is illustrated
in electrical theory where the interactions of myriads of
electrical particles are replaced by the interaction of
an electric field which is specified uniquely by six
numbers. In the same way another part of the inter¬
action of the rest of the universe on the atom is idealised
into interaction of a metrical field, or—to give it its usual
name—space. The few broad types of variation which
are not smoothed out by averaging are retained in the
curvatures of space.
We must distinguish in conception between space
which for certain purposes replaces the rest of the
universe and space which is occupied by the rest of the
universe, although the two spaces ultimately become
identical. The distinction is easier if we use the term
“ metrical field ” instead of “ space ”; for (by analogy
with electrical fields) we recognise that a field has a
dual relation to matter, viz. it is produced by matter
and it acts on matter.
The remainder of our task is to try to discover the
details of this idealisation of the “ rest of the universe ”
into a metrical field containing a radius of curvature.
IV

One of the most fundamental equations of physics is
the wave-equation for a hydrogen atom, that is to say
for a proton and electron. The equation determines
the size of the atom or the spread of its electric charge.

102

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

Clearly the ubiquitous standard of length R must come
into this equation.
Now R does not appear in the equation as ordinarily
written. That is because the equation has been reached
through experiment, and is expressed in terms of quan¬
tities such as the charge of an electron, Planck’s con¬
stant, the velocity of light, etc. The radius R though
present is in disguise. We must try to penetrate the
disguise.
At first sight a formidable obstacle appears. The
radius of the hydrogen atom is of order 10~8 cm., and
the natural unit R is of order 1027 cm.; thus the radius
of the hydrogen atom in terms of the natural unit is of
order 10-35. Our idea was that by introducing the
natural unit we should obtain a simplified equation;
but can it be a very simple equation if its solution is
10~35? Clearly it must contain an enormous numerical
coefficient in one or more of its terms. If the equation
is really in its most elementary form, every coefficient
ought to have some simple meaning—some obviously
appropriate reason for being what it is. We should not
be surprised to see the 4tc type of coefficient, which
has a simple geometrical meaning; or a coefficient
equal to the number of dimensions or degrees of free¬
dom concerned in the problem, which arises from sum¬
ming together a number of symmetrical terms. But
what simple meaning can be attached to an enormously •
large number like 1035?
I can think of only one large number which is in
any way relevant to the problem, viz. the number of
particles (electrons or protons) in the universe. Indeed
there seems to be no other way of putting a large
number into the structure of the physical world. I
refer, of course, to pure numbers, not to the kind of
number that we arbitrarily introduce by our centimetregram-second system of reckoning.
We shall find
presently that there are direct reasons for assuming that

THE

UNIVERSE

AND

THE

ATOM

103

the number of particles in the universe N will occur in
the coefficients of the wave-equation; but even without
these reasons the enormous magnitude of the coefficients
would be a sufficient indication of the occurrence of N.
Another aspect of the same large ratio appears when
we compare the electric force between a proton and
electron with the gravitational force between them.
According to classical theory the ratio is 2-3.1039. I
have long thought that this must be related to the
number of electrons and protons in the universe 1 and
I expect that the same view has been entertained by
others. Since N is about 1079 (p. 68) the above ratio is
of the order yW.
The direct reason for the appearance of N is that N
is actually an effective number of degrees of freedom
of the universe. On classical theory the number would
be greater than N, because each of the N particles
would have several degrees of freedom; but there is a
well-known exclusion principle which limits the free¬
dom of a particle by forbidding it to go into an orbit
already occupied by another particle. Wave-mechanics
therefore approaches the problem from the other end
and defines N as the number of independent wavesystems existing in the universe, and therefore equal to
the number of separate constituents of the energy of
the universe. It is quite possible that the number N
approached in this way will be found, not to be arbi¬
trary, but to have some definite theoretical foundation;
but that is pure conjecture, and for the present we
regard it as the one arbitrary element in the design of
the actual universe.
Our atom is situated in and interacting with a
universe containing N degrees of freedom. We idealise
and simplify the problem by picturing it as situated
in and interacting with a space (or metrical field) of
radius of curvature R possessing a comparatively small
1 Mathematical Theory of Relativity, p. 167.

104

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

number of degrees of freedom, say n. In this simplified
form “ the rest of the universe ” comes into the equa¬
tion of the hydrogen atom through the quantity R. I
think we must expect that the numbers N and n will
also occur in the equation, as a memorandum of the
substitution of a space with n degrees of freedom for a
universe with N degrees of freedom. For four-dimen¬
sional space-time the number n is found to be 10. We
shall lose sight of it for the time being, but it will turn
up later.
Having decided that N and R will enter into the co¬
efficients of the equation of the hydrogen atom, we next
inquire in what kind of association they will occur.
The factor N, of course, arises from adding together
equal contributions from each of the particles or wavesystems; the question is, What is the nature of the con¬
tributions to be added and how do they contain R?
I do not profess to have achieved the necessary physical
insight to settle the question. It will no doubt be much
more satisfactory when we have a picture in which we
can, as it were, see these entities adding themselves to¬
gether, just as we can see a hundred centimetres adding
themselves to form a metre. But when this kind of
insight fails, we are not without a guide. As conduct
may be guided by ethics or by “ good form,” so this
kind of investigation can be guided by physical insight
or by analytical form. Both wave-mechanics and rela¬
tivity theory are very strict on good form. Only cer¬
tain kinds of entities are allowed to be added together.
To add anything else would be a solecism. “ It isn’t
done.”
In relativity theory the only things that are additive
are action-invariants.1 The action-invariant contain¬
ing R is the Gaussian curvature, which is proportional
1 Other tensors may only be added if they are at the same
point of space—a condition which is obviously not fulfilled
here.

THE

UNIVERSE

AND

THE

ATOM

105

.to 1/R2. In quantum theory the entities which may
be added are the squares of momenta, or as they are
written symbolically d2jdx2. To construct a quantity
of the same dimensions out of R we must take 1 /R2.1
I take it therefore that the entities to be added are, or
are proportional to 1/R2; so that the required combina¬
tion is NIR2.
This gives us what may be called an “ adjusted
natural standard of length,” viz. Rj-y/N. By using
R / a/N instead of R as our unit we absorb the factor N,
so that it will not trouble us any more. From the data
on p. 68 the length of the adjusted standard is about
3.10~13 cm., so that it is not unsuitable for dealing
with phenomena of electrons.
Now we can go back to our problem, which was to
discover how the natural standard of length is dis¬
guised in the familiar wave-equation. But this time
we look for the adjusted standard R/^N instead of the
original standard R.
I think I have identified the adjusted standard in
the wave-equation, disguised as the expression e2/mc2.
Here e is the charge of an electron or proton, m the
mass of an electron and c the velocity of light. This
expression is well known to be of the dimensions of a
length; in fact §e2/me2 used to be called the “ radius of
an electron ” in the days when the electron was con¬
ceived more substantially than it is now. The identifi¬
cation accordingly gives the equation
R_
^/N
me2
I cannot enter here into the justification of this iden¬
tification, which would lead deeply into the principles
of quantum theory. But I may mention that the identiThe guidance of quantum theory is less obvious than that
of relativity theory because the former commonly adopts a
mixed system of units (dynamical and geometrical). Relativity
theory being purely geometrical avoids the complication.
1

D*

106

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

fication is a very simple one. The expression e2/mc2,
or rather its reciprocal, stands rather disconsolately by
itself in the wave-equation, forming a separate term.
Investigators, who are busy transforming, explaining,
theorising on the other terms, leave it alone; it has just
been accepted as ballast. It calls out for identification.
It may be asked. Is not a straight identification too
simple? Granting the identification in principle, will
there not be a numerical factor—say J, or 2tc, or per¬
haps something more complicated—the type of factor
which usually appears when we reach the same entity
by different routes? Perhaps there is; but at present
the simple identification looks to me to be correct.1
I should add, however, that I am uncertain whether in
this formula N is to be taken as the number of electrons
or the number of electrons and protons, so that a factor
^2 is left in suspense. For definiteness I here take N
to be the number of electrons only; the number of
protons must be approximately, and probably exactly,
the same.
By the relativity theory of the expanding universe,
we have
N
TU
c2
R = 2^/3 GmJ
where mp is the mass of a proton. This follows readily
from the formulae given on p. 71; the only points to
notice are that the notation Rs is here changed to R,
and that the total mass M of the universe is approxi¬
mately Nmp.
Thus by relativity theory we find N/R, and by wavemechanics we find -yJN/R. Combining the two results
1 Except that there are certain corrections amounting alto¬
gether to less than 1 per cent, which are explained under V.
The mathematical arguments on which the identification is
based are given in Proceedings of the Royal Society, vol.
cxxxiii A, p. 605, and Monthly Notices of the R.A.S., vol.
xcii, p. 3.

THE

UNIVERSE

AND

THE

ATOM

107

we find N and R separately. The resulting value of N
is about 1079. From R the limiting speed of recession
of the galaxies c/R is found immediately. All the con¬
stants involved have been measured in the laboratory.
The agreement of the result obtained in this way with
the observed recession of the nebulae has already been
described (p. 91).
The following summary of the theory is due to
Prof. Dingle:
He thought he saw electrons swift
Their charge and mass combine.
He looked again and saw it was
The cosmic sounding line.
The population then, said he,
Must be 1079.

V

Having, as we think, detected the adjusted natural
standard in the terms of the wave-equation, we have
next to inquire how our result affects the theory of
protons and electrons. For in identifying the standard
with e2/mc2 we have taken a step which links the
universe to the atom; and we ought to verify the obser¬
vational consequences not only in the astronomical
universe but also within the atom.
In wave-mechanics the momentum of a particle is
usually stated to be
ih 0
2tc dx
The factor /z / 27t is an unnecessary complication due to
our haphazard choice of units of length and mass. We
shall adopt instead a natural unit of mass, which is
related to the unit of length in such a way that the
momentum is simply id/dx. The meaning of i (literally
the square root of — 1) in an equation is that the two

108

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

sides of the equation represent waves which, though
equal in amplitude, are a quarter-period different in
phase. When the mass of an electron is expressed in
terms of this natural unit we shall denote it by m,.
Making the change of unit, the identification on p. 105
becomes
he

WN

2ne2

R

We have taken the opportunity to turn both sides upside
down, since that is the way they actually appear in the
wave-equation.
The coefficient hcj2ne2, which is sometimes called
the fine-structure constant, is a pure number; and it is
well known that its value is close to 137. For my own
part I think that its value is exactly 137, that being
the number of degrees of freedom associated with the
wave-function for a pair of charges. There has been
much discussion whether the true value is 137 0 or
137*3; both values claim to be derived from observation. The latter, called the “ spectroscopic value,” is
preferred by many physicists. It is, however, mislead¬
ing to call these determinations observational values,
for the observations are only a substratum; the spectro¬
scopic value in particular is based on a rather complex
theory and is certainly not to be treated as a “ hard
fact ” of observation.
Although I believe %cl2ne2 to be 137, I shall take
the actual coefficient of me to be 136. This means that
I slightly amend the original identification by inserting
a factor 136/137. The reason for this change is that
one of the 137 degrees of freedom, viz. that correspond¬
ing to radial displacement, occurs in some problems
but not in others, and this appears to be a problem in
which it will not occur. The fine-structure constant is
introduced in the problem of interaction of two electric
charges, and there the 137 degrees of freedom are all

THE

UNIVERSE

AND

THE

ATOM

109

in play; a change of distance between the two charges
is recognisable because a comparison standard for dis¬
tances is furnished by the radius of curvature R. But
now we are considering a formula for the mass of an
electron, which arises from its interaction with the
“ rest of the universe.” The N particles of the universe
have been virtually simplified down to one particle by
introducing the adjusting factor yW, so that the prob¬
lem is not dissimilar to that of two interacting particles;
but there is no longer an extraneous comparison
standard of length. Tracing the analogy between the
two problems, we find that the analogue of change of
distance between the two electrons would be change of
the radius of curvature of space. But by its very nature
R cannot vary, since it is the standard unit of distance.
There is therefore no analogue to the 137th degree of
freedom; and we conclude that our first identification,
which did not enter into such minutiae, ought to be
amended so as to show the correct number of degrees
of freedom.
One might hesitate to introduce so odd-looking a
factor as 136/137 were it not that we know of another
case in which the radial degree of freedom is inhibited,
and there the factor has been verified by observation.
This occurs when a proton enters into the almost rigid
helium nucleus. Its mass or energy is found to be re¬
duced in a ratio which is very nearly 136/137; the
reduction is called the packing-fraction. The disap¬
pearance of a degree of freedom is essentially the same
in the helium nucleus and in the metrical field; the
former cannot expand radially because it is rigid, the
latter cannot expand because its radius is the standard
of length.
Thus at present our result stands
.

136m, =

VN
R

(B).

110

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

But to this there is a serious objection. The result
shows an unfair discrimination in favour of the electron,
the proton not being mentioned. The proton is pre¬
sumably as fundamental as the electron. But what can
we put in place of ^/N / R which would give an equally
fundamental equation for the mass mp of a proton?
With an electron and proton calling out for equal
treatment the only way to satisfy their claims impar¬
tially is to make the fundamental equation a quadratic,
so that there is one root for each. We do not want to
alter the part we have already got, after taking so much
trouble to justify it bit by bit; so we assume that
136m - ^/N/R = 0

.(C).

gives correctly the last two terms of the equation, but
there is a term in m2 to come on at the beginning.
It is well known that we can learn something about
the roots of a quadratic equation, even if only the last
two terms are given. The ratio of the last two coeffi¬
cients is the sum of the roots divided by the product
of the roots. Since the equation is to have roots mc
and m^, we must have
me + mp __ 1367?
' memp ~ yW
136m, m. _ <s/N

.(D).
+ me
R
This is another change in the identification equation;
but this time it is a very small change numerically.
Comparing (D) with (B) we see that a factor
m^ -f- (mp + me) has been inserted. We know that m,
is about 1,847 times me, so that the factor is 1,847/1,848
or -99946. Numerically the change is insignificant;
but the proton no longer has any cause of complaint,
for proton and electron receive perfectly impartial treat¬
ment in (D).
The next step is to complete the quadratic equation
or

THE

UNIVERSE

AND

THE

ATOM

111

of which the last two terms are given in (C). Since
we have finished with the problem of the identification
of the adjusted standard (our final equation giving it
in terms of known experimental quantities being (D))
we may as well now adopt it as our unit of length. As
already explained this choice of unit ought to reduce
the equations to their simplest possible form. This
means that R / y'N can now be taken as unity. The two
terms given in (C) are therefore 136m -1 = 0, and the
completed quadratic is
? m2 - 136m + 1=0.
What number must we put in place of the query?
You may remember that there was a number n = 10,
which we promised to bring into the wave-equation 1
sometime. Here is our chance. We take the equation
to be
10m2-136m+ 1=0

.(E).

For reference we write down the same equation, re¬
introducing the centimetre as the unit of length. It is
\/N
N
10m*- 136mV_-+_ = 0

.(F).

You see that the number n = 10 occurs in the first
term as a counterweight to N in the last term, which
is evidently their proper relation.
Although we are not yet able to give a clear-cut
theory of this equation, the argument is farther ad¬
vanced than might appear from this superficial sketch.
I think it will be agreed that, since the coefficient 136
represents number of degrees of freedom, it is extremely
probable that the remaining coefficient in (E) will also
represent number of degrees of freedom. Presumably
each degree of freedom possesses a concealed energy
or cyclic momentum similar to that provided by the
1 The wave-equation is formed by replacing the mass m by a
differential operator.

112

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

ignoration of co-ordinates in ordinary dynamics.
Approaching the problem from this dynamical point of
view one arrives almost immediately at the term 10m2,
but there is more difficulty in seeing the reason for the
term 136m.
Thus, broadly speaking, we have two lines of
approach. They have not yet met and coalesced, as
they ultimately must do.
But since one line of
approach gives the linear term and the other the squared
term, apparently quite definitely, the progress seems to
be already sufficient to give the correct equation.
We find the ratio of the two roots mp, m by solving
equation (E) or (F). The result is 1,847-60. The
observed value 1 of the mass-ratio of the proton and
electron is stated to be 1,847 0 with a probable error of
half a unit. Thus the agreement is complete.
The solution of equation (F) gives

135-9264m.= VJtyR)
0073569m, = i/N/Rj

.( ’’

This is another form of our final identification of the
adjusted standard R/^/N. The preliminary identifica¬
tion was \31me='\/N/R\ so that there has not been
any change worth considering in the numerical magni¬
tude ofyW/7?, derived for the purpose of predicting
the speed of recession of the nebulae. The formulae
will work either way. Normally we apply them to
calculate the astronomical results, using mf or mp deter¬
mined by physicists; but we can also use them to give
1 There is also a spectroscopic value about 10 units lower,
obtained by adopting 137-3 instead of 137 for the fine-structure
constant; but this is irrelevant. We are already committed to
the value 137 at an earlier stage, so we do not want our com¬
putation to agree with a result which would only be true if the
value were not 137. To put it another way—Naturally our
theory cannot agree with both deflection values and spectro¬
scopic values, since these differ; but it ought to agree con¬
sistently with one set, and not sometimes with one and some¬
times with the other.

THE

UNIVERSE

AND

THE

ATOM

113

an astronomical method of measuring the mass of an
electron or proton.
To measure the mass of an electron, a suitable pro¬
cedure is to make astronomical observations of the
distances and velocities of spiral nebulae! The result,
corrected if necessary for the mutual attraction of the
galaxies is, let us say, 600 km. per sec. per megaparsec.
This is c/R (p. 72); and since the velocity of light c is
300,000 km. per sec., we have R = 500 megaparsecs,
which is equal to T54.1027 cm. The remaining steps,
which involve a little algebraic handling of the equa¬
tions, need not be described in detail; as soon as R is
known, they become soluble and we can find N, and
hence y'N/R. The masses of the electron and proton
are then given by equations (G). They are there ex¬
pressed in terms of the natural unit of mass; we can
convert them into grams if we know Planck’s con¬
stant h. I am afraid that the accuracy attainable by
this method would not satisfy the modern physicist,
but we shall not be out by more than a factor 2 or
thereabouts.
Perhaps you will object that this is not really measur¬
ing the mass of an electron; even supposing it to be
right, it is a highly circuitous inference. But do you
suppose that a physicist puts an electron in the scales
and weighs it? If you will read an account of how the
spectroscopic value of the mass has been determined,
you will not think my method unduly complicated.
But, of course, I do not seriously put it forward in
rivalry; I only want to make vivid the wide inter¬
relatedness of things.
We can show that the two roots of the quadratic
represent electric charges of opposite sign. To test this
an electric field must be introduced into the problem.
Following Dirac’s theory, this is done by adding to the
equation a constant term (i.e. a term not involving the
differential operator m = id/ds) depending on the elec-

114

THE

EXPANDING

UNIVERSE

trical potential. Since this changes only the third term
of the quadratic, the sum of the roots n^+nij, is un¬
changed. In other words, the mass or energy added by
the field to mc is equal and opposite to the mass or
energy added by the field to m;). But that is the defini¬
tion of equal and opposite charges—in the same electric
field they have equal and opposite potential energy.
Our conclusion that the fundamental wave-equation
is really a quadratic has recently received unexpected
support by the discovery of the neutron. It had been
supposed that the wave-equation for two charges (a
proton and electron x) was a linear equation first given
by Dirac. The complete set of solutions was found to
represent (approximately, if not exactly) a hydrogen
atom in its various possible states. But from recent
experiments it has been discovered that there exists
another state or group of states in which the proton
and electron are much closer together and form a very
minute kind of atom. This is called a neutron. Clearly
the present wave-equation for a proton and electron
cannot be correct, since its solutions do not give the
neutron states. Just as for one charge we require a
quadratic wave:equation whose two sets of solutions
correspond to electrons and protons, so for two charges
we require a quadratic wave-equation whose two sets
of solutions correspond to hydrogen atoms and neu¬
trons. I expect that this continues in more compli¬
cated systems, the two solutions then corresponding to
extra-nuclear and nuclear binding of the charges.
The support to the present theory is twofold. Firstly
it indicates that the theory of two charges will come
into line with our theory of one charge as regards the
general form of the equation. Secondly, since the
“ spectroscopic values ” of the physical constants are
based on an incomplete theory of two charges, we
1 Note that our quadratic equation (£) is for a proton or
electron—not for two charges.

THE

UNIVERSE

AND

THE

ATOM

115

should not attach overmuch importance to a slight dis¬
crepancy between them and the values found in our
theory.
It is perhaps still more important that we can see
other problems ahead. Thus it will be necessary to
investigate the theory of the additional term in the
equation for the hydrogen atom and neutron, and to
show that the extra solutions agree with the observed
properties of the neutron. This will give further oppor¬
tunities of testing, and if necessary revising, the present
conclusions.
VI

To those whose interest in modern science is directed
chiefly to the philosophical implications, the theory
of the expanding universe does not, I think, bring any
particularly new revelation. Except for one lapse, I
have avoided questions savouring of philosophy, I have
rather taken it for granted that the reader’s attention,
like my own, is fixed on the strictly scientific progress
of the inquiry, and that he will suspend all questions as
to how the physical scheme, which is here being
developed, can be made to fit in with the general out¬
look of life and consciousness. It would be unfortunate
to prejudice the inquiry by dragging in such questions
prematurely.
We may perhaps emerge with the uneasy feeling that
we no longer have vast domains of space and vast
periods of time to dispose of. But the complaint has
often been made that astronomical measures are too
vast to conceive; and if we have never been able to
conceive them, it scarcely affects our general outlook to
have a few 0’s lopped off here and there. In fact I
consider the man who is dissatisfied with a universe
containing ten thousand million million million stars
rather grasping. That is, if he wants them merely for

116

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

comfortable philosophic contemplation; in connection
with scientific investigations the cuts may, of course, be
serious, as we have seen in the case of the time-scale.
The new theory contains no obvious suggestion that
the world will come to an end sooner than we had
been expecting. The cosmical dispersal ignores the
smaller scale aggregations like our galaxy. We antici¬
pate that there will ultimately be a complete runningdown of the universe by the slow degradation of energy
into unavailable form; but that far distant day is not
brought noticeably nearer by the existence of cosmical
repulsion.
It would seem that the expansion of the universe is
another one-day process parallel with the thermo¬
dynamical running-down. One cannot help thinking
that the two processes are intimately connected; but, if
so, the connection has not yet been found.
The position with regard to the thermodynamical
running-down of the universe has not materially altered
since I discussed it four years ago.1 The impression
has got abroad that the conclusions have been shaken
by recent work on cosmic rays. That would be im¬
possible, so far as I am concerned; for the theory of
cosmic rays that is being urged in this connection hap¬
pens to be the one that I was advocating at the time
of writing, viz. that the cosmic rays give evidence of
the building up of higher elements out of hydrogen in
distant regions occupied by diffuse matter.2 I am not
at all sure that the more recent evidence should be
interpreted as favourable to it; but if it is favourable,
as Dr. Millikan maintains, I have the less reason to
change my views. The coming together of electric
particles to form a complex atom, and the consequent
dispersal of some of the energy in cosmic rays, is
clearly a step in the same direction as other energy-dis1 The Nature of the Physical World, Chapter IV (1928).
2 Internal Constitution of the Stars, p. 317 (1926).

THE

UNIVERSE

AND

THE

ATOM

117

sipating processes—for example, the coming together of
nebulous matter to form a star, and the consequent dis¬
persal of energy as radiant heat. It is one more con¬
tributor to the general running-down towards an ulti¬
mate state of thermo-dynamic equilibrium. Millikan
has sometimes called the atom-building process a
“ winding-up ” of the universe; but “ up ” and “ down ”
are relative terms, and a transformation of axes may be
needed in comparing his descriptions with mine.
It may be desirable to remind the philosophical reader
of the reason why the scientist indulges in these extra¬
polations of our present imperfect knowledge to regions
remote from our experience—why he writes about the
beginning and end of the world. It seems to be
gratuitously courting disaster to expose our theories to
conditions in which any slight weakness is likely to
become magnified without limit. But that is just the
principle of testing. “ The real justification for making
such forecasts is not that they are likely to be realised;
but that they throw light upon the state of contem¬
porary science, and may indicate where it requires*
supplementing.541
The test of extrapolation to the most distant future
does not, I think, disclose any definite weakness in the
present system of science—in particular, in the second
law of thermodynamics on which physical science so
largely relies. It is true that the extrapolation foretells
that the material universe will some day arrive at a
state of dead sameness and so virtually come to an
end; to my mind that is a rather happy avoidance of
a nightmare of eternal repetition. It is the opposite
extrapolation towards the past which gives real cause
to suspect a weakness in the present conceptions of
science. The beginning seems to present insuperable
difficulties unless we agree to look on it as frankly
supernatural. We may have to let it go at that. But
1 Prof. H. T. H. Piaggio.

118

THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE

I have referred elsewhere to the danger of limiting
scientific investigation to a bounded domain (p. 34).
Instead of honestly facing the intricacies of our prob¬
lem, we may be led to think that its difficulties have
been solved when they have only been swept over the
boundary. Sweeping them back and back, the pile in¬
creases until it forms an unclimbable barrier. Perhaps
it is this barrier that we call “ the beginning.”
VII

Now I have told you 44 everything right as it fell out.”
How much of the story are we to believe?
Science has its showrooms and its workshops. The
public to-day, I think rightly, is not content to wander
round the showrooms where the tested products are
exhibited; the demand is to see what is going on in
the workshops. You are welcome to enter; but do not
judge what you see by the standards of the showroom.
We have been going round a workshop in the base¬
ment of the building of science. The light is dim, and
we stumble sometimes. About us is confusion and
mess which there has not been time to sweep away.
The workers and their machines are enveloped in
murkiness. But I think that something is being shaped
here—perhaps something rather big. I do not quite
know what it will be when it is completed and polished
for the showroom. But we can look at the present
designs and the novel tools that are being used in its
manufacture; we can contemplate too the little successes
which make us hopeful.
A slight reddening of the light of distant galaxies,
an adventure of the mathematical imagination in
spherical space, reflections on the underlying principles
implied in all measurement, nature’s curious choice of
certain numbers such as 137 in her scheme—these and
many other scraps have come together and formed a

THE UNIVERSE AND

THE

ATOM

119

vision. As when the voyager sights a distant shore, we
strain our eyes to catch the vision. Later we may more
fully resolve its meaning. It changes in the mist; some¬
times we seem to focus the substance of it, sometimes
it is rather a vista leading on and on till we wonder
whether aught can be final.
Once more I have recourse to Bottom the weaver—
#

I have had a most rare vision. I have had a dream, past
the wit of man to say what dream it was: man is but an ass,
if he go about to expound this dream. . . . Methought I was,—
and methought I had,—but man is but a patched fool, if he
will offer to say what methought I had. . . .
It shall be called Bottom’s Dream, because it hath no
bottom.
,

INDEX
Absolute length, 97
Adjusted standard, 105

Gravitation, law of, 30, 94, 99
Gulliver of physics, 94

Beginning of universe, 15, 57,
118
Birkhoff, G. D„ 55
Bubble, bursting of, 74, 87

Hubble, E. P., 17, 19
Humason, M. L., 19
Individual velocities, 81
Instability of Einstein universe,
53, 58
Island galaxies, 13

Cepheid variables, 16
Closed space, 39, 47
Closed system, 45
Condensations in primordial
matter, 54
Contracting universe, 51, 54
Cosmic rays, 78, 116
Cosmic spectator, 89
Cosmical constant, 29, 68, 92,
100
Cosmical repulsion, 30
Curvature of space, 35, 99

Kolhorster, W., 78
Lemaitre, G., 50, 54, 55, 60, 72,
74, 80
Light, circumambulation of, 73
McCrae, W. H., 54
McVittie, G. C., 54
Mass of universe, 68, 71
Mass-ratio of proton and elec¬
tron, 92, 112
Milky Way system, 14, 83
Millikan, R. A., 78, 117
Milne, E. A., 65
Multiplication table, celestial,
14

de Sitter, W., 11, 50, 52, 64, 74,
80
de Sitter universe, 48, 51
Dingle, H., 107
Dirac, P. A. M., 28, 113, 114
Doppler effect, 23, 75
Einstein, A., 27, 30, 64, 71
Einstein universe, 48, 53, 58
Electron, mass of, 113
Elliptical space, 71
Ewing, J. A., 57
Expansion of space, 46
Extrapolation, 34, 117

Nebulae, 13
Nebular recession, 17, 20, 69, 91
Number of particles in the uni¬
verse, 68, 102, 107
Numerical data, 68

Fine-structure constant, 108
Formulae, principal, 71
Four-dimensional pictures, 37
Friedmann, A., 50

Packing fraction, 109
Primum Mobile, 49
Proton, mass of, 110, 113

Ghosts of stars, 76

Quadratic wave-equation, 110,
114
120

INDEX
Recession of nebulae, 17, 20,
69, 91
Relativity, principle of, 76, 87,
93
“ Rest of the universe,” 100,
101, 104
Robertson, H. P., 50
Running-down of universe, 59,
116

Standard of lenath, 85, 87, 95,
105
Static universe, 49
Time-scale, 82
Ubiquitous standard, 94
Units, natural, 97, 107
Velocities of nebulae, 17

Sen, N. K., 54, 55
Shrinking atom, 87
Slipher, V. M., 16, 48
Space, physical, 35, 47, 97
Spherical space, 40, 76

Wave-equation, 101
Weyl, H., 31, 94
Zwiclcy, F., 24

LIBRARY

Penguin
Short
Stories
Mr. Fortune, Please
A Tali Ship
In the Midst of Life
Tales from Tchehov

H. C. BAILEY

34

“ BARTIMEUS ”

103

AMBROSE BIERCE

199

Translated by
CONSTANCE GARNETT

180

W. W. JACOBS
Deep Waters
W. W. JACOBS
Many Cargoes
Ghost Stories of an Antiquary m.r.james
STEPHEN LEACOCK
Literary Lapses
OLIVER ONIONS
Widdershins
LLEWELYN POWYS
Ebony and Ivory
The Daring Young Man william saroyan
OSBERT SITWELL
Triple Fugue
Modern Short Stories, Vol. 1
Selected by ALAN STEELE

104
214
91
212
222
225
201
248

96

Modern Short Stories, Vol. II
Selected by ALAN STEELE

170

and

PENGUIN
PARADE
SEVEN VOLUMES
NEW STORIES, POEMS, ETC., BY CONTEMPORARY WRITERS

An Australian
Reader Writes

—

Dear Sirs,
Firstly, congratulations on “ Penguin Books ”
which are particularly welcome in Australia where
Exchange (and transport, etc.) makes books of
Is. 6d. and over an impossible luxury of ten or twelve
shillings—or more. I was reading one in the tram
the other day when a workman sitting next me
suddenly said, ‘ Excuse me, madam, but I can strongly
recommend that book * (it was as a matter of fact
Cold Comfort Farm which I’d roared with laughter
over years ago and was just about to begin again).
He continued to tell me that he owned every Penguin
and Pelican book that had been published and
added that never before had he been able to buy
books.
However, that’s just by the way. My reason for
writing is to suggest you re-publish, in two volumes
if necessary, The Good Soldier Schweik.
The author’s
name (he was, I think, a Czech journalist) I’ve for¬
gotten, but feel pretty sure Heinemann published it.
In London I know ail my friends adored it and here
it seems even more popular. There seems to be
about one copy in Melbourne and everyone is either
trying to borrow it to read, or re-read. I think Mel¬
bourne sales alone would make it worth while!
Please put me on your mailing list.
With all good wishes,
M. M.

“ The Good Soldier Schweik ”
is now available in this series

PELICAN
ARCH/EOLOGY
BELLES LETTRES

:

;

8/:

HISTORY : LITERATURE :
PSYCHOLOGY : RELIGION ;
F. L. Allen.*Only Yesterday (2 vols.) A 25 26
Clive Bell.Civilisation A 28
Lady Bell.The Letters of Gertrude Bell (2 vols.) A 46 and 55
Sir Peter Chalmers Mitchell.* The Childhood of Animals A 65
G. D. H. Cole.|Practical Economics A 6
Socialism in Evolution A 37
J. G. Crowther.*An Outline of the Universe (2 vols.) A 21 —22
J. H. Fabre.*Social Life in the Insect World A 14
Sigmund Freud...Totem and Taboo A 33
Psychopathology of Everyday Life A 24
Roger Fry. Vision and Design A 20
Bishop Gore.Belief in God A 47
J. B. S. Haldane.The Inequality of Man A 12
£lie Halevy.A History of the English People (5 vols.) A 9, 16, 30, 50, 52
J. L. and Barbara Hammond.Lord Shaftesbury A 48
John Hampden (editor) ... Great English Short Stories (2 vols.) A 57 and 64
G. B. Harrison (author) .^Introducing Shakespeare A 43
G. B. Harrison (editor) .A Book of English Poetry A 17
Julian Huxley.Essays of a Biologist A 51
Julian Huxley, A. C. Haddon and A. M. Carr-Saunders
*We Europeans A 41
Holbrook Jackson.The Eighteen Nineties A 58
Sir James Jeans.*The Mysterious Universe A 10
*The Stars in their Courses A 59
P. Kropotkin.Mutual Aid A 49
R. S. Lambert (editor).f*Art in England A 38
H. J. Laski.Liberty in the Modern State A 13
D. S. MacColl.* W hat is Art? A 62
H. J. and Hugh Massingham (editors)
The Great Victorians (2 vols.) A
35
t SPECIALLY WRITTEN FOR THIS SERIES }

LIGHT

BLUE

7

BOOKS
RT

:

-OGY

ASTRONOMY
:

ECONOMICS

’HILOSOPHY : POETRY
CIENCE

:

SOCIOLOGY

W. J. Perry.The Growth of Civilisation

A 15

Eileen Power.*Medieval People

A 19

Margery Spring Rice.t*Working-Class Wives

A 60

D. K. Roberts (editor).The Century’s Poetry (2 vo/s.)

A 39, 40

J. M. Richards. f * An Introduction to Modern Architecture
Viscount Samuel.Belief and Action

A 61
A 56

Bernard Shaw.The Intelligent Woman’s Guide (2 vo/s.)

A 1,2

Olaf Stapledon.Last and First Men

A 3

tPhilosophy and Living (2 vo/s.)

A 53, 54

L. Susan Stebbing...Thinking to Some Purpose

A 44

J. W. N. Sullivan.Limitations of Science

A 29

The Bases of Modern Science

A 42

Beatrice Webb.My Apprenticeship (2 vo/s.)

A 31, 32

Josiah Wedgwood.The Economics of Inheritance

A 45

H. G. Wells.A Short History of the World
A. N. Whitehead.Science and the Modern World

A 5
A 34

Leonard Woolf.After the Deluge

A 18

Virginia Woolf.The Common Reader
Sir Leonard Woolley.*Ur of the Chaldees

A 36
A 27

*Digging Up the Past

A 4

PELICAN

SPECIALS

Viscount Astor and B. Seebohm Rowntree.British Agriculture
Arnold Bennett.Literary Taste

S 38
S I I

Anthony Bertram.Design
Robert Gibbings.f*Blue Angels and Whales

S 22
S 16

Arnold Haskell.t*Ballet
Lucia Moholy.f*>4 Hundred Years of Photography

S 5
S 35

Hugh Nicol.t*M'crofces by the AMIIion

S 28

*

COVERS

ILLUSTRATED

MYSTERY
and CRIME
PENGUINS HAVE
THE BEST THRILLERS
Margery Allingham.
Anthony Armstrong.
H. C. Bailey.
E. C. Bentley.
Anthony Berkeley.
Alice Campbell.
John Dickson Carr.

Death at Swaythling Court
Murder in the Maze

219
131
34
78
153
142
124
158
250
256
6
61
155
159
137
188

A. Conan Doyle.
M. G. Eberhart.
J. Jefferson Farjeon..No. 17
John Ferguson.
Stealthy Terror
Richard Keverne.
The Man in the Red Hat
The Sanfield Scandal
Missing from His Home
The Fleet Hall Inheritance
C. H. B. Kitchin.
Philip Macdonald.
Ngaio Marsh.
A Man Lay Dead
Death in Ecstasy
Vintage Murder
J. C. Masterman.
A. A. Milne.
Gladys Mitchell..
The Devil at Saxon Wall
John Rhode.
The Murders in Praed Street
Sax Rohmer.
W. Stanley Sykes.
Henry Wade.
Edgar Wallace.
H. G. Wells.

240
209
65
239
127
147
90
218
227
190
79
152
210
249
253
220
156
217
228
154
98
157
62
216
64
151

The Waxworks Murder
Poison in Jest
Hag's Nook
Agatha Christie.
The Mysterious Affair at Styles
G. D. H. and Margaret Cole.
J. J. Connington.

III

Look for the PENGUIN on the GREEN COVER

%

Adventure &Travel
J. Johnston Abraham.The Surgeon’s Log
J. R. Ackerley.Hindoo Holiday
Edmund Blunden.Undertones of War
Olive Murray Chapman.*Across Lapland
Alexandra David-Neel...With Mystics and Magicians in Tibet
Gandar Dower.* Amateur Adventure
A. J. Evans.The Escaping Club
Alain Gerbault.The Fight of the Firecrest
Jan and Cora Gordon . Two Vagabonds in Serbia and Montenegro
Anne Morrow Lindbergh.......North to the Orient
Robert Marshall.Arctic Village
Weston Martyr.*The Southseaman
Eric Muspratt...Wild Oats
David Scott.The Egypt’s Gold
Captain von Rintelen.The Dark Invader
Nora Wain.House of Exile
* Illustrated

The Penguins with the
CERISE COVERS

66
242
82
226
68
198
202
183
223
161
255
236
258
187
60
168

BIOGRAPHY
and MEMOIRS
H. C. Armstrong. ...Grey Steel (General Smuts)

204

Grey Wolf (Mustafa Kemal)

77

Lord of Arabia (Ibn Saud)

128

Cedric Belfrage.

254

E. F. Benson. . As We Were

169

William Bolitho.

230

John Fothergill. .An Innkeeper’s Diary

181

Pamela Frankau. .1 Find Four People

141

Stephen Gwynn. . Captain Scott

207

R. H. Kiernan. .Captain Albert Ball, V.C.

259

Ethel Mannin. ...Confessions and Impressions

71
1

Andre Maurois.

Disraeli

110

George Moore. ..Confessions of a Young Man

185

Beverley Nichols.

7

Sean O’Faolain.

221

DARK BLUE COVERS

MISCELLANEOUS
Earl Baldwin...

116

Edward Lear.

234

Izaak Walton. .The Compleat Angler

238

W. T. Williams and G. H

Savage

The Penguin Problems Book

260

Alexander Woolicott. . While Rome Burns

118

YELLOW COVERS

Howard Coster

Sir Arthur Eddington
Sir Arthur Eddington is known to a large
non-specialist public as a scientist who can
explain difficult ideas clearly and wittily.
He was born in 1882 and educated at Owens
College, now Manchester University, and
Trinity College, Cambridge. At Cambridge
he became a Senior Wrangler and Smith’s
Prizeman. He was appointed Chief Ob¬
server at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich,
in 1906, and in the following year he was
elected to a Fellowship at Trinity. In 1913
he returned to Cambridge as Plumian
Professor of Astronomy, and in 1914 he
became Director of the Cambridge Obser¬
vatory; both these offices he still holds.
He is a Fellow of the Royal Society, whose
Royal Medal he received in 1928, President
of the International Astronomical Union,
and former President of the Physical Society
and the Royal Astronomical Society.
His
publications include the following books:
Stellar Movements and the Structure of the
Universe; The Relativity Theory of Gravity;
Space, Time and Gravitation; The Mathematical
Theory of Relativity; Stars and Atoms; New
Pathways in Science; and The Philosophy of
Physical Science

Sir Arthur
Eddington

*
The
Expanding
Universe

Reading-case label
This book will keep better if it is
protected by the special Penguin
reading-case
(6d. from any
bookseller). Cut out this label
and paste it on to the back of
the case.

THE NEW PELICANS

(/)

z

A 61

H

A 62
A 63
A 64

o
D
D

<
t/)
Ul

H

<

include

A 65
A 66
A 67

AN INTRODUCTION TO MODERN ARCHITECTURE
J. M. Richards
WHAT IS ART ?.D. S. MacColl
INVENTIONS.. . ..H. Stafford Hatfield
GREAT ENGLISH SHORT STORIES (Vol. 2)
Edited by John Hampden
THE CHILDHOOD OF ANIMALS
Sir Peter Chalmers Mitchell
PLANNING FOR LIVING.Thomas Sharp
PRIMITIVE ART.Leonhard Adam

PENGUINS
241
242
243
244
245
246
247
248
249
250

A WINDJAMMER’S HALF DECK.“ Shalimar ”
HINDOO HOLIDAY.J. R. Ackerley
THE TAVERN KNIGHT.Rafael Sabatini
CRUMP FOLK GOING HOME.Constance Holme
THE BRONTES WENT TO
WOOLWORTH’S.Rachel Ferguson
THE BARBER OF PUTNEY.J. B. Morton
(Beachcomber)
CORDUROY .Adrian Bell
TRIPLE FUGUE.Osbert Sitwell
DEATH IN ECSTASY.Ngaio Marsh
POISON IN JEST.John Dickson Carr

THE NEW SPECIALS
546 The Case For Federal Union „..W. B. CURRY
547 Why Britain is at War .HAROLD NICOLSON
548 The Penguin Political Dictionary
WALTER THEIMER

549 Europe Since Versailles.DAVID LOW
550 The Rights of Man. .H. G. WELLS
S5I Must the War Spread .. D. N. PRITT, K.C., M.P.
S54 Unser Kampf (Our Struggle)
SIR RICHARD ACLAND, M.P.

