Editorial & Publishing Offices : 


MACMILLAN & Co., LTD. 
St. MARTIN’S STREET 
Lonpon, W.C.2 


| No. 3512 


SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


Telegraphic Address : 
Puusis, LESQUARE, LONDON 


Telephone Number : 
WHITEHALL 8831 


Vol. 139 


Oxford and Present Needs in Science 


OR some time, the University of Oxford has 
been faced with the task of finding £500,000 
for pressing needs, largely connected with the 
extension of Bodley’s library and prospective 
science and other buildings. It recently launched 
an appeal for help to its friends in Great Britain, 
in the Dominions and in the United States. The 
sum it is hoped to collect is about £1,000,000. 
Great trouble has been taken privately to make 
the need known to those capable of helping, and 
there is good hope that industry (now flourishing 
as rarely before), the surtax-payer, and the 
ordinary individual, between them, will find this 
large amount. 

While it is true that those who contribute jointly 
the last £50,000 are most blessed of all, it is good 
that already the first three hundred thousand 
pounds have been given or are in sight. It is 
hoped that as much as £150,000 will come from 
North America, despite the damage due to the 
Mississippi floods, which rightly makes a first 
claim on much of American generosity. The needs 
for this appeal are, of course, quite independent 
of those so handsomely met by Lord Nuffield last 
year for the school of clinical research. They are 
very different needs and needs of long standing ; 
they cannot even indirectly be met out of the 
£2,000,000 provided by him. Lord Nuffield has 
recognized this point by generously subscribing a 
separate £100,000 to the present appeal. 

The money received is to be administered by a 
trust, so that it will be guarded from inroads for 
‘general purposes’, and devoted to the needs set 
out in the appeal. The extension of the Bodleian 
library will be the first charge on the fund ; the 
alteration or erection of buildings, mainly science 
buildings, will be the second. ‘The rest of the 


money is to be used as capital or interest for 
developing research in any subject at all that looks 
promising, except such part of it as may have been 
earmarked at the wish of contributors. Oxford, 
while still highly cherished in our affections, is a 
changed place from the old days. It is now largely 
a University for the hard-working, middle-class 
student. Higher study and research have never 
been more ardently pursued over a wide field. 
In pure science for many years Oxford has done 
a large quantity of excellent work. With in- 
creased endowments for material in the physical 
sciences, and for men in the biological sciences, it 
could do much more without attempting to become 
a second Cambridge. 

The most urgent of the scientific needs is a new 
physics building for Prof. F. A. Lindemann. His 
department has grown rapidly of recent years and 
latterly has become almost intolerable in the 
Clarendon Laboratory, now more than seventy 
years old. Within the next three or four years it 
is proposed to erect nearby in the Parks a new 
physics institute, equipped for the studies now 
being prosecuted there, and to adapt the vacated 
building for the Department of Geology. That 
department has had to exist in cramped quarters 
within the University Museum, which dates from 
1860, and has suffered in recent years from the 
lack of leadership of its late head, who was in 
office until he was nearly ninety years of age. In 
the ampler space of the Clarendon Laboratory, with 
increased endowment, and with a new professor 
to be elected this term, this department should 
again take its rightful place in the University. 

The second great need is for a University 
Institute of Physical Chemistry. There is at 
present no such place. For years the whole of the 


304 


teaching and most of the research in this subject 
has been done in the college laboratories and 
cellars of Balliol, Trinity and Jesus Colleges. A 
fine spirit has been shown there and excellent work 
done—more, perhaps, than in many a university 
department with proper staff and ungrudged 
grants for material. But college laboratories are 
now at best makeshifts, rich only in improvisation. 
They are neither well endowed nor well equipped. 
They are small; not everyone is free to enter 
them and work there. 

A new University building properly equipped 
and endowed is imperative, and it is fitting that 
Prof. C. N. Hinshelwood, who has succeeded Prof. 
Frederick Soddy as Dr. Lee’s professor of inorganic 
and physical chemistry and is a leader of physical 
chemistry, should have as his place a proper 
official laboratory in which scattered researchers 
in this subject, collected from various parts of 
college and University buildings, may find a home. 
It is proposed to put up the building in the next 
four or five years in the Parks next to the Organic 
Chemistry Laboratory, if funds earmarked for it 
are forthcoming. 

These are the immediate needs. Next comes 
that of the Physiology Laboratory, which some day 


NATURE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


must be rebuilt. It was originally put up in 1884, 
and the recent growth of the medical school must 
soon make change in it very desirable. Something 
also should be done to endow the Museum of the 
History of Science. A donor who might jib at 
seeing his comparatively modest contribution swal- 
lowed up in the general total might like to in- 
dividualize it by helping this institution, which 
does good work on an exiguous income. It 
saves for the studies of future generations 
apparatus and other objects of historical value 
which might easily be lost in the midst of 
change. 

Mention must also be made of the need for an 
extension of the Ashmolean Museum and for funds 
for archeological research, and, what is likely to 
be of far-reaching significance in the future, for 
research in the study of human society, social 
studies and allied subjects such as anthropology. 

It is announced that the appeal has already 
produced a response averaging £2,000 a day. The 
promotion of the welfare and influence of the 
University of Oxford is worthy of the support of 
all who are concerned for the progress of learning 
in the present somewhat distracted state of world 
affairs. 


Inter-Imperial Co-operation in Scientific Research 


S already pointed out in the leading article 
in NATURE of November 7 last (p. 777), the 
proceedings of the British Commonwealth Scientific 
Conference were mainly concerned with inter- 
Imperial co-operation in supplying bibliographical 
information on the sciences relating to agriculture. 
Co-operative research in certain subjects was, 
however, suggested by various delegations from 
the countries represented. Sections of the report 
of the proceedings recently issued (Cmd. 5341. 
London: H.M. Stationery Office, 1937. 1s. 3d. 
net) deal briefly with such subjects of wide Empire 
interest as the transport and storage of foodstuffs, 
the control of insect infestation of stored products, 
the properties and utilization of wool, the collection 
and maintenance of plant material for crop improve- 
ment, and the control of damage by termites. 
The Conference recommends that the contri- 
butions of overseas Governments to the Food 
Investigation Board of the United Kingdom 
should continue to be a matter for arrangement 


between the individual Governments interested in 
the transport and storage of foodstuffs, and that 
Governments should continue, pending further 
consideration, the payments they are making for 
work on wool at the Wool Industries Research 
Association’s station at Torridon, Leeds. It also 
recommends that the Farnham House Laboratory 
of the Imperial Institute of Entomology be con- 
tinued on an inter-Imperial basis by the countries 
interested in the control of insect pests by the use of 
parasites of these pests (so-called ‘biologic control’), 
so as to maintain a small nucleus staff. Additional 
staff to deal with specific problems will be paid for 
by fees as occasion arises. Though stating that 
this method of controlling insect pests is still in 
its infancy, no reference is made to the need for 
research into it; the aim is to bring the cost of 
maintaining the Laboratory into close relation to 
the specific (applied) services demanded of it. 
Similarly, in considering the work—largely 
pioneer work—on the control of insect infestation 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


of stored produce carried out at Slough at the 
Stored Products Research Laboratory of the 
Imperial College of Science and Technology, the 
Conference, while recording its appreciation of the 
work, notes that in future the contributions from 
Empire countries towards general expenses will 
cease, and special inquiries will be paid for by fees ; 
no inter-Imperial finance for research on this 
subject is suggested. No recommendations for 
financial co-operation on the various other subjects 


Birds of the 


A Glossary of Greek Birds 

By D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson. (St. Andrews 
University Publications, No. 39.) New edition. 
Pp. viii +342. (London: Oxford University Press, 
1936.) 12s. 6d. net. 


per first edition of this book was published 
forty years ago, and the author tells us that 
it is fully fifty since he began to write it. It is 
the work of a Greek scholar of wide knowledge and 
immense reading, as well as an expert naturalist. 
More, much more, than fifty years ago, he says in 
his preface, his father taught him that many a 
Greek word or name of a hero was foreign to Aryan 
speech. The merchant and the mariner had 
brought strange words home from overseas, and 
many a beast and bird and hill and river had kept 
its pre-hellenic name. Many old names of birds 
and fish are recorded by Italian scholars from the 
rich dialects of Italy, and new light is thrown 
hereby on obscure Greek and Latin words. 

The author quotes in his preface a series of 
names of birds with strange non-Greek (probably 
Pheenician) names which, save one exception, 
it is difficult to identify with their present 
modern Greek names, or even to prove by their 
actual existence. What is, for example, sedevxtc, 
sitvy&, covopa Or tdvtadoc ? Optvé however, and 
mépove, differ very little from their present 
names and the foreign traveller who would 
designate them, as many of the other Greek 
birds, by their ancient name to a Greek peasant 
would be easily understood by him—unless the 
pronunciation was the Erasmian one or his accent 
too foreign. 

So far as I can judge, the glossary of the names 
of birds in the book seems to be very complete, 
and the reader is amazed by the profusion of 
quotations from ancient authors—naturalists, his- 
torians, or poets, representing the reading and 


NATURE 


305 


of wide interest discussed were made, beyond 
those included in the provision of bibliographical 
services and in the identification work of the 
Institutes of Entomology and Mycology. 

Co-operation in scientific research, jointly 
financed on an inter-Imperial scale is, at the 
moment, in abeyance. It seems likely to remain 
so until its scope can be more clearly defined by 
the men of science concerned, and its planning 
entrusted to them. 


Greek Classics 


filing of a whole lifetime indeed. The mention of 
the corresponding names in the modern Greek 
language is extremely accurate, except in a few 
cases, where Prof. D’Arcy Thompson has been led 
into error by foreign observers describing Greek 
birds. For example, the neutral in modern Greek 
does not use the terminal syllable ov of earlier 
forms (ancient Greek of Byzantine), so that the 
modern name cannot be òptòxov or xeydwov 
but is òptōxı and naydw. Heldreich, from whom 
the author quotes, was a naturalized German, and 
was influenced by the ancient grammatical forms, 
or he heard the names from Greek purists who 
thought it probably more elegant to use classical 
forms instead of the popular ones, especially when 
informing foreigners. Such lapses, however, are 
rare and unimportant, and the correct forms are 
also mentioned by the author. 

Ancient Greek literature, descriptive as well as 
imaginative, is luxuriously rich in its references to 
birds. Prof. D’Arcy Thompson borrowed lavishly 
from it, and I think that no quotation worthy of 
being referred to has been missed. Thus we have 
in the book a real treasure of quotations, which 
can be enjoyed by the naturalist as well as the 
scholar or the ordinary reader. Since the first 
edition of the book, the author has been able even 
to enlarge and to complete them. The whole 
romance of the life of Greek birds is displayed 
here in the etymology of their names (sometimes 
unknown, disputed or obscure), in epithets and 
phrases from authors or poets, in their description, 
nesting and migration, or with reference to 
mythical and legendary traditions connected with 
them. Some of the latter are really fascinating, 
and it is interesting to see them sometimes per- 
petuated to-day among the Greek people. 

One of the most captivating chapters of the 
book is the long one devoted to the swallow, the 
bird of the returning spring, or as Sappho sings, 


306 NA PURE 


“who brings again the new beauty”. Superstitions 
are still connected with the bird. Modern Greeks 
are not reputed as bird-loving people, and it is 
probable that some of the species mentioned in 
the glossary have disappeared from the country. 
The swallow, however, remains the favourite bird. 
Lucky is the house chosen by it for nesting when 
the spring comes! It is a good omen. A daughter 
will marry during the year, or the mother will 
give birth to a male child—female ones being not 
generally welcome in Greek families, owing, I 
suppose, to the dowry to be paid when they are 
of age to be married. It would be curious to verify 
whether the swallow ever stays, as recorded by 
Pausanias, to nest in Daulis (now Davlia), the 
country of Tereus. 

The hoopoe or hoope-bird, which persecutes 
the swallows (the Exo of ancient Greeks), plays 
an important part in the Aristophanean play 
and boasts there that he and his companions 
live “by grazing in the gardens on the white 
sesame, the myrtle, the poppy, and the mint”. 
There are in the very obscure Tereus myth, 
as Prof. Thompson remarks, frequent indications 
of confusion between hoopoe and cuckoo, and 
the ‘metamorphosis’ is in part connected with 
the resemblance between the cuckoo and the 
hawk. In spite of confusions, the modern Greek 
tonkuneteivoc is to be identified with Ero and 
is too the &ypıoxòxopaç, found on Mount Taygetus. 

To revert to the swallow, as I mentioned in an 
article on “Classical Aspects in Modern Greece” in 
the October issue of the Quarterly Review, I 
cannot affirm from personal experience that the 
charming and ever-young song of the swallow, 
preserved by Athenzeus, survives until to-day, but 
reliable witnesses report that children in villages 
still sing it, scarcely altered, as they carry round a 
wooden swallow to announce the coming of spring. 

Modern Greeks are not at all respectful of the 
sacred bird of the goddess patron of Athens, 
symbolizing her wisdom. Not only has the beautiful 
ancient word yA«é, so strikingly reminiscent of 
the blue-eyed daughter of Zeus, been succeeded 
by the cacophonous xovxovBeyia, evidently 
derived from the resemblance of the ululations of 
the owl to the call of the cuckoo (Md. Gr. xoōxxos), 
but also they consider a visit from the Athenian 
bird to the roof of a house, flying there from its 
usual haunts on the slopes of the Acropolis, as a 
definite ill-omen. Somebody will die in the house 
so visited, and the superstition, more widespread 
in Athens than elsewhere, is confirmed by striking 
coincidences. 

The nightingale, on the contrary, is most wel- 
come and much cherished among Greek birds. 
Nightingales delight by their melodious concerts 
the tardy walkers wandering around the Royal 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


Gardens during the summer in Athens, seeking 
some relief from the canicular heat of the day. 
As a matter of fact, nightingales amply justify 
the ancient epithet “deprived of sleep” attributed 
to them. 

As people believe firmly that nightingales once 
captured and locked in a cage cannot survive but 
for a short time, the bird is generally respected 
and free, among trees and groves ; and it charms 
with its harmonious modulations the life of 
humble folk in the country as well as that of the 
opulent citizen enjoying the blessing of a private 
garden. 

The 

Td, TIÒ, ted, TIÒ, TIÒ, TLÒ, TIÒ, TIÒ, TIÒ, 
TELOTO, TpLOTÒ, TOTOBpLE 


of the nightingale is really spread over all in the 
most democratic way. 

Colonus alas ! is no more the beautiful wooded 
hill, where according to the immortal Sophoclean 
song 


éc 


. the clear voiced Nightingale 
Who hid in her bower, among 
The wine-dark ivy that wreathes the vale, 
Trilleth her ceaseless song” ; 


but nightingales may be heard now even there. 

It is interesting to note that in spite of the 
popularity of the nightingale, sweethearts are 
never referred in Greek folk-songs as anddw pov. 
This appellation applies, in a satirical mood, to 
prolix orators in the Agora or elsewhere. As for 
terms of endearment, comparisons used in the 
Greek folk-songs and even in daily life, are con- 
fined to partridges (=zepdixx ov), pigeons 
(=nepiotipx or nepeotèpt pov) and turtle-doves 
(=tevyova pov). I must say, however, that 
the names of these birds in Greek have a poetical 
flavour unknown in the corresponding names in 
Western languages. Or am I influenced in this 
belief by the frequent use of the words in Greek 
folk-poetry ? 

The production of the new edition of “Greek 
Birds” by the Oxford University Press enhances 
the reputation of this famous printing-house— 
although I should prefer for the Greek text the 
new beautiful Greek type designed some time ago 
by Mr. Victor Scholderer and freely used now by 
the University Press. The author acknowledges 
gratefully the contributions made by the Carnegie 
Trust for the Universities of Scotland and his own 
University of St. Andrews for the production of 
the book, published by Mr. Humphrey Milford 
for the latter. To make easier for laymen the 
identification of birds mentioned in the glossary, 
the drawings of many of them figure in the text, 
and the innovation is most welcome. 

DEMETRIUS CACLAMANOS. 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


NATURE 


Natural History of Glamorgan 


Glamorgan County History 

Vol. 1: Natural History. Edited by Prof. W. M. 
Tattersall. Pp. xix+444+39 plates. (Cardiff : 
William. Lewis (Printers), Ltd., 1936). 25s. net. 


AES handsome and well-produced volume is 
the first instalment of a projected history of 
the county of Glamorgan which was initiated in 
1930 by the Lord Lieutenant of the County, the 
Earl of Plymouth. It is intended to cover the scien- 
tific interest of the county, and includes sections 
on the geology, climate and meteorology, soils, 
botany and zoology, written by voluntary workers, 
the whole being edited by Prof. W. M. Tattersall, 
professor of zoology and comparative anatomy in 
University College, Cardiff. This volume is to be 
followed by five others covering the industries, 
archeology, and ecclesiastical, political, economic 
and parochial history of Glamorgan. The scheme 
adopted is more or less that of the “Victoria 
County History”, but the material of future 
volumes will be treated chronologically as a whole, 
and not as separate sections. 

The first volume now published deals with the 
“natural environment of the county as a back- 
ground to the history of man”, and Prof. Tattersall 
is to be complimented upon setting a standard 
which, if followed in subsequent volumes, and in 
neighbouring counties, will result in an imposing 
contribution to the topographical history of Wales. 
In Glamorgan, the geological history has an 
important economic aspect owing to the material 
resources of the county, and this practical side is 
not forgotten in the biological sections, which 


include chapters on ornamental trees and shrubs 
under cultivation, and an account of the parasitic 
diseases to which cultivated plants and domestic- 
ated animals are subject. 

In this connexion, attention may be specially 
directed to the section which discusses liver-rot 
in sheep. The distribution of four species of the 
primary host, Lymnea, has been plotted during 
a period of ten years, and also the areas in which 
L. truncatula, the only important species economic- 
ally, does not occur. The conditions favourable 
and unfavourable to this species, and its methods 
of migration, have been investigated. Ecological 
research of this character has significant bearings 
on the incidence of an important epizootic disease. 
Similarly, the survey of the soils of the area, 
accompanied by soil maps, is a useful contribution 
to the solution of the problem of soil classification. 
The greater part of the history, however, is devoted 
to the fauna and flora of the district—the work of 
various specialists. Besides the usual lists of 
species, ecological and historical notes are included, 
which add considerably to the usefulness of the 
records. This section of the work is valuable as a 
first attempt to assemble in print the fauna and 
flora of the county, but an inspection of the lists 
suggests that considerable additions have still to 
be made to them. 

The volume is beautifully printed and illus- 
trated, and there is a good index. It is to be hoped 
that the reasonable price which the Committee has 
wisely decided to adopt will ensure a wide circula- 
tion forthe series. 

PAJAC: 


Another Dimension. in Films 


Colour Cinematography 

By Major Adrian Bernard Klein. Pp. xi +350 +29 
plates. (London: Chapman and Hall, Ltd., 1936.) 
25s. net. 


NO all books are written by experts, in the 

sense that their authors know not only 
their special corner of their field but also what 
everyone else has done in that field and over a 
historical period of time. The present author 
complies with this definition for he gives valuable 
data respecting the system of colour cinemato- 
graphy in which he is most interested, and also 


collects and criticizes the entire range of systems 
and processes tried and developed up to date. 
Major Klein is right in his contention that the 
release colour print must be used in standard 
projectors without any modification of the latter, 
beyond the obvious necessity of using specific 
carbons. It may never be assumed that the pro- 
jectionist will carry out arbitrary instructions, 
precisely and time without number; such pro- 
cedure will always break down and discredit the 
colour system. The remarkable freedom from 
breakdown in cinemas has been won by adhering 
to the limit of standardization. It follows that 


308 


additive systems of colour cinematography are 
thereby ruled out, likewise two-colour systems, 
since not all shades can be objectively realized 
with a primary omission. We are left with Techni- 
color, Kodachrome, and Gasparcolor, the second 
being in use for 16 mm. film only, but has pos- 
sibilities in simplifying the others for 35 mm. 
The history of colour films is remarkable for the 
millions of pounds which has been expended on 
development ; much of it, according to the 
author’s contention, uselessly because of disregard 
of fundamental engineering limitations. The 
exquisite Technicolor, with its elegant, though 
yet secret, methods of imbibition printing, is 
criticized for using a key print and so causing 
some desaturation. The author’s analysis of the 
complete problem, from the original lighting, 


NA VURE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


colour, design, emulsions, processing, to final 
projection and the reproducing light, is clear and 
balanced, while his knowledge of patents and other 
people’s work is impressive. 

As an extension from technicalities, the author 
has wisdom to offer film directors in their use of 
mobile colours in their work, and some pungent 
ideas in cutting down existing production expenses 
to balance the greatly increased cost of film, 
lighting and the colour experts which are to come. 
His esthetic pronouncements are derived from 
years of experience with colour-music, which did 
not fascinate the public. In the world of art, he 
suggests that Rembrandt was colour-blind and 
that the colour-film will be perfected when the 
colour is so natural as not to be noticed. 

L. E. C. H. 


Humanistic History 


A History of English Life, Political and Social 
By Amabel Williams-Ellis and F. J. Fisher. Pp. 
xvii + 120 + 132 + 163 + 160 + xviii + xxxii + 
5 plates. (London: Methuen and Co., Ltd., 1936.) 
8s. 6d. net. 


WE have so often in these pages deplored the 

absence of the scientific, popular and pro- 
gressive spirit in the presentation of history, 
especially for educational purposes, that we hasten 
to welcome a new and most successful effort in 
the right direction. The book by Mrs. Williams- 
Ellis and F. J. Fisher has everything to commend 
it. The publishers’ aċcount on its ‘jacket’ does not 
exaggerate in the least. Y 

The book is delightful and racily written; it 
gives the necessary outline of political develop- 
ment—all the kings and their dates are there— 
with a really good account of the progress of 
science and of the arts of living. It is most ad- 
mirably and suggestively illustrated by all sorts of 
coloured sketches and diagrams, as well as prints 
and photographs. But it has more than all this, 
and something of still greater moment. It is 
inspired throughout by an intense sympathy for 
the life of the common people—the poor who have 
been at all times in history the vast majority of 
the population. The authors constantly insist on 
this, but they do it in no sense of despondency 
or of a desire for violent revolt. They see quite 
truly that the lot of the masses, which must be 
the main criterion of human progress, has im- 
proved immeasurably in the time and country 
which they review, mainly through science. They 
estimate England kindly but not excessively, and 


introduce at every suitable place the European 
or world-connexions and contrasts. 

It is only practised writers who can do all this 
so deftly. Mrs. Williams-Ellis is a novelist, and 
the success of the present book is another proof of 
what has so often been proved before, namely, 
that the mere possession of a mass of knowledge 
is not in itself any guarantee of the power of 
presenting it effectively to others; and that for 
this particular purpose—and many others—a 
woman has special qualities not generally pos- 
sessed by men—sympathy, tact and a knack of 
story-telling which in this case is combined with 
a very unusual and truly philosophic grasp of the 
hang of all the parts of the great theme. The 
authors thus show government, industry, science 
and social life bound together as they really are, 
and they do not entirely neglect—though this is 
undoubtedly the minor interest—the arts of 
beautiful expression. It is not too much to say 
that the authors have done in this book for English 
history much the same service which Arabella 
Buckley did in the last generation for science, in 
her “Fairy Land of Science”. 

It would be an interesting task to pick out a 
few specimens of the happy sayings and picturesque 
figures with which the book is full. The changes 
which “Old Parr’ would have witnessed in his life 
of more than a hundred and fifty years are a good 
example. But we have only space to deal with the 
one overwhelming question which will face teachers 
and scholars who will turn over its pages with de- 
light. Will it enable the pupil to pass the School 
Certificate Examination ? The answer must be, 
“Probably not’. But could any interesting 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


all-round presentation of the subject, in reasonable 
compass, ever hope to make its way through that 
barbed-wire entanglement in which our education 
is now confined ? The final answer must be some 
drastic change in the system. 

Everyone should know the things which are 
here set out with so much charm, clarity of 
expression, humane tendency and fair balance of 
interest. That might well be required from all 


NATURE 


309 


completing a course of general education by the 
age of sixteen years. For the rest, encourage- 
ment should be given to scholars with special 
interest to pursue further the study of special 
branches of history. This is the sphere to which 
diplomatic relations, constitutional details, plans of 
campaign and colonization properly belong. There 
alsothe progress of science and of technicalinventions 
should find a leading place. F. S. Marvin. 


Absorption from the Intestine 


Absorption from the Intestine 

By Prof. F. Verzár, assisted by Dr. E. J. 
McDougall. (Monographs on Physiology.) Pp. 
xii +294 +12 plates. (London, New York and 
Toronto : Longmans, Green and Co., Ltd., 1936.) 
21s. net. 


oi elise Monographs on Physiology, published by 
Messrs. Longmans, Green and Co., Ltd., have 
performed a useful service in providing competent 
reviews of different aspects of a rapidly advancing 
subject. It is good to see that the series is to be 
continued under the editorship of Prof. Lovatt 
Evans, and it is hoped that these monographs will 
now appear more frequently. 

Prof. F. Verzir of Basle has made many 
important contributions, during the last ten years, 
to our knowledge of absorption from the intestine. 
He writes with the authority of experience on 
nearly all aspects of this subject, and his book is 
fascinating to read. The first five chapters are 
devoted to a general discussion of the anatomy of 
the intestine, methods of research, and the 
physical and chemical forces involved. The 
remaining seventeen chapters are each devoted to 
a discussion of the absorption of one class of 
substance. 

The author has tried to explain all the facts in 
terms of physico-chemical laws. In many cases 
he has been successful in finding plausible ex- 
planations ; and in all cases he has made it clear 
that there is no necessity at present to invoke 
vitalism. The water in the intestine is in free 
communication with the body water; if heavy 
water is placed in the intestine it becomes diluted, 
within an hour, by an amount corresponding with 
the total water content of the body. The mem- 
brane is also freely permeable to crystalloids. It 
is practically impermeable to colloids, although 
minute quantities of unsplit proteins, or even 
visible particles, may occasionally be absorbed, 
probably through an accidental fault in the mem- 
brane. Absorption is controlled by diffusion and 
osmosis, and in the large intestine the hydrostatic 


pressure may be such that filtration is also an 
effective factor. The pumping movements of the 
intestinal villi may help to mix the intestinal 
contents, but it is probable that their main 
function is to pump absorbed fat into the large 
lymphatic vessels. 

Hydrotropy plays an important part in the 
absorption of water-insoluble substances such as 
fat and calcium salts. This is defined as the pro- 
perty of some asymmetric, strongly surface-active, 
water-soluble organic substances of disintegrating 
water-insoluble substances to molecular complexes 
in which the hydrotropic molecules surround the 
insoluble molecule, and render it soluble and 
diffusible. Bile acids have this effect. 

The rapid absorption of substances, such as 
glucose, which are useful foodstuffs, compared 
with similar substances, such as xylose, which are 
not, has seemed in the past to suggest that the 
intestinal mucous membrane is endowed with 
intelligence, and has provided a prop for vitalism. 
When the cells are killed they lose their power of 
discrimination. Prof. Verzár attributes these 
observations to the fact that glucose is rapidly 
phosphorylated in the cells of the living mucous 
membrane, while xylose is not. The diffusion 
gradient is therefore greater in the case of glucose 
than in the case of xylose. When phosphorylation 
is inhibited by monoiodacetic acid, the cells lose 
their power of discrimination. Similar explanations 
can be applied to the absorption of fats and other 
substances. This work has led to interesting 
experiments with the suprarenal cortex, which is 
known to affect the phosphorylation of sugars. 
Adrenalectomy destroys the selective absorption 
of glucose and fats; the injection of eucortone 
restores it. These facts are easily explained on 
the theory discussed above. 

The theoretical and practical importance of this 
work is obvious. Prof. Verzar and Dr. McDougall 
have performed an important service to physiology 
in writing an authoritative account of work that 
is not so well known as it deserves to be. 


310 


Change of Life in Men and Women 
By Dr, Marie Carmichael Stopes. Pp. xv+282, 
(London : Putnam and Co., Ltd., 1936.) 6s. net. 


Tus book, like most others of the author, is popular 
in style and easy to understand, Moreover, it con- 
tains much common sense and a great deal of the 
advice given is thoroughly sound. For example, no 
physician would quarrel with the recommendation 
to avoid constipation. There are many other practical 
suggestions, and Dr. Stopes has done good service in 
directing attention to the help to be obtained from 
the work of the distinguished Spanish gynecologist, 
Prof. Gregorio Marañón. 

It is in dealing with the male climacteric that Dr. 
Stopes claims most originality, and though every 
medical man will agree with her as to the importance 
of studying this subject, serious doubts will be ex- 
pressed as to the value of some of her advice and the 
accuracy of some of her statements. It is surely an 
extreme view to hold that “in the general physiology 
of man the testicles share their pre-eminent place 
with the prostate gland”, and it is by no means 
certain that “the spermatozoa are stimulated to 
activity” by the alkalinity of the prostatic secretion. 
Again, it is doubtful what action the prostatic hor- 
mone possesses, or indeed whether there is a true 
hormone secreted by the prostate at all. Yet Dr. 
Stopes recommends the use of prostatic extracts to 
reduce the enlargement to which the prostate is 
subject. It is stated, further, that these and other 
extracts should be taken orally and not injected, the 
fact being ignored that most hormones (but not 
thyroid) are destroyed in the alimentary canal and 
never enter the circulation of the patient. In view 
of recent researches on the testicular hormones, it 
may confidently be predicted that in course of time, 
and probably in the near future, prostatic enlarge- 
ment will be successfully treated, but Dr. Stopes 
does not allude to testicular extracts; and in any 
event further experimental data are required before 
definite recommendations can be safely made in a 
book addressed to the general public. 


Isles of the Seven Seas 

By Collingwood Ingram. Pp. 283+31 plates. 
(London: Hutchinson and Co (Publishers), Ltd., 
1986.) 18s. net. 


Tue author is well known among horticulturists as 
an enthusiastic collector of cherries, and one who has 
also contributéd to our knowledge of the genus 
Gladiolus. Furthermore, all his life he has been an 
observer of birds. Equipped with the twin lore of 
botany and ornithology, he has travelled widely, 
collecting and noting. For the purpose of this book, 
he has made a selection from his copious material, 
confining himself to islands he has visited. We leap 
from Tahiti to Coll and back to Sumatra, to Corsica, 
New Zealand, Ushant, and not least to Little Tobago ; 
and if we have a feeling that Mr. Ingram is rather 


' self-consciously trying to avoid the too smooth day- 


to-day narrative of orthodox travel literature, the 
device has its charm. Wisely he rivets our interest 
at the start by taking us to the South Seas. 


NEAT URE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


Where the author has, if not quite beaten out the 
track himself, at least helped to widen it—and 
nowhere does he follow the crowd—he writes interest- 
ingly, and with real insight. His account of his 
father’s experiment in introducing a very rare bird 
of paradise from the Aru Islands into Little Tobago 
is fascinating. Occasionally he imports scientific 
words into narrative in a slightly pretentious way ; 
it would indeed be surprising if the moonlight even 
in Tahiti, where we expect everything to be glamorous, 
is really ‘glaucous’! Such mannerism is the only 
blemish in an otherwise pleasant style. 

The book is a record of personal impressions by a 
man of considerable feeling and knowledge, trained 
to observe accurately ; a scholarly but not technical 
book for the lover of Nature. 


Eisen- und Stahllegierungen: Patentsammlung 
Erginzungsheft 1. Von A, Griitzner. Zugleich 
Anhang zur Metallurgie des Eisens in ‘‘Gmelins 
Handbuch der anorganischen Chemie”, achte völlig. 
neu bearbeitete Auflage herausgegeben von der 
Deutschen Chemischen Gesellschaft. Pp. v+425. 
(Berlin: Verlag Chemie G.m.b.H., 1935.) 44 gold 
marks. 


THE publication in 1932 of a special volume contain- 
ing in tabular form a list of patent specifications 
relating to iron and steel has proved to be so useful 
to research workers engaged in this industry that it 
has been necessary to prepare supplements of this 
collection on similar lines. |The comprehensive 
nature of these tables, which cover the patent 
specifications of Germany, England, France, Austria, 
Switzerland and the United States, will be gathered 
from the fact that the present issue deals only with the 
interval between March 1932 and December 1934, 
and furthermore another special supplement to 
Part A of the volume on iron is being devoted to 
‘Mechanical Properties of Steels”, and will contain 
a complete bibliography extending over a very 
considerable period of time. 


Epitome de Culturologia 

Por el Dr. Imbelloni. (Humanior: Biblioteca del 
Americanista Moderno, Serie A, Tomo 1.) Pp. 320+ 
8 plates. (Buenos Aires: José Anesi, 1936.) n.p. 


Tue series, of which this is the first volume, might 
well be symbolized by an inverted cone. The volumes 
of which it will be composed are classified into sections, 
beginning with general surveys of the various 
branches of the study of man, and narrowing and 
intensifying with each successive section, until in 
the sixth and last, attention is focused on the cul- 
tural history and ethnology of Argentina. This con- 
ception of a gradual intensification of interest as a 
basis of regional study, if execution does not fall 
behind, is wholly admirable. Dr. Imbelloni has 
given the series a good send-off in his survey of the 
study of culture and the methods of investigation 
by cultural distributions, Several examples of the 
study of areas of cultural distribution in relation 
to specific cultural traits are given in appendixes, 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


NATURE 


311 


Geography and Economic Theory* 


By Sir Josiah Stamp, G.C.B., G.B.E., F.B.A. 


1| pieu who are interested in geography as a 
subject to be expounded educationally must 
welcome every approach to it which may add to 
its effective rationalization and bond it into the 
main structure of knowledge. This is not a mere 
teaching device, for it may make teaching more 
difficult, if it is to make it more effective. It 
makes teaching more difficult if we have to go 
beyond the immediate neighbour in causation, to 
reach basic causation and fundamental reasons. 
To explain a geographical condition by an economic 
condition is immediate, but not fundamental. 
Some theory of economic action is implied, though 
it may be conveniently left unexamined and un- 
expressed—taken for granted. All such single 
economico-geographic couplets of facts taken 
together must ultimately conform to some theoretic 
principle, and have some common thread. If they 
do not, then there is no uniformity of causation, 
and no economic, still less geographical science. 
An economic explanation of a geographic fact is 
then no ‘explanation’ at all. The kind of theory 
which geography may involve, or which may aid 
geographic understanding, and help to make 
geography, already culturally basic to so many 
mental disciplines, a fully rounded science, is 
therefore the subject of this address. 

Geography in recent decades has multiplied its 
descriptive classification or titles in a rather 
opportunist manner. No one bothers much about 
keeping or making the boundaries—they seem to 
be sufficiently well understood. Yet at the 
outset I find some uncertainty as to the true 
scope and purpose of ‘economic geography’. 
Economic history is certainly not the history of 
economics, but quite clearly the selection of those 
facts in history which are of economic importance, 
or which can be accounted for only by economic 
tendencies and principles. But I am not sure 
whether economic geography is confined to de- 
scribing the geographical aspects of physical and 
spatial facts which are of interest to the economist, 
providing him, so to speak, the bricks to build 
with, but quite indifferent to the use he makes 
of them. If so, how far does the economist really 
use them? To what extent in constructing an 
edifice of economic principle does he rely on 
geographical material ? To what extent does he 
overhaul and recast principles to cover the wealth 


_ * Abstract of the presidential address to the Geographical Associa- 
tion, delivered at the London School of Economics on January 6. 


of material, with differences and similarities, 
which the economic geographer continually pre- 
sents to him ? How far does he merely use this 
material by selection, to illustrate his point, or 
does he feel a responsibility for subsuming and 
accounting for the whole of it ? Is a geographical 
fact ever the awkward fact that kills the happy 
economic theory? But perhaps the economic 
geographer thinks it is his own task to account 
for facts, for the presence or absence of features, 
for similarities and differences, by applying 
economic principles and tests. Perhaps he learns 
what facts to register and elaborate, by economic 
theories and differentials. Or am I again an 
idealist ? What, in fact, is the functional relation- 
ship between the two disciplines ? Whose task 
is it to do the work of establishing causation, in 
either direction ? 

Economic geography must begin with physical 
environment, because these natural controls are 
dominant. So its first contributor is pure geo- 
graphy. But this is only the first of three classes. 
Variations of labour and capital are also important 
and these are covered by economic history and 
economics proper, not by geography. Thus com- 
plementary productions, in seasons or in female 
labour, are not factors derived from geography. 
The persistence of a factor through an early start 
comes from economic history. The data provided 
by Nature have to be handled by man, and there- 
fore human motives are involved ; so the balance 
of marginal cost to himself of the effort and of 
marginal utility to himself of the product, or its 
market equivalent, must be made. Utility and 
value and psychic considerations have entered. 

Geographers have been as active in adopting 
the term ‘economic’ without doing much distinctive 
with it, as economists have been inactive in using 
the term ‘geography’ for their basic data. In the 
composite volume, “The Trend of Economics”, 
Prof. Weld has a section on “Regional Comparison 
and Economic Progress”, in which he refers to 
the three trends now becoming clear: first, 
realistic studies as opposed to abstract analysis ; 
secondly, statistical presentation; and thirdly, 
regional comparison. In elaborating the last, he 
details Mill’s five canons of method applied to 
inter-regional data. “The economist of today finds 
himself face to face with the problem of the 
inequalities of standards of living in different 
regions. For example, India and China have not 


312 


participated in the economic progress which has 
become conspicuous in some of the Western 
countries. Many explanations have been offered 
for the economic backwardness of regions in Asia, 
Africa and South America. Which explanation 
is nearest the truth ? We do not know. It is time 
we were finding out. Scientific comparison seems 
the most obvious method. What is required is a 
thoroughgoing search for the causes of the differ- 
ences in the separate regions.” Surely this is 
economic geography in the truest sense, yet he 
never once uses the term ‘geography’. The word 
geography does not appear in the indexes to the 
first forty years of the Economic Journal. The 
“Encyclopedia Britannica”, 14th edition, has 
no mention of economic geography in its index. 
Palgrave’s ‘Dictionary of Political Economy” 
(1896) includes an article on “Commercial Geo- 
graphy”, which is for a large part economic history, 
but contains no reference to causal geography 
in the economic sense, except the conventional 
reference to England’s natural advantages. It is 
very much the same story when we look in geo- 
graphy literature for economic theory. The index 
to the Geographical Review over a long period of 
years contains scarcely any reference to economics 
in its analytical or theoretical sense. Probably 
the nearest that it gets to it is in an article by 
Chisholm on “World Unity”, where he postulates 
the tendency towards the equalization of economic 
development throughout the world in capital, in 
population density and in skill—an important 
economic generalization akin to the second law 
of thermodynamics and fraught with vital con- 
sequences in the field of foreign trade and also 
in the extent to which natural resources will be 
fully developed. But it is a generalization of his 
own which does not base itself on any recognized 
economic field. Modern works on realistic economics 
contain much geographical matter, and those on 
commercial geography, important summaries of 
economic factors. Thus a chapter in Seligman’s 
“Principles of Economics” and one in Dr. Dudley 
Stamp’s “Commercial Geography”, dealing with 
the localization of industry, might even be changed 
over, without doing any real violence to the balance 
or trend of either work. 

We may classify geographical explanations of 
economic facts, which are thus also quite often 
reversible as economic explanations of geographic 
facts, first as the simple static; second, as the 
simple dynamic ; third, as the inductive static and 
fourth, as the inductive dynamic; and fifth, 
beings the most rare, as theory inductive and 
illustrative. The first, the simple or direct static, 
is the type best known to us, filling our commercial 
geographies and our realistic economic text-books. 
Its method is to account for one fact or set of 


NAGURE 


FEBRUARY 20. 1937 


facts by another set, not indeed in a connexion 
obvious until it is pointed out, but when stated, 
requiring or securing no supporting argument, no 
discrimination. from other possible causes or 
connexions, and certainly involving no analytic 
and theoretic body of economic principles either 
to verify it or in itself to form an illustration. 
These often involve a certain element of history. 
In general, this class includes such statements as 
that a given port owes its prosperity to the fact 
that it lies on the trade routes between two 
wealthy or populous areas. “The completion of 
the Erie Canal in 1815 gave to New York, then 
a city of secondary importance, a position of 
undisputed pre-eminence” (Chisholm). 

The second, or simple dynamic, class accounts 
for a changing set of facts by another set changing 
with it. Accounting for an important part of the 
grain trade of St. Louis, Chisholm says: “Here 
reside the merchants who handle a large part of 
the grain grown in the region to the west, including 
eastern Kansas and Nebraska. The nearest ports 
for that grain are Galveston and Houston. If 
the railways to these ports become congested, and 
are consequently disposed to charge too high rates, 
the merchants can apply for rates by rail or river 
to New Orleans, by rail to Baltimore or some 
other eastern port, or partly by water by the 
route here spoken of to New York” (p. 631). This 
is economic geography, but not economic theory. 
To provide economics with a problem for analysis, 
details of the change in traffic passing in different 
directions at different levels of freight rates and 
their fluctuations would be necessary. Or perhaps 
lessons in equilibrium between two types of trans- 
port, with different ratios of working costs to total 
costs, might be obtained therefrom. Chisholm 
provides a factual dwelling, but the economist is 
not yet dwelling therein. 

The third, or inductive static class, draws 
lessons from a number of instances of the first 
class—for example, cases in which transport is 
involved. “With the increase of facilities and 
lowering of costs, geographical situation is yielding 
to the facts of artificially created location” (Selig- 
man, p. 45). Similarly, population densities pro- 
vide material for comparable generalizations. 

The fourth, or inductive dynamic class, draws 
lessons from a number of instances of changing 
facts in sets or pairs with their correlations. This 
obviously is getting nearer to help for economic 
theory than any of the foregoing. 

The fifth class goes further than the fourth if it 
brings the general principle that emerges into re- 
lation with analytic work, and perhaps produces 
generalizations which will ‘work’ as prophecies or 
further explanations. But I cannot find many clear 
examples in recent work. J. E. Orchard advanced 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


along this line when he claimed that the geographic 
study of minerals is certain to involve economic 
theory and to make contributions to it. He 
illustrated by a geographic explanation of the 
agitation for the nationalization of mineral re- 
sources. Pressure comes through a demand for 
higher wages or lower prices. The emergence of a 
period of abundance in particular countries has 
the basis of different economic conceptions of 
property rights, and the threat of future scarcity 
in particular places has a like differential in the 
property concept. The period of abundance lay 
behind the laissez faire theory, and the current 
concept of property right is differentially dis- 
tributed with scarce or abundant minerals. 

Now, in the present state of economic geography, 
it seems to me that most progress is naturally 
being made in the third class. The photographs, 
so to speak, being taken in the first class, are being 
brought together for induction under the third. 
But as time goes on, new photographs will be taken 
of the same physical locations under the first class, 
and the endeavour to relate the old and the new will 
call for measurement and explanation of the 
change, and bring them under the second class. 
The accumulation of instances under the second 
class will then provide masses of material for 
induction under the fourth class. Here economic 
theory fully emerges, but not before. The economic 
theory is not based on static conditions—it is 
essentially related to incremental changes of cause 
and effect, or related effects; and only as geo- 
graphy registers changes over time can it be of 
full advantage to economic theory. 

Turning to the geographical ideas of well-known 
economists, Adam Smith’s “Wealth of Nations” 
was not so much a piece of abstract reasoning, as a 
systematic induction from history and geography, 
in what was really a piece of political propaganda 
of high wisdom. It was a great protest against 
nationalism, and therefore it was cosmopolitanism. 
But no man can be a cosmopolitan without being 
a geographer. It has more geographical references 
in proportion to its bulk than any later important 
work. 

A famous example of the inductive method is 
John Stuart Mill’s discussion of peasant proprietors. 
He does not elaborate from first principles the 
economic results of the whole produce of land 
going to the owner worker without a tripartite 
division into rent, profits and wages, for he calls 
it one of the most disputed questions in the range 
of political economy. But instead he examines 
conditions in Ireland, Switzerland, Norway, the 
Palatinate, Saxony, Prussia, Holland, Flanders, 
Channel Islands, France and Lorraine, takes the 
common factors and then makes generalizations. 
He declares, first, there is no necessary connexion 


NATURE 


313 


between the form of landed property and an 
imperfect state of the arts of production ; secondly, 
that the most effective use of the soil is not 
endangered ; thirdly, that it is supreme in develop- 
ing industry, intelligence, and frugality; and 
last, that it raises the standard of life, and does 
not unduly increase the numbers of the population. 

We find no such rich geographic texture in the 
abstract reasoning of Ricardo, which was “‘un- 
favourable to any regional treatment”. The 
German historical school introduced again ideas 
of relativity in time and space, but as we get 
down to modern times the text-books of “principles” 
are rather bare of geographic illustration. Selig- 
man’s “Principles” is well based on such facts, but 
even so objective a writer as Taussig in his 
“Principles” provokes the criticism of a geographic 
reviewer that he has very little geography. The 
latest highly analytical works of Pigou and Keynes 
are nearly bare of geographic facts. 

Let us now lay out the field of economic theory 
on broad lines, and indicate in which quarters 
there lies most opportunity for geographic illus- 
tration or induction. It will be obvious at once 
that geography has no lot or part in-a considerable 
range of it. Material objects need to have an 
appeal to human psychology before they are 
wealth. At least one half of the theory of value 
is psychological. A good part of invested capital 
is not geographical. Political and social institu- 
tions are of this order and, therefore, in the fields 
where these matters predominate geographic 
generalization is at a minimum. Where, however, 
we come to land, we should expect to find that if 
the theory, for example, of no rent land, and 
marginal land of various types, has any validity, 
we ought to be able to see these things objectively, 
and it is in relation to land and minerals, that 
induction from geographic facts should be most 
productive of theory or illustrative of it. 

All questions of location and their effect upon 
production are capable of geographic illustration. 
Here is a generalization which is capable of 
economic analysis and certainly of illustration : 
“The geographic location of a manufacturing 
plant assumes an importance now that did not 
obtain when competition was less keen and almost 
any site would do. All the geographic factors 
have to be considered and a mistake in only one 
of them may offset good judgment in all the rest.” 
Again, the geographer finds various methods of 
land utilization and describes them. The economist 
asks the question, why and wherefore—the causes. 
He finds certain uses bring misfortune ; he seeks 
to impose conditions and so considers values. 

When we get to the theory of demand and value, 
geography is quiescent. It is not, however, out of 
the question to see some possibilities. Anyone 


314 


illustrating the principles of inelastic and elastic 
demand respectively, and taking salt and mar- 
garine as examples, might extend the study into the 
relative stability of employment in geographical 
areas supplying one as compared with those de- 
pendent on the other, to account for their differences. 
This would be an excellent geographic verification 
or illustration of the theory. The principle of 
substitution might well be illustrated by the rise to 
popularity of particular commodities supplanting 
others the costs of which had become dearer, 
relatively, if not absolutely. This change means a 
change in the economic statistics of geographical 
areas, which can be examined and stated. 
International trade proceeds on the theory of 
comparative costs (with certain important modi- 
fications) and it shows that it is quite possible for 
a to export to b commodities in which b has the 
greater natural advantage, provided that b’s 
natural advantages in another commodity are even 
greater. This ought to be susceptible of verifi- 
cation by reference to geographic facts. 
Geography has little concern with money, banks 
or the technique of trade, and productive methods, 
but I would not conclude that the economist can 
make no use of geography at all in these fields. 
Atkinson says: “But if the metric system gives 
Germany an advantage over Great Britain in 
South American markets, it becomes to that 
extent a factor in the Geographic division of 
labour—that is, it tends to locate the economic 
complement of the wheat fields, and cattle ranches 
of Argentina in Germany rather than England.” 
Then again, banking systems may affect geo- 
graphic facts: if the bank reserve system in 
America draws money from country to cities and 


Constitution 


By Jor. 


R behaviour of materials such as granite 
and basalt can be tested in the laboratory 
up to a pressure of 30,000 atmospheres, or, as 
engineers would say, about 200 tons to the square 
inch. This corresponds to a depth of 120 km. in 
the earth’s crust, but what are the conditions of 
matter at pressures of 10,000 tons to the square 
inch or thereabouts, which presumably must obtain 
near the centre of the earth ? Then with regard 
to temperature, we know that near the surface of 
the earth in Europe this increases generally with 
depth by about 30° C. per km. The rate of increase 

* Extract from the fe presentati address to the Royal Astronomical 


Society delivered on the presentation of the Gold Medal to Dr. Harold 
Jeffreys on February 1 


NATURE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


gives them a lower interest rate, then it becomes 
a factor in concentrating industries, and determin- 
ing the geographic division of labour. 

Technical production is not economic geography. 
But if the Bessemer process causes migration of 
the steel industry to areas where the ores are free 
from certain impurities, it is part of economic 
geography. 

A few years ago the American Economic 
Association had a round table discussion on the 
various relations between economics and geo- 
graphy. It covered the geographic basis of 
agricultural production, land economics, economic 
concept of property in minerals, the study of 
pioneer belts, and geography in foreign trade 
prospects. 

This probably expresses fairly the field of 
geography which actually lies within the field of 
economic theory, but the range of the latter is 
extensive and may—to reverse the metaphor— 
throw valuable side-lights at unexpected points of 
geography. But economics, though now highly 
specialized, is really one and indivisible. The 
geographer who aims at strengthening his grasp 
of causality, especially for expository purposes, by 
learning economics, would do well to cover the 
whole field first, in a preliminary way, and then 
specialize on the particular applications to which 
our analysis has led us. The economist who would 
keep his feet on the ground, even if his head is in 
the clouds, by realistic treatment, will get no such 
mitigations of his task from the geographer—like 
John Wesley, he will take the whole world for his 
parish. 


1 Proceedings of the American Economic Association, March, 1926, 
p. 112. 


omahe arth 
Reynolds 


differs considerably from one point of the earth’s 
surface to another. In North America it is three 
quarters of this amount, and in South Africa only 
about one half. In regions where volcanic activity 
has taken place in recent geological times, the 
rates of increase are abnormally high. In a boring 
almost a kilometre deep at Budapest a temperature 
of 69° C. was reached at the bottom. In Tuscany 
and other places in Italy a similar rate of increase 
has been found. If we take an average and extra- 
polate from this, we find that at a depth of some- 
thing like 50 km. we reach a temperature of 
1,400° C.,— enough to fuse all but the most re- 
fractory substances. 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


But is it safe to extrapolate, and would not the 
increase in pressure alter the fusing point and also 
the rigidity ? This undoubtedly takes place, for 
earthquake foci as deep down as 400-500 km. have 
been inferred from the various types of seismic 
waves and their times of travel to different stations. 
An earthquake focus at such a depth presupposes 
that the material there is strong enough to fracture, 
so we must assume that notwithstanding the prob- 
ability of a temperature certainly equal to, and 
probably much more than, the free fusing point, 
the material, whatever it is, has still considerable 
strength. 

Then we have the complication introduced by 
radioactivity. A certain proportion of the earth’s 
internal heat, at any rate in the outer crust, is 
due to the presence in igneous rocks of radioactive 
metals such as uranium and potassium. What 
proportion of the earth’s internal heat is due to 
this cause, and how much to primeval heat still 
remaining from the time when the whole earth 
was a molten globe ? 

The deductions which geophysicists can make 
as to the internal structure and composition of 
the earth, below such an insignificant fraction of 
the earth’s radius as a few kilometres, must there- 
fore be in the nature of extrapolations, and the 
validity of the conclusions reached depends entirely 
on the assumptions made as to the behaviour of 
various substances under conditions of heat and 
pressure which are for the most part far beyond 
the limit of verification in the laboratory. 

Notwithstanding these formidable difficulties, 
Dr. Harold Jeffreys has boldly grappled with the 
many problems involved, and has presented us 
with a conception of the earth’s interior which fits 
in remarkably well with the known data. He 
first of all postulates a shell which behaves 
mechanically as a solid, reaching down as far 
perhaps as 3,000 km. This shell is of a density 
which increases from the surface downwards, the 
surface density being about 2-7 and the lowest 
layer about 5. It is worth noting at this point that 
Jeffreys’ work is quite inconsistent with Wegener’s 
hypothesis of the continents floating on a viscous 
magma comparatively near the surface, and it is 
equally opposed to the tetrahedral theory of the 
formation of the continents. There is a dis- 
continuity between the central core and the shell 
in the way of transmitting earthquake waves, and 
as the core is apparently incapable of transmitting 
distortional waves at all, it is concluded that the 
central core is still in a molten condition. Its 
density is only consistent with the heavier metals, 
and iron is probably its principal constituent. 

From a detailed study of the times and rates 
of travel of the two main types of earthquake 
waves, the primary and the secondary, with their 


NATURE 


315 


associated surface waves, it is suggested that the . 
principal constituent of the earth’s solid shell is 
olivine, as this mineral is of about the right 
density required. But this does not extend to 
the surface, where there is a layer of granite under 
the accumulated sedimentary rocks of the con- 
tinents, and a layer of denser rocks, presumably 
basic, lies under the oceans. The granitic or 
continental layer is estimated to be about 10 km. 
thick, and two other layers of about the same 
thickness, but discontinuous in their density, may lie 
between it and the lower shell of olivine or its 
equivalent. 

Stoneley has also made an estimate of two 
discontinuous surface layers, and he finds a thick- 
ness of 12 km. for the granitic layer and 24 km. 
for the intermediate layer. There seems to be 
another discontinuity of density at something like 
400 km. down. 

In substances that contract on solidifying, the 
fusing point is raised by pressure, so that at great 
depths materials must be still solid at temperatures 
much higher than the fusing points at the surface. 
This rise in the melting point due to pressure at 
low pressures is about 3° per kilometre, at greater 
depths probably somewhat less than this. While 
the earth was molten, the temperature would 
increase downwards, but the fusing point would 
increase faster, and as the whole cooled at a 
uniform rate, so solidification must have taken 
place from the bottom upwards. If the core is 
of metals, which have a lower fusion temperature 
than the basic silicates of which the outer shell 
probably consists, then the core would remain 
liquid, while the outer shell, still liquid at the 
surface, would be solid at great depths. The core, 
therefore, got trapped under a layer of badly 
conducting silicates, and its temperature has not 
dropped greatly since it was originally formed. On 
this hypothesis the whole process of solidification 
did not take more than some tens of thousands 
of years. 

It is now established that the earth’s surface 
temperature is practically controlled by solar 
radiation alone, and it has been so during the 
greater part of geological time. If we find evidence 
of variation in surface temperatures in past 
geological epochs, we must attribute the variation 
either to changes in the sun’s radiation or to 
altered meteorological conditions. I find it difficult 
to imagine altered general meteorological conditions 
without a corresponding cause in solar radiation. 

The small amount of heat still leaving the earth 
by conduction from the interior is partly a relic 
of the primeval heat from great depths, and partly 
heat generated more recently by radioactivity. 
The radioactive metals, uranium, thorium and 
potassium are found in all surface rocks in minute 


316 


but measurable amounts. Granite contains a 
greater proportion of these radioactive metals than 
the basic rocks. In average granite the rate of 
generation of heat is found to be 1:3 x 10-7 
calories per cubic centimetre per second, while for 
basalt it is only 0-50 x 10-2 calories. Small as 
these amounts are, it is found that the total heat 
now being lost from the earth by conduction can 
be supplied by a layer of granite 20 km. thick over 
the whole surtace. This leaves nothing to be 
supplied from greater depths, and fixes an upper 
limit for the thickness of the granite layer. But 
it has been found from the study of near earth- 


Obituary 


Dr, F. S. Macaulay, F.R.S. 


RANCIS SOWERBY MACAULAY, who died at 
Cambridge on February 9, aged seventy-four 
years, was for many years mathematical master at St. 
Paul’s School and will be remembered by generations 
of pupils, not a few of whom became distinguished 
mathematicians ; he also produced original mathe- 
matical work of high quality, in a field little cultivated 
in England, the general theory of algebraic poly- 
nomials. 

Macaulay was the son of the Rev. Samuel Macaulay, 
and was born at Witney, Oxfordshire, on February 11, 
1862. From Kingswood School, Bath, he went up 
to St. John’s College, Cambridge, in 1879, and was 
bracketed eighth wrangler in Parts I and II of the 
Mathematical Tripos in June 1882, the first year of 
the divided tripos. In the January following he was 
placed in the third division of the new Part IIT, to 
which only wranglers were admitted. After two 
years at his old school, he was in 1885 appointed to 
a mastership at St. Paul’s, where he remained until 
his retirement in 1911. Before going to Cambridge 
he had passed the London Matriculation with 
honours ; he took the London B.Sc. in 1891, and 
the D.Sc. in 1897. He published, in 1895, a text-book 
on “Geometrical Conics’’. He was an active member 
of the Mathematical Association, being for many 
years an associate editor of the Mathematical Gazette. 
After the Great War he went to live in Cambridge, 
where, in 1923, he married Norah, widow of Mr. 
G. A. Matthew. 

Macaulay approached his algebraic research from 
the geometrical side, the theory of algebraic curves. 
His first paper, of fifty pages, published in the 
Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society (26 ; 
1895), is concerned with the number of conditions 
presented by a finite set of points in a plane, grouped 
in ‘clusters’ of any degree of complication, in the 
determination of algebraic curves of given order. 
This led on to an algebraic investigation of the inter- 
sections of curves at multiple points and to a thorough 
reinvestigation of the well-known theorem of Noether 


NATURE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


quakes and surface waves that the granitic layer 
is only 10 + 3km. thick There must be, therefore, as 
large a proportion of radioactive elements in the 
upper 10 km. as in all the rest of the solid shell 
beneath it. This leads to the conclusion that radio- 
activity decreases rapidly with depth, and further 
that the radioactive metals became concentrated 
in the surface rocks in the early history of the earth. 
In any event, volcanoes and subterranean igneous 
phenomena such as intruded masses of granite and 
basalt must have some source of heat not a great 
distance down to explain them, and radioactivity 
in the earth’s crust does this. 


Notices 


on the form of the equation of a curve which passes 
through the intersections of two curves, with the 
generalizations of Lasker. So his interest was aroused 
in the general theory of modular systems, that is, 
of polynomials, in any number of variables, expressible 
in the form A,F, +... + A,F,, there the F’s are given 
polynomials and the A’s are arbitrary polynomials. 
A series of papers in the Proceedings of the London 
Mathematical Society, the Transactions of the American 
Mathematical Society, and the Mathematische Annalen 
was followed in 1916 by his Cambridge Tract, “The 
Algebraic Theory of Modular Systems”, in which he 
gave an account of the whole subject, filling in many 
gaps in the proofs of his predecessors, and adding 
considerably to the theory. 

Macaulay’s work attracted more attention in 
Germany than in Great Britain, and it was not 
until 1928 that its first-rate quality was recognized 
by his election to the Royal Society. In his later 
years, in Cambridge, he lived a retired life, and 
was not often seen in College or in society, but 
he always showed a keen interest in the work of the 
younger mathematicians on the algebraical and 
geometrical side, and was a frequent and welcome 
visitor at seminars in these subjects. 


We regret to announce the following deaths : 


Dr. Frederick V. Coville, botanist of the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, known for his work on 
the relation of plant growth to soil conditions, on 
January 9, aged sixty-nine years. 

Sir Reginald Craddock, member of Parliament for 
the Combined English Universities since 1931, on 
February 10, aged seventy-two years. 

Dr. Alfred Daniell, author of the well-known ‘“‘Text- 
book of the Principles of Physics”, on January 12, 
aged eighty-three years. 

Prof. Max C. W. Weber, For. Mem. R.S., formerly 
professor of zoology and comparative anatomy in the 
University of Amsterdam, on February 7, aged 
eighty-four years. 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


NATURE 


317 


News and Views 


British Industries Fair 


THE 1937 British Industries Fair opened in London 
and Birmingham on February 15 and will remain 
open until February 26. The organizers tell us, as 
they have been able to tell us each successive year 
for many years past, that it is the biggest and most 
impressive fair that has yet taken place. There is 
no reason to doubt the claim; the record area 
occupied by the exhibitors’ stands last year has been 
exceeded by more than 10,000 square feet. No 
doubt, over and above the increased number of 
exhibits due to the natural growth of industry and 
to the recent improvement in trade generally, the 
fact that this is Coronation year has had a consider- 
able influence upon the record figures. There are 
more than 1,500 exhibitors detailed in the catalogue, 
of whom the largest number (78) are from London 
and the two smallest groups are from Glasgow (12) 
and from Edinburgh (7). No less than sixty countries 
are represented by their trade buyers. Holland 
heads the list, and other countries well represented 
are Germany, Belgium, France, Denmark, the 
United States, Sweden and Poland. Italy also is 
well represented, but Spain, which last year sent a 
strong contingent of buyers, is this year a notable 
absentee, for reasons which will be obvious. As 
before, the hardware and heavy industries section of 
the fair is held at Castle Bromwich, Birmingham. 


OLYMPIA accommodates exhibits of what may 
perhaps be called the lighter industries, such as 
chemicals, glassware, leather, scientific instruments, 
foodstuffs, paper, toys and games, and musical 
instruments. The textile, furniture and allied indus- 
tries have their exhibits at the White City. It should 
be noted that only goods manufactured or produced 
within the British Empire are permitted to be dis- 
played, and no exhibitor may exhibit articles other 
than those of his own manufacture. We hope to 
publish in our next issue an article directing attention 
to the prominent features of the exhibits that can 
be regarded as being predominantly scientific. 
Meanwhile, it is of interest to note that the printers 
of NATURE, Messrs. Fisher, Knight and Co., Ltd., 
have installed at Olympia a complete printing works 
demonstrating block-making, type setting, machining 
and binding, and volumes of NATURE are being 
exhibited. 


New Equipment for the Royal Air Force 


THE publicity recently given in Parliament to the 
delay in the aircraft building programme scarcely 
gave due importance to one of its fundamental 
causes. This expansion in quantity required comes at 
a time when a radical change is taking place in air- 
craft constructional methods, made necessary by 
recent research having caused aerodynamic design to 


demand a somewhat different exterior form. A con- 
tinued increase in engine-power available, added to 
improvements in design reducing resistance and 
giving greater speed ranges, have enabled the speed 
of flight to increase so that up to 300 miles per hour 
can be contemplated for certain types of aircraft 
which constitute the quite normal equipment of the 
R.A.F. At such speeds as this, the air friction at the 
surfaces of the various component parts of the 
machine becomes a much greater proportion of the 
total resistance than at the lower speeds used hitherto. 
It now becomes vital to have both correct aero- 
dynamic shape and smooth surfaces if reasonable 
efficiency is to be attained. In the past, most aircraft 
has consisted of girder frameworks taking the loads, 
covered by linen fabric the function of which was to 
give an airtight surface to react to the air pressure. 
It is not possible to avoid this cover sagging between 
its points of support to a certain extent, thus spoiling 
the correct aerodynamic form. Also the method of 
attachment, usually sewing, set up excrescences on 
the surface the roughness of which was appreciable. 
Thin metal sheeting, with flush riveting, is the 
obvious improvement upon this, but its weight is 
intolerable unless it can be made to take some of the 
induced loads, and allow the interior structure to 
be correspondingly lighter. 


Tue development of this conception has led to the 
use of ‘stressed skin’ construction in modern machines, 
in which both the wings, control surfaces, and the 
body are formed of strong and hard sheet metal, 
withstanding the majority of, and in some cases all, 
the loading. Although the theory of the design of 
such structures is now becoming fairly well known, 
the workshop practice of building them in quantities 
is by no means well advanced. The adoption of 
these new designs has necessitated the development 
of new workshop technique and the design and pro- 
duction of new tools and equipment, which has 
obviously been especially difficult for those firms 
that are still working on the older type of construc- 
tion, which is by no means obsolete or even incorrect 
for certain types of slower-speed machines. It is 
probably not unfair to say that the speed-up in 
aircraft production that has taken place in some 
countries during the last few years began too soon, 
and has resulted in a large equipment of machines 
that are already obsolescent. 


Dr. Thomas Midgley 


Tue Perkin Medal of the American Section of the 
Society of Chemical Industry has this year been 
awarded to Dr. Thomas Midgley, who has achieved 
world-wide fame for his discovery of tetra-ethyl lead 
as an anti-knock agent. This, it should be emphasized, 
was no chance discovery but the result of systematic 


318 


trial following a study of the periodic system, the final 
finding that the lead derivative would solve the 
problem being predicted beforehand. To-day ‘ethyl’ 
is added to seventy per cent of all the petrol used in 
America, and the increased horse-power thereby 
generated amounts to a very large figure. In a char- 
acteristic address given at the time of receiving the 
medal, Dr. Midgley told the story of his more recent 
discovery of a compound of carbon, chlorine and 
fluorine, CHCI,F, to be used as a refrigerant, which 
is non-toxic and non-inflammable. Apparently he 
was told of the need for a new refrigerant over the 
telephone, and with the aid of two colleagues, the 
use of a chemical library and some deductions from 
the periodic table, arrived at the probability that the 
above fluorine compound might prove non-toxic and 
suitable. Small quantities were prepared from various 
samples of available starting material. The first 
batch was pure and proved non-toxic ; in the others 
the raw material proved to be contaminated and gave 
toxic products, which, however, could be purified 
when this fact was realized, and became non-toxic. 
Three days’ work sufficed to solve the problem and 
to give the refrigerating industry a new material 
which is expected will prove of outstanding importance 
in its development. 


Gottfried Treviranus (1776-1837) 


QOTTFRIED REINHOLD TREVIRANUS, the eminent 
physiologist, the centenary of whose death occurred 
on February 16, was born at Bremen on February 4, 
1776. He studied medicine at Göttingen, and while 
an undergraduate wrote an essay on nerve power 
and its method of action. He qualified in 1796 with 
a Latin thesis on the reform of physiology, and 
settled in his native town where he was made pro- 
fessor of mathematics and medicine in 1797. The 
rest of his life was divided between the practice of 
medicine and scientific research, though the latter 
claimed most of his attention. His medical publica- 
tions were of little significance, being chiefly concerned 
with the prevention of salivation in the mercurial 
treatment of syphilis and animal magnetism in 
Bremen. On the other hand, his biological work was 
of considerable importance, his principal publications 
of this kind being entitled ‘“‘Biology or the Philosophy 
of Living for Natural Philosophers and Doctors” 
(6 vols., 1802-22) and “Manifestations and Laws of 
Organic Life” (2 vols., 1831-33). In addition to 
physiological research, he devoted special attention 
to microscopical anatomy of invertebrate animals, 
especially molluscs and insects. In collaboration 
with his brother, Ludwig Christian Treviranus, a well- 
known botanist and medical man of Bonn (1779-1804), 
he published four volumes of miscellaneous work on 
anatomical and physiological subjects (1816-20). 


Auroral Display and Radio Disturbance 


THE probable occurrence of an aurora on January 7, 
twenty-seven days earlier than the notable display 
on February 3, as recorded in last week’s issue of 
NATURE (p. 277), is confirmed by Mr. W. N. Craig, 
of The Manse, Fortrose, Ross-shire. On January 7, 


NATURE 


> 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


between 1634 and 19% U.T., Mr. Craig, who was 
listening on the 14 Mc. amateur band, found that 
reception from long-distance stations in South Africa 
and on the west coast of America, which was good 
at first, suddenly deteriorated at 182 40™ so as to 
render the signals practically unintelligible by “a 
very rapid flutter”. At 192 30m, Mr. Craig, on 
looking outside, found that a conspicuous auroral 
display was in progress. An arch extending from 
north-east through north to west was beginning to 
break up into a series of streamers, and at 19b 45m, 
after an apparent increase in auroral activity, a 
corona formed for a few minutes a little to the north- 
west of the zenith. The display then decreased 
rapidly, but was partially renewed as a quiescent 
arch extending from east-north-east to west-north- 
west from 222 until after 234, As mentioned in 
the previous note, the magnetic traces on January 7 
recorded at the Greenwich magnetic station at 
Abinger show distinctive movements between 192 
and 20 U.T. The extreme ranges, occurring at 
about 192 32m, indicate a local increase in the 
intensity of the earth’s magnetic field of about 130 y 
accompanied by an easterly swing in declination of 
about 20’. 


Science and Building Exhibition 


THE Science and Building Exhibition which is to 
be held on March 1-25 at the Building Centre, 158 
New Bond Street, London, W.1, is being arranged 
at the invitation of the Building Centre, by the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
The object of the Exhibition is to illustrate the work 
being carried out by the various organizations con- 
trolled by the Department, or associated with it, of 
interest to the building industry. The exhibit 
provided by the Building Research Station will deal 
with such subjects as concrete, plastering materials, 
fire resistance, bituminous materials and building 
units for walls and roofs, an exhibit by the Fuel 
Research Station illustrates work on domestic 
heating. The Forest Products Research Laboratory 
is dealing with wood preservation, dry rot, resistance 
of timber to abrasion, timber seasoning and insect 
damage. Interesting exhibits are being shown by 
the National Physical Laboratory on illumination in 
buildings, acoustics and engineering investigations 
such as wind pressure on structures and mechanical 
tests on structural steels, etc. The exhibit by the 
Water Pollution Research Board and the Depart- 
ment’s Chemical Research Laboratory deals with 
water softening, the removal of dissolved salts from 
water and contamination of water by lead. British 
marbles will be dealt with in an exhibit provided by 
the Geological Survey of Great Britain. The Indus- 
trial Research Council of the British Iron and Steel 
Federation will show models of steel-frame buildings 
intended for working-class flats, and the applications 
of foamed slag as an aggregate for lightweight con- 
erete. An exhibit by the Non-Ferrous Metals Re- 
search Association deals with galvanizing and zine 
coatings, and recent investigations on the frost- 
bursting of water pipes. The Cast Iron Research 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


Association, the Paint Research Association and the 
Rubber Research Association will also be represented. 
Lectures have also been arranged to take place at 
8 p.m. on March 3, 10, 17 and 24. 


Palzobiology and Biostratigraphy 

Dr. H. Œ. Scuenck has published an exhaustive 
monograph of “‘Nuculid Bivalves of the genus Acila” 
(Geological Society of America, Special Papers No. 4 ; 
1936). A critical descriptive catalogue of the twenty- 
five known species and varieties is arranged in the 
order of their age, from Cretaceous to Recent, and 
is illustrated by eighteen admirable plates which give 
a complete iconography of the genus. The systematic 
part of the work is preceded by the morphology of 
the shell and by an account of the anatomy, habits 
and habitats of the living animal. The terms ‘paleo- 
biology’ and ‘biostratigraphy’ are used hopefully, but 
no radically new methods are apparent to correspond 
with them. Ever since paleontology has been 
rationally studied, its best workers have used the 
anatomy, the habits and habitats of living creatures 
to explain the debris of their precursors. The method 
requires caution, for some animal genera have 
changed their mode of life. The marine mollusc 
Pholadomya, for example, is now abyssal ; in Jurassic 
times it lived in shallow water and, so late as the 
Eocene, it is found in sediments which give no indica- 
tion of very deep seas. Dr. Schenck was led to this 
study by the problems of the Oligocene in the 
United States Pacific coastal areas. His results help 
to solve these problems, not by any a priori palæo- 
biology, but by the accurate delimitation of fossil 
species and by showing that they are associated with 
distinct faunas in a sequence of strata. This is not 
a new method, but it is the only sound one, for all 
our knowledge of the succession of forms of life is from 
stratigraphy, which, somewhere or other, must be 
based upon visible superposition. Terms like ‘zone’, 
‘age’, ‘epoch’ are discussed, Palzeontologists did not 
invent these words, which are still current in ordinary 
speech, so that we can doubt the wisdom of restricting 
their meaning, for their common, vague sense is sure 
to lodge in runaway minds and cause confusion. 


Investigation into Brood Diseases of Bees 


In May 1934, an investigation into the brood 
diseases of bees was commenced at Rothamsted 
Experimental Station, the British Bee-Keepers’ 
Association undertaking to supply half the annual 
cost of the work (£250 per annum) and the Agri- 
cultural Research Council the remainder. As a result, 
Dr. H. L. A. Tarr was appointed, and has worked 
continuously on the problem since that time. He 
has confirmed the fact that American foul brood is 
caused by a spore-forming organism, Bacillus larve, 
and that its incidence is independent of the strength 
of the bee colony. European foul brood, on the 
other hand, is a disease which usually affects weak 
colonies of bees early in the brood-rearing season, 
and is probably caused by Bacillus pluton, a curious 
organism which has so far resisted all attempts made 


NATURE 


319 


to cultivate it, in association with other organisms. 
He has also shown that a third condition known as 
addled brood is very, prevalent in Great Britain, and 
has constituted almost one third of the cases of 
brood disease sent in for examination. The Bee 
Research Committee at Rothamsted and the British 
Bee-Keepers’ Association are unanimously of the 
opinion that the investigation should be continued, 
particularly in connexion with methods of treatment, 
but the latter have asked that Rothamsted should 
collect the contributions directly. The Agricultural 
Research Council has sanctioned an increased grant 
of £300 for the current year on condition that a sum 
of not less than £250 is collected from other sources. 
In the circumstances, Rothamsted Experimental 
Station is making an appeal for contributions from 
interested individuals in order that this important 
investigation may be continued. 


Sperm Whale at the Natural History Museum 


THE skeleton of the sperm whale stranded at 
Bridlington on January 25 has now reached the 
British Museum (Natural History). The animal from 
which the skeleton was taken was a male 59 feet in 
length. In the sperm whale, the male is fully grown at 
about 65 feet, whereas females have not been recorded 
exceeding 40 feet in length. The sperm whale or 
cachalot belongs to the division of the Cetacea known 
as toothed whales or Odontoceti. The Bridlington 
animal had thirty pairs of teeth in the lower jaw 
(all unfortunately removed by souvenir hunters) and 
three small tooth vestiges on one side of the upper 
jaw. The whole skeleton weighed between four and 
five tons, of which weight the skull accounted for 
more than three tons. The sperm whale is not a 
common animal in British waters, only about six 
strandings having occurred in the last twenty-five 
years. It prefers the warmer tropical and sub- 
tropical seas. Sperm whales stranded on British 
shores are almost invariably large old males, and it 
has been suggested that they are animals which have 
been driven out from the main herd by younger and 
more vigorous bulls. The present stranding is there- 
fore rather remarkable. The Museum is informed 
by coastguards of all Cetacea stranded on the British 
coasts, and specimens are obtained whenever desirable 
and practicable. On an average, there are about 
sixty such strandings in the year, Stranded whales, 
being ‘‘Fishes Royal,” are the property of the Crown, 
and are handed over to the Museum by the authorities 
concerned. 


Botany in China 


In a paper presented at the annual conference of 
the International Faculty of Sciences, held in London 
on January 29-30, Prof. H. H. Hu described the 
progress of botanical sciences in China. Botany in 
China is a very modern study, having a history of 
only a quarter of a century, though, of course, the 
medicinal study of herbs in ancient China is well 
known. At present, taxonomy takes pride of place, 
which is natural in a country so rich in botanical 


320 


resources. During the past fifteen years, six institutes 
have been established which are carrying out im- 
portant exploration work; and this has resulted in 
a rich harvest, including many rare specimens. Prof. 
Hu himself is attached to the Fan Memorial Institute 
of Biology which was established in 1928, and is 
wholly devoted to the taxonomic study of the flora 
and fauna of China. The botanical section carries 
out exploration in Yunnan, during which many new 
genera have been discovered. Monographie studies 
of ferns and flowering plant families are also being 
made, which are published in the bulletins of the 
Institute. In connexion with systematic botany in 
China, three botanic gardens have been established. 
The other branches of botany are still at the pioneer 
stage. Valuable work is being done on freshwater 
and marine alge, mycology and morphology. We 
would, however, like to see further recruits to the 
small band of Chinese botanists studying plant 
physiology, ecology and genetics, in order that the 
whole subject may become more balanced, since all 
the subdivisions of the science are so interrelated 
that satisfactory progress in the whole is not easy 
without equal progress in each part. 


Plastics for Use in Electrical Engineering 


In a recent paper (J. Inst. Elec. Eng., Oct.), A. R. 
Dunton gives an account of recent advances in the 
technique of producing plastics. This word is now 
used for describing ‘moulded compounds’ which 
produce intricately shaped articles in a suitably con- 
structed mould under the influence of heat and 
pressure. The accuracy obtainable by this method 
has aroused great interest in both mechanical and 
electrical engineers. There are many fabricated 
articles still being sold which could be replaced 
conveniently and economically by suitable mouldings. 
In Germany, many plastics are employed, and the 
technical specifications made ensure that they are suit- 
able for the purpose for which they are to be used. 
The articles supplied are stamped with an identifica- 
tion mark and the maker’s number. The national 
laboratory in Berlin has the right to take samples 
at any time without warning, and if the test results 
are not satisfactory, the maker’s name is deleted 
from the approved list published periodically by the 
laboratory. The British Standard Specification was 
published by the B.S.I. in 1933; but unfortunately 
it makes no attempt to define the characteristics of 
are-resisting or high-temperature materials. The 
performance of nearly all plastics is coupled in practice 
with high temperatures. A method of making rapid 
tests advocated by Prof. Marten of Berlin is described. 
It determines without difficulty the softening point 
of plastics. In a paper in the same issue by A. Caress, 
an attempt is made to classify typical plastics into 
those for ‘hot service’ and those for use at moderate 
temperatures. The author says that if the electrical 
industry will specify clearly what it requires, the 
plastics industry will rapidly develop suitable 
materials. He states that there is a very large 
range of new plastic materials to be discovered and 
examined. 


NATURE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


Sterilized Catgut for Surgical Use 


In a Circular (No. 1563. Price ld. net) and accom- 
panying Memorandum (Memo. 199. Med. Price 2d. 
net. London: H.M. Stationery Office) issued to 
county, and county borough, councils, the Minister 
of Health directs attention to the responsibility and 
risk attached to the use of imperfectly sterilized, or 
unsterile, catgut for surgical purposes. Several 
groups of cases of tetanus infection have recently 
occurred following surgical operations in which catgut 
had been employed, in some of which the infection 
was definitely traced to the catgut. Under the 
Therapeutic Substances Act, 1925, and Regulations, 
1931, the manufacture for sale and the importation 
of sterilized surgical ligatures and sutures is pro- 
hibited except under licence from the Minister of 
Health, and the granting of such licence is conditional 
upon routine testing of samples of the product for 
sterility, and upon control and inspection of the 
process of manufacture. When ‘sterilized surgical 
catgut’ is employed, the patient may be regarded as 
adequately safeguarded from tetanus infection, but 
in many hospitals ‘raw’ unsterile catgut is bought 
for use. Such catgut is not controlled under the 
Therapeutic Substances Act, and is ‘sterilized’ in the 
hospital itself by a process which may or may not 
be satisfactory. The Memorandum describes the 
method of preparation and of sterilization of catgut. 
Respecting the sterilization process, heat is some- 
times employed, but needs great care, and an aqueous 
solution of iodine, with or without preliminary treat- 
ment with hydrogen peroxide, is efficient and widely 
used. Most other sterilizing agents are inefficient, or 
damage the gut. 


Yale University Publications in Anthropology 


Tue second issue of collected papers in anthropology, 
published by Yale University (London: Oxford 
University Press. lls. 6d. net) under the editorship 
of Dr. E. Sapir and Dr. Leslie Spier, contains six 
papers, of which five deal with various aspects of 
the ethnography of North America. Students of 
primitive music will welcome an attempt to produce 
order in a subject to which no little attention has 
been given in the field, but to which comparative 
study has still to be applied systematically. This isa 
regional survey of the music and musical instruments 
of the indigenous inhabitants of North America by 
Helen H. Roberts. A contribution by Mr. William 
Morgan on “Human Wolves among the Navahos” 
will be found of considerable interest to students of 
European witchcraft and demonology. Not only do 
the Navaho beliefs relating to the werwolf bear a 
strong resemblance to certain of the European 
beliefs, but also the all-pervasive Navaho belief in 
witchcraft suggests something of the atmosphere in 
which the European witchcraft superstition and 
consequent persecutions became rife. Mr. George P. 
Murdock studies “Rank and Potlatch among the 
Haida”, providing something of a rational setting 
for a custom which, as usually described, is beyond 
the range of normal reasoning, and thereby affording 
a valuable object lesson for the student of social 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


anthropology. In this connexion, however, Prof. 
R. C. Thurnwald’s account of the profane literature 
of Buin, Solomon Islands, is even a more valuable 
pointer towards a method of gauging social values, 
while affording an index of change under contact 
with external influences. The songs which he collected, 
at first in 1908-9 and then in 1934, deal with topics 
of everyday life, and by their difference in manner 
and matter show unconsciously but infallibly how 
times have changed. 


Sodium Lamps for Lighting Tennis Courts 


For the lighting of tennis courts it is essential 
that there should be complete freedom from glare 
and that the light should have a high speed of dis- 
crimination. In Philips Technical Review (Eindhoven) 
of August last, it is pointed out that both these 
requirements are exceptionally well fulfilled by a 
lighting system employing sodium lamps. Although 
no satisfactory method has yet been found for making 
quantitative measurements of the disturbing effect 
produced with different types of light, experience has 
shown that the presence of a source of light in the 
field of vision is less disturbing with sodium lamps 
than with other lamp sources of equivalent total 
candle power. This is due to the comparatively low 
luminous intensity of sodium lamps, Several experi- 
menters have also proved that the speed of dis- 
criminating objects is quicker with sodium light than 
with other types of light. The illumination of tennis 
courts is particularly important in regions with a 
tropical climate where the heat renders play during 
the day impossible, and where during the evening, 
when the atmosphere is cooler, darkness sets in very 
quickly. Three open-air tennis courts in the Nether- 
lands East Indies were recently equipped with sodium 
lamps. Good results have been obtained with an 
arrangement of eight 150 watt sodium lamps arranged 
in two rows, containing four each, on the sides of 
the court and situated 20 feet above the ground. 


Phenology of 1935 


Tue Phenological Report for 1935 by I. D. 
Margary (Quart. J. Met. Soc., 62, No. 265) covers 
the period December 1934—November 1935 inclusive. 
That period was of unusual interest on account of 
two spells of exceptional weather—the very wet 
December of 1934, and the bitterly cold period of 
May 1935 when a strong flow of air from polar regions 
brought severe frosts and snowstorms down even to 
the coastal regions of the south of England. The early 
months of 1935 were, on the whole, mild, with the 
result that in most counties flowers appeared early. 
The wintry weather in May therefore caused damage 
to plants and trees on a scale that luckily can probably 
be seen only once or twice in an average lifetime. 
Insects reacted eccentrically to this topsy-turvy 
weather that preceded the setting in of true summer 
weather, and showed very variable dates for their 
first appearance. Migrant birds behaved likewise ; 
the species that normally arrive early were in the 
south mostly much in advance of their average first 
appearance ; those that usually arrive late, for 


NATURE 


321 


example, the garden warbler and the spotted fly- 
catcher, were nearly all abnormally late. The spotted 
flycatcher was, however, exceptionally early in 
reaching the northern parts of Scotland and Ireland. 


Soviet Arctic Exploration 


In continuance of its plans of Arctic exploration, 
the Soviet Government, according to the Soviet 
Union Year Book Press Service, is planning to 
dispatch ninety-five Arctic expeditions this year. 
Besides new geological prospecting work, topo- 
graphical surveys in high latitudes will be combined 
with hydrographical work in the Kara and Laptev 
Seas. The northern rivers will also be studied with 
the view of improving transport. Research is also 
in hand on the problem of the northward extension 
of agriculture. Last year’s work led to the discovery 
of coal deposits in the Chukchee peninsula, and these 
are now being worked. 


New Coastline of Antarctica 


Tue Norwegian expedition to the Antarctic under 
Mr. L. Christensen which aims at mapping from the 
air the partially known coast-line of Antarctica 
between long. 100° W. and 10° E. is reported by 
The Times to have discovered one of the missing 
stretches of the coast. Mr. Wideroe, flying from the 
Thorshavn, found land between Queen Maud Land 
to the east and Princess Ragnhild Land to the west 
in about lat. 69° 30’S. and long. 38° E. Even more 
interesting than this completion of the coast-line 
south of the Indian Ocean was the discovery by 
another flight of a mountain range extending west- 
ward for at least two hundred miles from lat. 71° 30’ 
S. and long. 26° E., with peaks rising to 6,000 ft. and 
10,000 ft. This range would appear to lie in Princess 
Ragnhild Land and to extend into the new land. 
Farther east, it may be remembered that in 1930 
Sir Douglas Mawson found mountain ranges in the 
interior of Enderby Land. In all probability, these 
ranges will prove to be fault ranges along the edge 
of the plateau of the eastern Antarctic. 


Presentation to Dr. E. J. Butler, F.R.S. 


For many years, mycologists throughout the world 
have reaped the benefits of the great work carried 
out by Dr. E. J. Butler, the first director of the 
Imperial Mycological Institute, Kew. Following 
upon his resignation, workers in all parts of Australia 
contributed to a presentation fund organized by Dr. 
W. L. Waterhouse of the University of Sydney. 
Acting on their behalf, the High Commissioner for 
the Commonwealth in London, Mr. S. M. Bruce, 
kindly consented to make the presentation, which 
took place at the Institute on February 8 in the 
presence of the members of the staff, most of whom 
had been with Dr. Butler throughout his term of 
office. One of the gifts was an inscribed table clock 
made of Australian woods. 


Biological Equipment 

Messrs. GRIFFIN AND Tarrock, Lrp., Kemble 
Street, Kingsway, London, W.C.2, have issued a 
catalogue, No. 30 K, of biological and general 


322 


apparatus and laboratory equipment for bacteriology, 
pathology, public health, chemistry and cognate 
sciences. In addition to laboratory fittings, and the 
ordinary chemical and physical glass-ware and 
apparatus and reagents, microscopes by various 
makers, microtomes, incubators, and blood and milk 
testing instruments are included. An extensive 
series of anatomical diagrams and models, osteo- 
logical preparations, and mounted microscopic ob- 
jects are also listed. Practically all laboratory 
requirements appear in this catalogue, which is well 
produced and illustrated, and strongly bound. 


Sir Warren Fisher, Permanent Secretary of H.M. 
Treasury since 1919; Prof. R. H. Fowler, Plummer 
professor of applied mathematics in the University 
of Cambridge since 1932; Dr. W. B. Yeats, author 
of poetic and dramatic works, have been elected 
members of the Atheneum under the provisions of 
Rule II of the Club, which empowers the annual 
election by the Committee of a certain number of 
persons of distinguished eminence in science, litera- 
ture, the arts, or for public service. 


THE Council of the Institute of Metals has elected 
Dr. Harold Moore and Mr. W. Murray Morrison to 
the short list of fellows of the Institute, limited in 
number to twelve, who have “rendered eminent ser- 
vice to the Institute”. Dr. Moore is a past-president of 
the Institute and director of the British Non-Ferrous 
Metals Research Association. Mr. W. Murray 
Morrison is an original member of the Institute, 
having assisted in its formation in 1908. He is vice- 
chairman and managing director of the British 
Aluminium Company, Ltd. 


Ar the annual general meeting of the Royal 
Astronomical Society, held on February 12, the 
following officers were elected: President, Dr. H. 
Spencer Jones; Vice-Presidents, Sir Frank Dyson, 
Prof. E. A. Milne, Prof. H. C. Plummer, and Prof. 
W. M. Smart; Treasurer, J. H. Reynolds ; 
Secretaries, W. M. H. Greaves, and Prof. H. H. 
Plaskett ; Foreign Secretary, Sir Arthur Eddington. 


Pror. E. J. SALISBURY will deliver the Masters 
Memorial Lectures of the Royal Horticultural Society 
in the lecture room of the Society’s New Hall in 
Greycoat Street, Westminster, on March 9 and 
March 23 at 3.30 p.m. The subject of the lectures 
will be “The Plant and its Water Supply”. 


Mr. L. B. Tanstry has been appointed assistant 
director of the Testing House and Laboratory of the 
Manchester Chamber of Commerce, Royal Exchange, 
Manchester. At present, Mr. Tansley is assistant to 
the Director of the British Cotton Industry Research 
Association. 


THE second Conference on Industrial Physics 
arranged by the Institute of Physics will be held in 
Birmingham on March 18-20. The subject of the 
Conference will be “Optical Devices in Research and 


NAT URE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


Industry”. The president of the Institute, Prof. A. 
Fowler, will deliver his presidential address, entitled 
“Spectroscopy in Industry”, on March 18. Further 
information can be obtained from the Secretary, 
Institute of Physics, 1 Lowther Gardens, Exhibition 
Road, South Kensington, 8.W.7. 


Ivy order to encourage original medical research, 
the Grocers’ Company offers three scholarships, each 
of £300 a year, with an allowance to meet the cost 
of apparatus, tenable for one year but renewable for 
a second or third year. The next election will take 
place in May. Applications must be made before the 
end of April to the Clerk, Grocers’ Hall, E.C.2, from 
whom further information can be obtained. 


To commemorate the services of the late Sir 
Grafton Elliot Smith to University College, London, 
and to the advancement of anatomical and anthro- 
pological teaching and research, it is proposed that a 
bust of him should be modelled in bronze by Mr. 
A. H. Gerrard of the Slade School, and placed in 
the Thane Library of the College. Contributions 
towards the cost of the bust, made payable to “The 
Elliot Smith Memorial Fund’’, should be sent to 
Prof. J. P. Hill, University College, Gower Street, 
London, W.C.1. 


Tue Silver Jubilee Commemoration (1934) award 
of five guineas is granted annually by the Illuminating 
Engineering Society, which is open to members of 
the Society less than twenty-six years of age. The 
award may be made (1) for a suitable paper dealing 
with illuminating engineering, (2) the design or con- 
struction of a novel instrument or appliance for use 
in researches on illumination, or (3) the carrying 
out of any investigation beneficial to illuminating 
engineering. Further information can be obtained 
from the Secretary, Illuminating Engineering Society, 
32 Victoria Street, London, 8.W.1. 


PROF. GEORGES BOULIGAND, professor of differential 
and integral calculus in the University of Poitiers, 
has been elected correspondant of the Section of 
Mechanics of the Paris Academy of Sciences in 
succession to the late Dr. Joseph Auclair: 


Pror. Hans Mo.iscu, vice-president of the Vienna 
Academy of Sciences, Dr. Julius Wagner-Jauregg, 
emeritus professor of psychiatry at Vienna, Dr. 
Hans Horst Meyer, emeritus professor of pharmaco- 
logy at Vienna, Dr. Otto Loisi, professor of pharmaco- 
logy at Graz, and Dr. Victor Hess, professor of 
experimental physics at Innsbriick, have been 
awarded the Austrian insignia for science and art: 


A PHARMACOLOGICAL department is being organized 
in the Gorky Institute of Experimental Medicine at 
Moscow under the direction of Prof. Nikolayev to 
study the reactions of various medicines on the sick 
and healthy. Special attention will be paid to the 
effectiveness of traditional home remedies of various 
nationalities and of Eastern medicines in particular. 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


NATURE 


323 


Letters to the Editor 


The Editor does not hold himself responsible for opinions expressed by his correspondents. 
He cannot undertake to return, or to correspond with the writers of, rejected manuscripts 
intended for this or any other part of NaturE. No notice is taken of anonymous communications. 


NOTES ON POINTS IN SOME OF THIS WEEK’S LETTERS APPEAR ON P. 332. 
CORRESPONDENTS ARE INVITED TO ATTACH SIMILAR SUMMARIES TO THEIR COMMUNICATIONS. 


The Cosmological Constants 


Tur fundamental constants of physics, such as c 
the velocity of light,  Planck’s constant, e the charge 
and m mass of the electron, and so on, provide for 
us a set of absolute units for measurement of distance, 
time, mass, ete. There are, however, more of these 
constants than are necessary for this purpose, with 
the result that certain dimensionless numbers can be 
constructed from them. The significance of these 
numbers has excited much interest in recent times, 
and Eddington has set up a theory for calculating 
each of them purely deductively. Eddington’s 
arguments are not always rigorous, and, while they 
give one the feeling that they are probably sub- 
stantially correct in the case of the smaller numbers 
(the reciprocal fine-structure constant he/e* and the 
ratio of the mass of the proton to that of the electron), 
the larger numbers, namely the ratio of the electric 
to the gravitational force between electron and 
proton, which is about 10%, and the ratio of the mass 
of the universe to the mass of the proton, which is 
about 1078, are so enormous as to make one think 
that some entirely different type of explanation is 
needed for them. 

According to current cosmological theories, the 
universe had a beginning about 210° years ago, 
when all the spiral nebulæ were shot out from a 
small region of space, or perhaps from a point. If 
we express this time, 2 x 10° years, in units provided 
by the atomic constants, say the unit e?/mc*, we 
obtain a number about 10%. This suggests that the 
above-mentioned large numbers are to be regarded, 
not as constants, but as simple functions of our 
present epoch, expressed in atomic units. We may 
take it as a general principle that all large numbers 
of the order 10%, 1078... turning up in general 
physical theory are, apart from simple numerical 
coefficients, just equal to ¢, t?..., where ¢ is the 
present epoch expressed in atomic units. The simple 
numerical coefficients occurring here should be 
determinable theoretically when we have a compre- 
hensive theory of cosmology and atomicity. In this 
way we avoid the need of a theory to determine 
numbers of the order 10%, 

Let us examine some of the elementary conse- 
quences of our general principle. In the first place, 
we see that the number of protons and neutrons in 
the universe must be increasing proportionally to ¢*. 
Present-day physics, both theoretically and experi- 
mentally, provides no evidence in favour of such an 
increase, but is much too imperfect to be able to 
assert that such an increase cannot occur, as it is so 
small; so there is no need to condemn our theory 
on this account. Whether the increase is a general 
property of matter or occurs only in the interior of 
stars is a subject for future speculation. 

A second consequence of our principle is that, if 
we adopt a scheme of units determined by atomic 


constants, the gravitational ‘constant’ must decrease 
with time, proportionally to #1. Let us define the 
gravitational power of a piece of matter to be its 
mass multiplied by the gravitational constant. We 
then have that the gravitational power of the universe, 
and presumably of each spiral nebula, is increasing 
proportionally to t. This is to some extent equivalent 
to Milne’s cosmology!, in which the mass remains 
constant and the gravitational constant increases 
proportionally to t. Following Milne, we may intro- 
duce a new time variable, t=log t, and arrange for 
the laws of mechanics to take their usual form 
referred to this new time. 

To understand the present theory from the point 
of view of general relativity, we must suppose the 
element of distance defined by ds*=g,,da,dxy in 
the Riemannian geometry to be, not the same as 
the element of distance in terms of atomic units, but 
to differ from this by a certain factor. (The former 
corresponds to Milne’s dt and the latter to Milne’s 
dt.) This factor must be a scalar function of position, 
and its gradient must determine the direction of 
average motion of the matter at any point. 

P. A. M. Drac. 

St. John’s College, 

Cambridge. 
Feb. 5. 


1 Milne, Proc. Roy. Soc., A, 158, 324 (1937). 


Gamma Rays excited by Capture of Neutrons 


Lea’s observations and Fermi’s pioneer work has 
shown that many elements may capture a neutron, 
and emit gamma rays in the process. This phe- 
nomenon has been further investigated especially by 
Rasetti!, and more recently by Kikuchi? and Fleisch- 
mann’, who used polonium-beryllium, deuteron- 
deuterium and radon-beryllium sources respectively. 

We have used radon-beryllium sources, with an 
experimental arrangement designed to reduce the 
high background effects of the Geiger counter due to 
the gamma rays emitted by this type of neutron 
source, and also to concentrate slow neutrons on the 
counter. As indicated in the diagram (Fig. 1), a 
cylindrical block of lead 18 em. in diameter and 
44 cm. in length is sunk into a thick-walled paraffin 
wax tube closed at the bottom. The radon-beryllium 
neutron source is placed on the axis of the lead block 
at a distance of 29 cm. from the top. The neutrons 
emitted are slowed down by the paraffin wax, diffuse 
through the lead core, and slow neutrons emerge at 
the top of the lead block. The efficiency of this 
arrangement is based on the fact that the mean free 
path for. scattering of slow neutrons is much larger 
in lead than in paraffin. Gamma ray effects were 
measured by a thin-walled magnesium counter 
covered by a thick-walled lead tube and placed in 


324 


the neutron stream; beta rays and secondary 
electrons were measured with the same counter 
uncovered. 

The capture radiation from a thick sheet of cad- 
mium (0-4 gm./em.?) placed below the counter pro- 
duced 1,700 impulses per minute above the back- 
ground; the background amounted to 440 impulses 
per minute with a radon-beryllium source of about 
500 me. The capture radiation of cadmium (and 
other strongly absorbing elements) is thus a sensitive, 
and in many respects a very convenient, indicator 
for slow neutron intensities in our arrangement. 


Fig. 1. 
A, PARAFFIN WAX TUBE >; 


B, LEAD CORE; C, RADON- 

BERYLLIUM SOURCE; D AND 

E, BORON SCREENS; F, 

GEIGER-MULLER COUNTER ; 

1, 2, 3, 4, POSITIONS OF THE 
SAMPLES. 


We have used it as an indicator to determine the 
absorption of slow neutrons in a number of elements. 
A sample of the element was placed below the 
counter, a sheet of cadmium inserted between this 
sample and the counter, and the gamma ray effect 
measured. This, compared with the gamma ray 
effects obtained in the absence of the cadmium, and 
in the absence of the sample, gives the absorption of 
the sample. The results are shown in Table 1. Our 
values are not corrected for a slight divergence of the 
neutron stream, which may account for the fact that 
most of them are slightly above those of Dunning 
and Pegram‘, who used the disintegration of lithium 
as an indicator. 


TABLE 1. 

Per cent Cross-section 

Element | Compound | gm./em.* transmitted | (x 10-*4 em.*) 
Cl CCl, 1:30 34 52 
Co C020; 2:87 44 39 
Rh Rh 0-68 51L 170 
Ag Ag 1:07 56 97 
Cd Cd 0-0285 50 4,500 
Ir Ir 0-61 46 410 
Au Au 3-14 37 103 
Hg HgO 0-70 50 355 


Further, we have compared the gamma ray effect 
per captured neutron as measured by the counter for a 
number of strong absorbers of slow neutrons, and the 


NVA TUSRAE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


results are given in Table 2. The value for cadmium 
is arbitrarily fixed at 100. 


TABLE 2. 
Cl Co Rh Ag Cd In Sm Gd Ir Au Hg 
9 86 82 75 100 94 94 94 74 80 105 


The same samples of elements were used to measure both the 
absorption cross-section and the gamma ray effect, and the values 
given in column four of Table 1 were then used to compute the relative 
gamma ray effect per captured neutron. The value for indium includes 
gamma rays from the induced activity of the 54-minute period. 
Otherwise the figures include only gamma rays from induced activities 
of periods shorter than half-hour; longer periods were not appre- 
ciably excited in our experiments. 


The eleven elements investigated give almost equal 
effects although their atomic weights range from 35 
to 200. 

A similar comparison of the gamma rays emitted 
by elements which are weak absorbers of slow neutrons 
would, in our opinion, require better data on the 
elastic scattering of such elements than is at present 
available. So far, with no element heavier than 
chlorine have we found evidence to show that the 
gamma ray effect is appreciably different from 
‘normal’, 

About equal effects might be expected if each 
element emitted one gamma ray quantum per cap- 
tured neutron, but other observations do not support 
this simple interpretation of our result, since they 
seem to indicate that a larger number of quanta are 
emitted from the investigated elements. 

We obtained some indication of this number by 
comparing the number of fast electrons ejected back- 
wards from lead by the gamma rays from cadmium 
which were excited by a slow neutron beam, with the 
number of beta rays from a very thin silver foil made 
radioactive by the same neutron beam, Half-value 
thicknesses in lead were determined for the electrons 
from lead and for the gamma rays from cadmium. 
The values obtained indicate that more than seven 
quanta are emitted from cadmium per captured 
neutron, but this result requires confirmation by an 
independent method which is now being attempted. 

The fact that chlorine shows a ‘normal’ gamma ray 
value indicates that its intense neutron. absorption is 
due to radiative capture that leads to a chlorine 
isotope of long half-life period which has not yet been 
detected. Samples of yttrium prepared free from 
gadolinium by Dr. J. K. Marsh, Old Chemistry 
Laboratory, Oxford, showed only very weak capture 
radiation and, in agreement with a measurement of 
Hevesy®, a small absorbing cross-section. Thus the 
widespread view®, based on earlier measurements, that 
yttrium has a large capture cross-section for slow 
neutrons and therefore must transform into an 
undetected radioactive isotope, does not seem to be 
justified. Barium also shows a much smaller capture 
cross-section (<10 x 10-*4 em.*) than given by earlier 
measurements’. In agreement with Kikuchi’, we 
find that boron shows a gamma ray effect of about 
a twentieth of that of cadmium. 

J. H. E. GRIFFITHS. 


Clarendon Laboratory, Leo SZILARD. 


University Museum, 
Oxford. 
Jan. 20. 


1 Rasetti, Z. Phys., 97, C4 (1935). 

2 Kikuchi, Husimi and Aoki, Proc. Phys.-Math. Soc. Japan, 18, 
188 (1936). : 

3 Fleischmann, Z. Phys., 100, 307 (1936). 

‘Dunning, Pegram, Fink and Mitchell, Phys. Rev., 48, 265 (1935), 

5 Hevesy and Levi, NATURE, 187, 185 (1926). 

® Cf. Feather, “Nuclear Physics’, p. 183 (1936). 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


Resonance Levels of Neutrons in Silver Nuclei 


THE resonance absorption of neutrons by silver 
nuclei has been studied with a photo-neutron source 
by Kurtschatow and Schepkin' and by us’. Con- 
tinuing this work, we have now estimated the 
total width of the resonance levels effective for 
neutron capture which have their energy values lying 
in the continuous spectrum of the neutrons scattered 
in a thin paraffin layer. Using the formula of Breit 
and Wigner? for the capture cross-section as a function 
of energy, and making some simplifying assumptions, 
we can evaluate the average spacing between adjacent 
levels in the energy region concerned, by giving a 
plausible value to the width of a single level. 

In our experiment, the neutron source consists of 
50 mgm. of radium surrounded with 12 gm. of 
beryllium powder. It gives 1-0 x 10‘ neutrons per 
second, as deduced from the work of Chadwick and 
Goldhaber*. In order to produce a continuous 
spectrum of neutrons, the source is surrounded with 
a spherical paraffin shell of 0-5 em. thickness. Two 
silver detectors of 0+4 mm. thickness are used. Each 
is screened with cadmium, and subtends a solid angle 
0-71 at the source during exposure. According to 
a formula of Wigner®, the neutron-proton scattering 
cross-section is 11 x 10-?4 cm.? for neutrons of 
2 x 105 volts. The total number of scattered neutrons 
received by the detectors is then 450 per second. 
By means of a Geiger-Miiller counter, the number 
of B-rays emerging from the surfaces of the silver 
detectors in the saturation state is found to be 1-4 per 
second for the activity of half-period 22 sec. We had 
measured also the apparent absorption coefficient of 
the resonance neutrons in a thin silver absorber of 
0:020 gm./em.? and get the value 12-5 x 10-** em.? 
per silver nucleus. For the absorption coefficient of 
the 8-rays emitted from silver, we find 10 x 10-** em.? 
per silver atom. 

Let us assume that the photo-neutrons consist of 
one homogeneous group of energy Hy = 2 x 10° e.v.; 
let n, be the density of the effective resonance levels 
per volt and 2T be their half-value width, assumed 
to be equal for all levels. Then it can be shown by 
a calculation which will appear elsewhere that the 
total half-value width summed over the effective 
resonance levels from zero to 2 x 105 e.v. can be 
evaluated from our experimental results. 
2Tn,H, = 520 e.v. If I be given the value 0-1-1-0 
volt®, the average spacing between adjacent effective 
resonance levels is then of the order 80-800 volts. 
This result is in good accord with a recent theoretical 
estimate given by Bethe’, namely, of the order 
50-500 volts. It is also in conformity with the 
frequency of occurrence of the resonance groups in 
the low energy region. 

Details of this work will be published in the 
Chinese Journal of Physics. 

C. Y. CHAO: 
Ce, But 
Physics Department, 
Tsing Hua University, 
Peiping. 
Nov. 30. 


1 Kurtschatow and Schepkin, Phys. Z. Sowjet., 9, 102 (1936). 

* Chao and Fu, Tsing Hua Science Rep., A, 8, 451 (1936). 

* Breit and Wigner, Phys. Rev., 49, 519 (1936). 

* Chadwick and Goldhaber, Proc. Roy. Soc., A, 151, 479 (1935). 
5 See Bethe and Bacher, Rev. Mod. Phys., 8, 117 (1936). 


ë Frish and Placzek, NATURE, 187, 357 (1936); Preiswerk and 
Halban, NATURE, 188, 163 (1936). 


7 Bethe, Phys. Rev., 50, 332 (1936). 


NATURE 


We find . 


325 


A New Phenomenon in the Supraconducting 
Transition of Tantalum and of Tin 


Tue transition from the supraconducting to the 
normal resisting state under certain conditions is 
found not to be continuous but to include a hitherto 
unsuspected spontaneous increase in resistance 
followed by a slower decrease. The spontaneous 
decrease in resistance usually proceeds for several 
minutes in a succession of steps, until only a fraction 
of its crest value remains. This crest value of the 
transient resistance is sometimes 75 per cent of the 
normal. After such an effect has occurred, it will 
not occur again when the same conditions are re- 
established, unless in the meantime the temperature 
has been lowered or else a time interval of at least 
half an hour has elapsed. 

These spontaneous changes in resistance can be 
initiated by a step upward in temperature, in current 
or in magnetic field, and proceed thereafter as 
described above while all three external conditions 
are maintained constant. The combination of tem- 
perature, field and current at which this phenomenon 
appears has been studied and the progress of the 
resistance change under various conditions noted. 
The effect is pronounced only when the current is 
relatively large (about 2 amperes in the tin wire, 
diameter 0-022 cm.). i 

A more complete report of this work will appear 
in the March issue of the Journal of Research of the 
National Bureau of Standards. 

F. B. SILSBEE. 
R. B. Scorr. 
F. G. BRICKWEDDE, 
National Bureau of Standards, 
Washington, D.C. z 
Jan. 8. 


Influence of Magnetic Fields on Persistent Currents 
in Supraconducting Single Crystals of Tin 


Up to the present, the determination of the effect 
of a magnetic field in restoring the resistance in a 
metal conductor which is in the supraconducting 
state has depended on the direct measurement of the 
resistance of the conductor, and consequently it has 
been difficult to find the exact point at which the 
first traces of resistance return. 

In the McLennan Laboratory at Toronto there 
have been in use supraconducting galvanometers! by 
means of which it is possible to measure directly, 
under various conditions, the value of the persistent 
current in a completely supraconducting circuit. 
With such an instrument, it is easy to find the mag- 
netic field under which resistance begins to appear, 
for the smallest resistance causes rapid cessation of 
the persistent current. These measurements have 
been carried out for a cylindrical single crystal of 
tin, in both transverse and longitudinal external 
fields, at a temperature of 3-22° K. (0:5° below the 
normal transition point). 

According to the theory of von Laue?, F. London?, 
and R. Peierls‘, the penetration of a transverse 
magnetic field into a cylindrical supraconductor 
should commence when the external field has reached 
one half of the critical field strength, He, and the 
body should then pass into the so-called ‘intermediate 
state’, and show resistance. In a longitudinal field, 
the resistance should return abruptly when the 
external field is equal to He. 

In Fig. 1 the observed persistent current is plotted 
against the external magnetic field, in Curve I for 


326 


transverse fields, and in Curve II for longitudinal 
fields. With a transverse magnetic field, no per- 
sistent current flows in a field greater than 41 gauss, 
while with a longitudinal field the limiting value is 
71 gauss. The ratio of the transverse to the longi- 
tudinal field for the first appearance of resistance is 
therefore 0:58 instead of 1/2. This result agrees 
with the work of de Haas, Voogt and Jonker®, who 
also found this ratio to be 0-58 in the case of direct 
resistance measurements. Along the descending 


I- Transverse 
I- Lowertupinat 
3.22° K. 


Persistent Currents (Amperes) 


32 48 64 
MAGNETIC FIELD STRENGTHS (cavss) 
Fig. 1. 


portion AB of Curve I, the persistent current de- 
creases as the external field is increased, in such a way 


that the relation 3 + H; = He is obeyed, where 


m. 
0-5 
H; = = is the fieldat the surface of the wire due to 


the current itself. 
Complete results will be published shortly. 
E. F. BURTON. 
K. ©. Mann. 
McLennan Laboratory, 
University of Toronto. 
Jan. 7. 


1 Smi Grayson, and Tarr, F. G. Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., 
(3), 29, re Hi (1935). Smith, H. Grayson, Aa K. C., and Wilhelm, 
J. O., Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., 30, Sec. III (1936). 

2 Laue, M. von, Phys. Z., 33, 793 (1932). 

3 London, F., Physica, 3, No. 6 (June 1936). 

4 Peierls, R., Proc. Roy. Soc., A, 155, 886 (1936). 

5de Haas, W. J., Voogt, J., and Jonker, J. M., Leiden Comm., 
229c (1934). 


The Sterckfontein Ape 

THE letter from Dr. E. Schwarz which appeared 
in Nature of December 5 shows, I think, the 
necessity for some hesitation before coming to any 
definite conclusion as to the affinities of Australo- 
pithecus. r. Schwarz considers it “very probable 
that Australopithecus was a pigmy gorilla” ; and he 
has compared it with the dwarf chimpanzee of the 
Congo (Pan satyrus panicus). It is unnecessary at 
this stage to criticize in detail Dr. Schwarz’s views, 
but the fact that other prominent anatomists have 
come to quite different opinions shows that we are 
not yet able finally to place it. 

Dr. Adloff, who has made a special study of the 
dentition of Australopithecus, says, “Das Gebiss von 
Australopithecus ist aber rein menschlich und lässt 
den Schluss zu, dass Australopithecus kein Anthro- 


NA TU RE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


poide, sondern ein Hominide ist”. Dr. Gregory, of 
New York, who is probably the greatest living 
authority on mammalian teeth, has pointed out that 
of twenty-six dental characters in Australopithecus, 
not one is nearer to the chimpanzee, two are nearer 
to the gorilla, one is nearer to the chimpanzee and 
gorilla, three are common to the chimpanzee, gorilla 
and primitive man, and twenty are transitional to 
or nearer to primitive man; and he adds: “if 
Australopithecus is not literally a missing link between 
the older dryopithecoid group and primitive man, 
what conceivable combination of ape and human 
characters would ever be admitted as such ?”? Romer, 
of Harvard, the eminent American paleontologist 
who made a careful study of the Taungs ape in 1929, 
while not definitely deciding as to the affinities, says 
it is “clearly not a chimpanzee or a gorilla”. 

All this seems to show that Australopithecus is a 
form of considerable interest whose affinities are 
difficult to determine ; but I think it likely that the 
whole question will be quite definitely settled within 
two years. In the meantime, I may mention that 
the brain of the Sterckfontein ape was considerably 
smaller than was at first believed. The contact of 
the occipital fragment has been found, and the 
restored brain appears to have been only about 
435 c.c. It is thus an ape fairly comparable in size 
with the chimpanzee, but with teeth which in my 
opinion resemble those of man much more than they 
do those of any of the living anthropoids, 

R. Broom. 

Transvaal Museum, 

Pretoria. Jan. 18. 


Vitamin P 

WE reported in our previous notes! on the vitamin 
nature of phenyl-benzo-y-pyrone dyes, and have 
described a method for the experimental demonstra- 
tion of this activity. Using this method, we tested 
the following substances for their vitamin activity : 
hesperiding (m.p. 261°), an impure sample of 
demethylo-hesperidine (mother liquor of ‘citrin’) and 
quercitrine, 1 mgm. being given daily. 

The experiment consisted of seven groups of 
20 guinea pigs each. One of these groups received 
the basal diet only. The other groups received in 
addition: hesperidine, demethylo-hesperidine, quer- 
citrine, ascorbic acid (2 mgm.), ascorbic acid plus 
hesperidine, ascorbic acid plus demethylo-hesperidine, 

All three groups receiving ascorbic acid equally 
showed normal growth. The animals receiving 
hesperidine, or demethylo-hesperidine only, behaved 
in the same way as the animals of our previous 
experiments receiving ‘citrin’. The animals receiving 
the basal diet only or this diet and quercitrine 
showed severe scurvy and died after a sharp fall in 
weight on about the twenty-eighth day. 

These results admit of the following conclusions : 
experimental scurvy, as commonly known, is the 
symptom of a mixed C and P avitaminosis. Pure C 
avitaminosis can be observed, if in addition to the 
basal diet vitamin P is administered. The pure P 
avitaminosis has no clinical symptoms. If, however, 
vitamins C and P are simultaneously withheld, the lack 
of P will greatly modify the pathological condition, 

There is a great difference in the activity of different 
phenyl-benzo-y-pyrones. Since the only essential 
difference in the formula of quercitrine and hesperi- 
dine is found on the C? and C? atoms, it can be con- 
cluded that these atoms are of special importance 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


for the activity. Changing the flavanone hesperidine 
into the corresponding flavonole entails inactivation. 
The therapeutic effects observed after the adminis- 
tration of ‘citrin’ in man in septic conditions, also 
accompanied by polyarthritis and endocarditis, 
suggest that the age-old beneficial effect of fruit juice 
is partly due to its vitamin P content. 
This research is being sponsored by the Josiah 
Macy Jr. Foundation, New York. 
A. BENTHSÁTH. 
Sr. RUSZNYÁK. 
A. SZENT-GYÖRGYI. 
Institute for Medical Chemistry 
and Medical Clinic, 
Szeged. Dec. 23. 


1 NATURE, 188, 798 (Nov. 7, 1936). 


Plant Collecting on the Pribilof and 
Aleutian Islands, 1936 

Tue Aleutian Islands stretch from the tip of the 
Kenai Peninsula of Alaska for 1,200 miles westwards 
to Kamchatka. 
islands and hundreds of smaller ones, and owing to 
their inaccessibility have been very little explored 
botanically. 

The Swedish botanist of Kamchatka, Dr. Erik 
Hulten, of the University of Lund, made important 
observations on the Aleutian isles in 1932. I visited 
them last summer, through the courtesy of the United 
States Government (to which they belong), and was 
also allowed to spend some days and make a botanical 
collection for the British Museum (Natural History) 
on the prohibited fur-seal islands of the Pribilofs, 
about 150 miles north of the Aleutians. 

Unalaska village, near Dutch Harbour, was my 
base for botanical work in the Aleutians. I reached 
it from Seward, in Alaska, in mid-July by a small 
monthly steamer, the Starr. Owing to delay en route 
I was able to spend some time collecting at Seward, 
and two weeks on the very interesting and fertile 
island of Kodiak, off the Kenai Peninsula. During 
the eruption of Katmai in 1913, the north-east 
portion of Kodiak lay for long under a thick covering 
of ash which killed all vegetation for a year or two. 

At Unalaska I collected during part of July and 
early August, and made a collection of about 318 
specimens. The island is very fertile, vegetation 
growing up to the summits of many of the mountains 
of several thousand feet, but owing to the dense 
vegetation and entire lack of roads it is very difficult 
in summer to get far afield, as there is no means of 
transport. Finding the further islands quite in- 
accessible without the aid of the United States coast- 
guard vessels (which were in 1936 the only ones calling 
there once or occasionally twice in the season), I 
applied to the Department of the Interior at Wash- 
ington, and was granted permission to make the last 
trip of the season, in August (unfortunately late for 
botanical work) so far west as Attu, the last of the 
islands, on the United States Coastguard Cutter 
Chelan, which was doing hydrographic survey work 
in these uncharted waters. Unfortunately, landings 
were usually brief, but on Attu (where a precarious 
landing of a few hours was all that was possible 
owing to bad weather conditions) I was granted the 
help of two sailors of the Chelan in collecting the 
plants, and obtained some seventy specimens, 
including a few Asiatic species not gathered on the 
other islands. Landings of two days were made at 


NATURE 


They comprise some fifteen larger ` 


327 


Kiska (where some fifty to sixty species were gathered), 
an interesting volcanic island, now a prohibited 
shore to aliens as it is a U.S. naval reserve, and at 
Amchitka and Atka. 

In all, some 2,000 specimens were gathered on the 
Kenai Peninsula and the Aleutians, including about 
160 species from the Pribilof Islands. Many thanks 
are due to the personnel of the U.S.S. Chelan and 
the coastguard authorities at Unalaska for their kind 
assistance, and to the agent of the U.S. Government 
and the Bureau of Fisheries on the Pribilof Isles, for 
much valuable assistance in transport and collecting. 

IsoseL W. HUTCHISON. 
British Museum (Natural History), 
London, S.W.7. 


An Amphipod, Eucrangonyx gracilis S. I. Smith, new 
to Britain 

RECENT exhaustive investigations into the fauna 
of filtration plants, which are being conducted by 
the Water Examination Department of the Metro- 
politan Water Board, under the direction of Colonel 
C. H. H. Harold, have resulted in the discovery at 
the Lea Bridge Waterworks of Hucrangonyx gracilis 
S. I. Smith. This species has been recorded only 
from Canada and the United States. It was collected 
in October and November 1936 by Mr. A. C. Gardiner, 
from whom I obtained the following notes on its 
distribution in the filters and its appearance in life. 
Specimens were submitted for identification to Prof. 
A. Schellenberg, of Berlin, to whom my thanks are due. 

The majority of specimens were found in culverts 
below the filter beds at the Lea Bridge Works : these 
culverts are in complete darkness, and specimens 
from them were whitish in colour, though with well- 
developed black eyes. A few were found among 
weeds on the grating of the intake to these filters, 
together with Asellus aquaticus (which was also 
found in the subterranean culverts) and Gammarus 
pulex. These specimens were of a quite dark slaty- 
blue colour. It was not ascertained whether this 
species was present in the River Lea, from which 
these filter beds are supplied with water. It is even 
possible that it is widely distributed in England. In 
Canada and the United States it has been recorded 
from a large number of loci, chiefly in surface waters. 
A list of these can be found in Shoemaker?. 

Eucrangonyx can be distinguished from Gammarus 
by the absence of spines on the dorsal surface of the 
urosome: from Niphargus by the presence of well- 
developed black eyes and from Crangonyx by the 
presence of a small inner ramus to uropod III. 
E. gracilis can usually be distinguished in life from 
Gammarus pulex by its smaller size. Stebbing? gives 
a detailed description of this species. The only 
published figure of the whole animal is that of 
Kunkel’, which is crude and in some respects in- 
correct. Various features are figured by Weckel*, 
Huntsman® and Shoemaker?. Weckel’s figures are 
inferior to those of Huntsman and Shoemaker. 


Department of Zoology, G. I. CRAWFORD. 
British Museum (Natural History). 
Jan. 15. 


1 Shoemaker, C. R., Amer. Mus.Novitates, 598, 15, fig. 9, a and b (1933). 

* Stebbing, T. R. R., “Amphipoda Gammaridea” in “Das Tier- 
reich”, 21, 390 (1906). 

3 Kunkel, B. W., Bull. Conn. State Geol. and Nat. Hist. Survey, 
26, 94, Fig. 20 (1918). 

4 Weckel, A. L., Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., 82, No. 1507, 32, Fig. 3 (1907). 

š Huntsman, A. G., “Contrib. Canad. Biol. 1911-14”, part 2, 152. 
Fig. 4c (1915). 


328 


Origin of Cross-Cousin Marriage in Assam 


CROSS-COUSIN marriage is widely prevalent among 
the primitive peoples of Assam. Of the two types, 
the marriage with the daughter of the mother’s 
brother is more frequent. Different theories have 
been put forward by ethnologists as to the origin 
of this custom, but none of them seems to be tenable 
in Assam area. 

Though most of the tribes of Assam are now 
patrilineal, yet an earlier stratum of matriliny should 
not be overlooked. Even among some of the tribes, 
matrilineal traits are still dominant. These matri- 
lineal people probably came in contact with later 
patrilineal immigrants of superior culture, and 
marriages between them were frequent. During this 
period, the immigrant people, in order to give their 
sister’s family better economic status, introduced 
the marriage of their sister’s son to their own 
daughters. The contact in some cases led to the 
formation of dual groups, and there both types of 
cross-cousin marriage were permitted. But after a 
time, when the domination of the patrilineal people 
was complete, the avoidance of the father’s sister’s 
daughter came from the idea that father and father’s 
sister inherited the same blood, so her daughter, who 
also inherited a part of the blood through her mother, 
was not marriageable. This idea is still common 
among the Chothe Kukis, Mantak Koms and other 
tribes of Assam. In some cases, the patrilineal 
dominance is so strong that, in the absence of the 
mother’s brother, the bride-price accrues to his son, 
that is, the mother’s brother’s son will get the pay- 
ment for his father’s sister’s daughter, as is found 
among the Chothes. 

This rule, on the face of it, seems to be absurd, 
but if we go into details we can easily understand 
the underlying principle. In the early matrilineal 
stage referred to, the marriage between the children 
of brothers and sisters was not looked upon with 
favour by the earliest group as it would break the 
‘household exogamy’. But the later group would 
not observe this rule, as it would be against their 
interest, and they might have no reason for observing 
‘household exogamy’. The husband in such a group, 
finding property to descend matrilineally, would try to 
provide for his portionless sister’s family by marrying 
his sister’s son to his daughter. The wife who owns 
the property and observes the rules of the earlier 
people would not object as ‘household exogamy’ on 
her side of the family would not be violated. In 
this way marriage with the daughter of the mother’s 
brother would come into vogue. But she would be 
opposed.to her children marrying her own brother’s 
children. Hence the other cross-cousin marriage 
(father’s sister’s daughter) would not be permissible. 
In some cases also, marriage with the daughter of 
the mother’s brother would not be allowable. But 
if the three groups (two older and the one later) 
were linked up in a tri-clan system, this problem would 
disappear. 

If later on, through the dominance of the patri- 
lineal people of this group or other groups, the whole 
social and economic structure passes on to father- 
right, only the tradition of such preferential mating, 
with occasional actual marriages, would persist. This 
seems to be the present position in Assam, 


J. K. Boss. 


Department of Anthropology, 
University, Calcutta. 
Dec. 31. 


NATURE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


Annual Variation of the Critical Frequencies of the 
E- and F,-Layers 

THE successive accumulation of data on the 
critical frequencies, that is, the limiting penetrating 
frequencies, of the H- and F-layers determined from 
noon observations show the following main features! : 
the critical frequencies of the H-layer show a regular 
annual variation depending on the height of the sun, 
whereas the critical frequencies of the #’,-layer show 
an inverse annual variation, with high values during 
winter and lower values in summer. Appleton? has 
explained this as a temperature effect, the density 
of the air at 200-400 km. in winter being higher on 
account of the lower temperature. According to the 
simple theory of photo-ionization, the maximum 
electron density, that is, the critical frequency, will 
depend on the pressure. 

From a geophysical point of view, it is difficult 
to understand why an annual temperature variation 
should be restricted to the /’,-layer alone. Studies 
of the variation of the auroral heights in the border 
region between the dark and sunlit atmosphere have 
shown? that there is a marked diurnal variation of 
temperature at a height of 100 km., that is, in the 
region of the H-layer. It is therefore probable that 
the annual variation of temperature in the F’,-layer 
also must include the H-layer. 

A hypothesis explaining the dependence of the 
critical frequencies of the F,-layer on, and the 
independence of the critical frequencies of the H-layer 
of, the annual temperature (and therefore, pressure) 
variations will be put forward in the following, based 
on noon observations of the critical frequencies 
recorded at Tromso (ọ = 69:7° N., A = 18-9° E.) 
during the last two years. 

The observations from Tromso show the same 
inverse annual variation of the critical frequencies 
of the F,-layer with high values in winter and low 
values in summer previously observed. During. the 
dark period in winter, when the sun’s height at noon 
is negative, the sun’s rays when producing the dense 
F,-ionization in the zenith have to enter the layer 
from below after first having passed once through 
the layer. During the same period one does not 
obtain H#-echoes on undisturbed days. This means 
that the part of the solar spectrum producing the 
F,-ionization is only slightly absorbed when passing 
through the F,-layer, whereas the rays producing 
the H-ionization are completely absorbed when 
entering the H-layer. From this it follows that a 
variation in the pressure of the air in the F,-layer 
will strongly influence the ion-production of the 
rays, as the spectral energy producing the ionization 
is in excess. For the H-layer, where the ionizing 
rays are completely absorbed when entering the 
layer, a variation of pressure (and therefore tempera- 
ture) will be of minor importance, as the maximum 
ionization there will be determined by the limited 
energy of the ionizing rays. 

Chapman‘ has developed a theory according to 
which there is a stratification in the ionosphere ; at 
heights above 200 km. the oxygen molecules are 
dissociated and occur as atomic oxygen. There will 
therefore be different parts of the solar spectrum 
which produce the ionization in different levels, 
according to the different ionization potentials of 
the constituents. The ionization potentials of N,, 
O, and O correspond to the bands from 766 A., 
730 A. and 910 A., and according to Chapman® the 
energy available in the solar spectrum from 910 A. 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


for ionizing the oxygen atoms is more than a hundred 
times greater than the energy available for ionizing 
O, and N,. This fits in with the point of view 
developed above that the energy of the part of the 
solar spectrum producing the /’,-ionization is in 
excess when passing through the layer. 
Lery HARANG. 
Auroral Observatory, 
Tromsø. 
Jan. 1. 


1 Appleton and Naismith, Proc. Roy. Soc., A, 150, 635 (1935). 
Schafer and Goodall, Proc. Inst. Rad. Eng., 23, 670 (1934). Kirby, 
Berkner and Stuart, Bur. Stand. J. Res., 12, 15 (1934). Harang, 
Gerl. Beitr. Geophysik, 46, 438 (1936). 

* NATURE, 186, 52 (1035). 

3 Harang, Terr. Mag., 41, 143 (1936). 

4 Proc. Roy. Soc., A, 181, 353 (1931). 

5 loc, cit. 


Excitation of Raman Spectra with the aid of 
‘Optical Catalysers’ 


Prosan and Bhattacharya have reported! the 
‘optical catalysis’ of the Raman effect. That this 
phenomenon should exist is in accordance with the 
theory of the Raman effect along classical lines which 
we have presented elsewhere*. Moreover, it is possible 
from that theory to predict the circumstances in 
which the catalysis should be most pronounced. 

According to this theory, the emission of the Raman 
lines is facilitated by the close proximity of a system 
resonant at the frequency of the difference line or 
anti-resonant at that of the sum line. It is hindered 
by the reverse of these conditions. If the observed 
effect is due to such a resonance in the ‘catalyser’, we 
should expect the following experimental results : 
(1) The effectiveness of a particular ‘catalyser’ should 
vary with the frequency of the incident light, being 
a maximum for some one frequency. (2) Two sub- 
stances having different infra-red frequencies should 
be ‘catalysed’ by the same added substance, provided 
the incident frequencies are so adjusted as to make 
the difference, or sum, frequencies the same for both. 
(3) It should be possible to find substances the 
addition of which reduces the Raman effect. In 
particular, if the effect of a ‘catalyser’ is found to 
show a maximum for a particular incident frequency, 
a shift of the incident frequency, such that the new 
sum frequency coincides with the old difference, 
should reduce the effect below normal. 

The above considerations apply particularly to 
experiments at low temperatures, and the effects 
described might easily be masked at higher tempera- 
tures, 

R. V. L. HARTLEY. 

Bell Telephone Laboratories, 

New York. 
Jan. 11. 
1! NATURE, 138, 510 (Sept. 19, 1936). 
* Bell System Tech. J., 424 (July 1936). 


Fluorescence of the Bivalent Rare Earths 


In a letter in NATURE of January 19, 1935% 
I stated that the blue fluorescence shown by fluorites 
is due to bivalent europium produced through 
reduction of traces of trivalent europium by radium 
rays. In the same way a yellow-green band shown 
by some fluorites at low temperatures can be ascribed 
to bivalent ytterbium. Later’, it was shown that a 
red fluorescence band that had puzzled us a good 
deal is due to bivalent samarium. 


NATURE 


329 


From the investigations of G. Jantsch and W. 
Klemm’, it appears that these three rare earths, 
europium, ytterbium and samarium, are the only 
ones that can be obtained definitely as bivalent ions ; 
whilst for thulium there are at least distinct indications 
of the formation of traces of bivalent compounds, for 
the other rare earths there are scarcely any. Taking 
the hypothetical connexion between the formation 
of bivalent ions and the appearance of radio- 
photo-fluorescence bands as a guiding hypothesis, one 
might hope to get such a fluorescence also with suit- 
able substances containing traces of thulium. 

Through the courtesy of Dr. P. Hoernes, I got 
from the Degea (Auergesellschaft) in Berlin a sample 
said to contain 93 per cent Tu,O;, 3 per cent Yb,0, 
and 4 per cent Cp,0;, for which my best thanks are 
due. A small amount of this substance was added to 
calcium sulphate (concentration 10-*), After exposure 
to radium rays, the preparation was tested. with 
filtered ultra-violet light. At room temperature, 
nothing was observed, but on lowering the tempera- 
ture a red fluorescence appeared that became very 
brilliant at the temperature of liquid air. Calcium 
sulphate preparations with 10-* erbium or 10? ytter- 
bium, the neighbouring elements, showed under the 
same conditions a much weaker fluorescence, evidently 
due to inevitable traces of thulium. The maximum 
of the thulium band has nearly the same wave- 
length as that of samarium in calcium sulphate, 
about 620 my, but it is—at the same temperature— 
distinctly narrower and reacts quite differently 
towards changes of temperature, increasing in bright- 
ness with decreasing temperature, whilst the samarium 
band gradually disappears on nearing liquid air 
temperature. At the latter, the thulium band shows 
a structure which needs further investigation. 

I have to thank Miss E. Rona for preparing the 
synthetic material, and Miss B. Karlik for photo- 
graphing the spectra. A detailed report will be 
presented to the Vienna Academy of Sciences. 

K. PRzIBRAM. 
Institut fiir Radiumforschung, 
Wien. 
Jan. 20. 


1 See also Wien Ber., Ila, 144, 141 (1935) ; Z. Phys., 102, 331 (1936). 
2 Wien. Anzeiger, Dec. 3, 1936. 
3 Jantsch, G., and Klemm, W., Z. anorgan. Chem., 216, 80 (1933). 


Claims of Geology in School Courses of General 
Science 


Pror. TRUEMAN’s letter in NATURE of February 6, 
as to the parlous state of geology in relation to teach- 
ing in schools, leads one to inquire further into the 
causes of this state of things. 

Considering first the cultural aspect of the question, 
it is abundantly clear that the purely cultural value 
of geology is insufficiently realized by teachers in 
secondary schools. This is all the more puzzling in 
view of the rapid hold which it exercises on the 
imagination when properly taught, and the extreme 
value of its field side to adolescents. 

My experience during the last twenty years has 
led to the conclusion that geologists lost a valuable 
chance of introducing their subject into schools when 
they allowed geographers to seize a branch (physical 
geology) in the great expansion which took place in 
geographical studies just after the Great War. 

Turning to the utilitarian side of the problem, it 
is found that apart from mining and oil geology, 


330 NATURE 


geologists as a body are little interested in applications 
of their science, in this respect forming a marked 
contrast to chemists and physicists. At the present 
time, the posts open to graduates in geology fall 
roughly into four main classes: (1) appointments 
with mining and oil companies ; (2) geological survey 
posts; (3) museum posts; (4) university appoint- 
ments ; and it is clear that the numbers and prospects 
of such posts are not such as to attract an increasing 
number of graduates in the near future. One of the 
chief factors militating against a change in this 
position is the present overweening importance 
attached in most quarters to the purely stratigraphical 
side of the science, to the exclusion of a linking up 
with other sciences such as chemistry, physics and 
engineering. 

I think it is correct to state that there is not a 
single trained full-time geologist on the staffs of 
Government departments, such as the Road Research 
and Building Research Laboratories, and I find it 
difficult to believe that there is not an outlet or 
opportunity for a suitably trained geologist in work 
of that kind. I have found that the possible applica- 
tions of the science in civil engineering and building 
problems are many, but that men who are suited to 
the study of these problems are not being produced 
by our schools of geology to-day. 

BERNARD H. KNIGHT. 
18 Glenross, 
Belsize Road, 
N.W.6. 
Feb. 8. 


Application of the Polarographic Effect of 
Proteins in Cancer Diagnosis 


THe investigations of E. Waldschmidt-Leitz! have 


‘shown that blood serum, similarly to blood itself*, 


activates deactivated papain. Prof. E. Waldschmidt- 
Leitz? has also shown that normal blood serum 
induces in these ferments or in methylglyoxalase 
a greater activity than serum from carcinomatic 
blood. This activity is ascribed to the sulphydryl 
groups of the proteins of serum. 


N iC Nv ee 


Current intensi 


Fig. 1. 


CURVE l, NORMAL SERUM, ‘WAVE’ P 38 MM. HIGH. CURVE 

2, CARCINOMATIC SERUM, ‘WAVE’ P 32 MM. HIGH. BOTH 

SERA WERE TREATED WITH ALKALINE IODOACETATE FOR 

70 MIN. CURVES la AND 2a WERE OBTAINED WITH THE 
SAME SERA AFTER 250 MIN. TREATMENT. 


Some years ago, I found a sensitive polarographic 
protein effect, conspicuously exhibited by serum, 
which I explained as due to the catalytic activity 
of the sulphydryl groups of proteins’. It seemed 
thus important to investigate the differences between 
carcinomatic and normal sera polarographically, by 
electrolysis with the dropping mercury cathode. In 
this way a method has been worked out, in which 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


the sulphydryl groups of serum proteins are acted 
upon by iodoacetate in alkaline solution, and after 
a certain time the denatured serum is subjected to 
the polarographic investigation. In these experi- 
ments, 0-3 c.c. of serum, 0:15 c.c. of N potassium 
hydroxide and 0:3 c.c. of 0:2 N potassium mono-iodo- 
acetate are mixed and kept at room temperature ; 
after a certain time (about one hour) 0-1 c.e. is taken 
out and added -to 5 c.c. of a solution consisting 
of 8 x 10-4 M cobalt chloride, 10-! N ammonium 
chloride, 107+ N ammonia. The polarographic curve 
of this solution is then recorded. The ‘protein effect’, 
consisting in the appearance of a characteristic ‘wave’ 
on the current voltage curve, is always found larger 
with normal serum than if in the same procedure 
carcinomatic serum is used (Fig. 1. Curves 1 and 2). 

Another way which also leads to polarographic 
differences between carcinomatic and normal serum 
is to mix 0:3 c.c. of serum, 0:3 c.c. of water and 
0:15 c.c. of N potassium hydroxide. After 5, 10 or 
20 min., 0-1 c.c. of this mixture is added to 20 c.c. 
of the above cobalt solution, to be investigated polaro- 
graphically. 67 different samples of various in- 
dividuals were thus examined without knowledge 
of the clinical (histological) investigations, which were 
carried out by Prof. H. Knaus. 32 of these gave 
an abnormally low polarographic protein effect, 
and thus were reported as carcinomatic, in perfect 
agreement with the results of the medical examina- 
tion and with the biochemical examination of Prof. 
Waldschmidt-Leitz. 

Whilst the details of this investigation will be 
found elsewhere’, it is mentioned here that the 
polarograms were obtained with Prof. J. Heyrovsky’s 
authentic polarograph, made by Messrs. Dr. V. and 
J. Nejedly, Prague. A simple ‘micropolarograph’ 
suitable for medical routine work of this sort of 
research is under construction. 

R. BRDIČKA. 

Physico-chemical Institute, 

Charles’ University, 
Prague. 
Jan. 17. 


1 Waldschmidt-Leitz, E., Conrath, O., and Gloeditsch, J., Natur- 
wiss. [Jan. 22]. Waldschmidt-Leitz, E., Z. Angew. Chem. (in the press), 

2 Purr, A., and Russel, M., Z. physiol. Chem., 228, 198 (1934). 

3 Brdička, R., Collection, 5, 112, 238 (1933). 


4 Brdička, R., Rozpr. Ces. Akad., II. té (in the press). Bull. intern. 
de UV Académie des Sciences de Bohême (in the press). 


Time Lag in the Vacuum Photo-Cell 


In a recent letter! Dr. R. A. Houstoun treats 
equally as vacuum photo-cells the KMV6 and the 
KV6, both of which are made in these laboratories. 
The KMV6 is highly evacuated, but the KV6 always 
contains an appreciable quantity of hydrogen evolved 
from the sensitized potassium; it should not be 
regarded as a true vacuum cell. 

No experiments made in these laboratories throw 
any light on the question whether the difference 
between the two cells discovered by Dr. Houstoun 
is actually due to this difference in gas content. My 
object is merely to point out that this possibility 
should not be excluded from consideration. 

Norman R. CAMPBELL. 

Research Laboratories of the 
General Electric Company, Ltd., 

Wembley. 
Feb. 8. 


1 NATURE, 139, 29 (Jan. 2, 1937). 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


Genetics in Madrid 


DuRine a recent visit to Madrid for another pur- 
pose, I was able to visit some of my colleagues there, 
and was delighted to find that research work in 
genetics was continuing. Prof. I. de Zulueta, in 
the intervals of hiding the more precious contents 
of the biological museum in cellars, was continuing his 
work on the polymorphic beetle Phytodecta variabilis. 
Prof. Galan, of Salamanca, was very appropriately 
breeding the ‘explosive cucumber’, Heballiwm ela- 
terium. This plant is hermaphrodite in one half of 
Spain, dicecious in the other. Crosses between a 
dicecious plant and hermaphrodites from different 
areas seemed to reveal the existence of ‘strong’ and 
‘weak’ local races, differing, like those of Lymantria, 
in respect of sex-determining factors. 

Our discussion of these topics was interrupted by 
an air raid considerably more severe than any of 
those on London in 1914-18. However, no bombs fell 
very near us, and at the time I left, the Museo de 
Ciencias had not yet shared the fate of the University 
City, the Prado and the Museum of Anthropology. 
I think that the persistence of de Zulueta and Galan 
under conditions which are, to say the least, un- 
congenial for research, deserves to be recorded, and 
augurs well for the future of biology in Spain. 

J. B. 8. HALDANE. 

University College, 

Gower Street, 
London, W.C.1. 


Neutrino Theory of Light 


Pror. V. Fock! has stated recently in these 
columns that he has found that the photon operator 
defined in the Jordan neutrino theory of light is 
commutable with its conjugate, and has thus claimed 
an inconsistency in the theory. It may be remarked 
that Fock’s arguments in this connexion are not 
quite clear. Indeed, if we follow the notation in his 
note, we get: : 


Vlvv'| (bby — byby) = f (vat¥a te er — 


ya İv Ya 4 ») du Sae) 


It must not be thought that (1) is zero just because 
it can be split up into two integrals and the second 
integral can be transformed to the first by changing 
“toa + vinit. The splitting of the integral appears 
to be not justified ; when v + v’ is zero, each of the 
split integrals is divergent, for each of them represents 
the number of particles both in the positive states 
and the negative states. This is in fact the argument 
which implies œ — oo, 

A careful application of the convergence criteria 
regarding the finiteness of the number of particles 
in the positive states and the number of holes in 
the negative states, presented in a report by Prof. 
Max Born and myself?, will lead to the result that 
(1) has the value v if b, and by are conjugate, and 
has the value zero if it is otherwise. Jordan? has also 
deduced this result by writing the photon operator 
in a form that does not involve negative indices. 

N. S. NAGENDRA Nats. 

Indian Institute of Science, 

Bangalore. 
1 NATURE, 188, 1011 (1936). 


* Proc. Ind. Acad. Sci., 8, 318 (1936). 
3 Z. Phys., 99, 109 (1936). 


NATURE 


331 


Breeding Tests and Variations 

In NATURE of January 30, p. 197, Prof. T. F. 
Dreyer draws certain sweeping conclusions as to 
genetics and its limitations, from an experiment in 
which he produced visible abnormality and con- 
stitutional defect in 11 locusts by means of environ- 
mental treatment during development. He did not 
breed even an F1 generation. 

Prof. Dreyer naively remarks that the abnormalities 
“remind one strongly of similarly localized (and 
similarly produced ?) abnormalities in Drosophila, and 
we may legitimately assume the abnormality will be 
hereditary”. 

Such a statement, in the present state of biology, 
can only rest on unfamiliarity with the facts. For it 
is a commonplace of genetics that only breeding tests 
can distinguish between hereditary and non-hereditary 
variation; and numerous workers, notably Gold- 
schmidt, have directed attention to the frequent 
phenomenon of the complete identity of visible 
effect, in Drosophila and other organisms, of muta- 
tions due to genetic change and modifications due to 
environmental change and not inherited. 

Prof. Dreyer’s conclusions are thus founded on 
an elementary but basic methodological error. 


Zoological Society, 
Regent’s Park, N.W.8. 


JULIAN S. HUXLEY. 


Activity of Corticosteron in the Glucose 
Test in Rats 

Ereut days after extirpation of both adrenals, 
adult rats die in about 5 hours if fed with 2-5 gm. 
glucose (5 c.c. of 50 per cent solution)!. This test 
can be used to titrate adrenal cortical hormone both 
quickly and accurately. 

By this method, the great activity of corticosteron, 
the active crystalline fraction of cortical extracts, can 
be clearly shown*. If 0-2 mgm. or more of cortico- 
steron be injected subcutaneously one hour before 
the glucose is given, the adrenalectomized rats 
remain alive. With doses of 0-1-0-15 mgm., about 
50 per cent of the rats lived, and with 0-05 mgm. 
or less all the rats died in 3-6 hours (with severe 
diarrhoea, as in the case of the uninjected rats), The 
active dose of corticosteron in this test is 0-2 mgm. 
(per rat of 150 gm.). 


Technical High School, T. REICHSTEIN. 


Zurich. 
University, F. VERZÁR. 
Basel. L. Laszr, 


1 Verzár, F., and Laszt, L., NATURE, 138, 844 (Nov. 14, 1936). 
* Fremery, Laqueur, Rechstein, et al., NATURE, 189, 26 (Jan. 2, 1937). 


Scientific Worthies and Events commemorated 
on Postage Stamps 

Some time agot, reference was made-in these pages 
to the fact that Ecuador had celebrated the centenary 
of Darwin’s visit on September 16, 1835, by a special 
issue of postage stamps. These are not the first 
stamps of scientific interest. In 1923 France issued 
stamps bearing the head of Louis Pasteur, in 1927 
Berthollet and later Pilatre de Rozier. Louis Blériot 
and his pioneer flight across the Channel were com- 
memorated in 1934. A recent issue also shows 
Pasteur at work. 

Other countries, too, have issued stamps com- 
memorative of scientific events or famous men of 


332 


science. In Germany, last year, there appeared 
stamps showing portraits of Otto Von Guericke, 
Daimler and Benz; Italy has Volta, and a stamp 
which shows a portrait of Galvani, commemorating 
the Radio-Biology Congress in 1934; the United 
States a stamp issued in 1929 showing Edison’s 
electric lamp. Special stamps were issued in Germany 
for the mails carried on the Graf Zeppelin’s flight to 
Spain-Brazil-America in 1930, and again in 1936 on 
the flight to North America. 

Mendeléeff appears on a stamp of the U.S.S.R., 
which also celebrated the bicentenary of the Academy 


NATURE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


of Sciences by a special issue in 1925. Hungary has 
two stamps for the tercentenary of the University 
of Sciences, whilst Yugoslavia remembers Nikola 
Tesla. So recently as last December, a set of Austrian 
stamps was issued showing six inventors—Weisbach, 
Schrauben, Von Ghega, Werndl, Lieben and Kaplan. 
JOHN Q. PILKINGTON. 
John Street School, 
Wombwell, 
Barnsley, 
Yorks. 


1 NATURE, 188, 15 (July 4, 1936). 


Points from Foregoing Letters 


By expressing the age of the universe as derived 
from cosmological theories (2 x 10° years) in units 
provided by the atomic constants (e?/mc?), Prof. 
P. A. M. Dirac obtains a number comparable with 
the ratio of the electric to the gravitational force 
between the electron and the proton (10%). He 
suggests that this ratio, and also that between the 
mass of the universe and the mass of the proton 
(1078) are functions of the age of the universe. This 
leads him to the supposition that the amount of 
matter in the universe is constantly increasing while 
the gravitational ‘constant’ decreases. He introduces 
a new time variable (+= log?#) similar to Milne’s 
distinction between ‘dynamic’ time as measured by 
pendulums, etc., and ‘kinematic’ time measured by 
radioactive and atomic phenomena. 


A method is described by J. H. E. Griffiths and 
Dr. Leo Szilard for observing the capture radiation 
emitted by slow neutron absorbers. Using the 
capture radiation of cadmium as an indicator of the 
neutron intensity, the absorbing cross-section for 
slow neutrons is determined for a number of elements. 
The effect on the Geiger counter of the capture 
radiation from the eleven strongest slow neutron 
absorbers is observed. Though the atomic weight of 
these elements varies from 35 to 200, the effect per 
captured neutron is about the same for all of them. 
The number of quanta emitted per captured neutron 
is estimated for cadmium. 


From the number and absorption coefficient of 
the ‘resonance’ neutrons and of the electrons which 
they liberate in a silver detector, C. Y. Chao and 
C. Y. Fu have estimated at 80-800 volts the average 
spacing between adjacent resonant levels. effective 
for neutron capture. 


A spontaneous increase in the resistance of supra- 
conducting tin and tantalum, followed by a slower 
decrease, has been observed by Dr. F. B. Silsbee, 
R. B. Scott and Dr. F. G. Brickwedde, when the 
current is relatively high (about 2 amperes in a tin 
wire, diameter 0:0222 cm.). 


By measuring the value of the persistent current 
in a single crystal of tin, by means of a supracon- 
ducting galvanometer, Prof. E. F. Burton and K. C. 
Mann show that the magnetic field necessary to 
initiate the restoration of resistance when the field is 
transverse is 0:58 of the value for longitudinal fields. 


Commenting on the uncertainty concerning the 
affinities of the Sterckfontein ape, Dr. R. Broom 
mentions that the contact of the occipital fragment 
has now been found. The restored brain appears to 


be fairly comparable in size with that of the chim- 
panzee, but the teeth “resemble those of man”. 


A. Bentsdth, St. Rusznyák and Prof. A. Szent- 
Györgyi report that hesperidin and also the mother 
liquor of ‘citrin? show properties which have been 
ascribed to vitamin P; quercitin, though nearly 
related in constitution to hesperidin, has no vitamin P 
activity.. (The absence of vitamin P does not in itself 
affect the animals, but modifies the pathological 
condition produced by the lack of vitamin C.) 


G. I. Crawford records the presence of Hucrangonyx 
gracilis S. I. Smith from the Lea Bridge Works of 
the Metropolitan Water Board. This amphipod has 
been previously found only in Canada and the 
United States. 


The reasons why certain types of cross-cousin 
marriage are favoured and other types are not 
allowed in Assam is ascribed by Prof. J. K. Bose to 
economic factors arising during the intermingling of 
patrilineal and matrilineal clans. 


L. Harang explains the regular annual variation 
of the critical frequencies of the H-layer and the 
inverse annual variation of the F,-layer as due to 
different absorption of the solar radiation producing 
ionization in the layer. In the F,-layer the ionizing 
agency is only slightly absorbed when passing 
through the layer; a variation of pressure will 
therefore strongly influence the production of ions. 
In the H-layer the ionizing rays are completely 
absorbed and the maximum electron production is 
fixed by the limited spectral energy and is inde- 
pendent of pressure variations. 


Assuming that a connexion exists between the 
bivalent ions of the rare earths and the radio- 
photofluorescence bands, Prof. K. Przibram has tested 
calcium sulphate containing 10? thulium after ex- 
posure to radium rays with ultra-violet light, and 
has obtained actually a brilliant red fluorescence at 
low temperatures. 


A criticism of the excessive attention paid to the 
stratigraphical side in the teaching of geology, at the 
expense of the chemical, physical and engineering 
aspects, a knowledge of which would be valuable in 
building and road research, is made by Dr. B.H. Knight. 


The behaviour of serum of a number of cancer 
patients has been compared by Dr. R. Brdiéka with the 
behaviour of ‘normal’ serum, in its effect upon the . 
current-voltage curve of a dropping mercury cathode, 
after suitable treatment devised to bring about the 
‘protein effect’. 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


NATURE 


333 


Researnc he litemis 


Buddhism in China 


A CLUE to the essential quality, often miscalled 
materialism, in Chinese culture is afforded in a lecture 
by Prof. Hu Shih, of Peiping, on “Chinese Culture 
before and after Indianization’’, which was delivered 
on September 11, 1936, at the Harvard Tercentenary 
Conference on Arts and Sciences (Science and Culture, 
Calcutta, 2, 6). As was then pointed out, the 
Indianization of China affords material for the study 
of cultural borrowing on a grand scale such as is 
without comparable parallel anywhere, except perhaps 
in the Christianization of Europe. The contrasting 
elements in the culture of China and India stressed 
by Prof. Hu Shih were the factual outlook of early 
Chinese religion, a religion of a hard-working and 
plain-thinking people, and the imaginative and 
speculative elements in Buddhism, in which Chinese 
thought, as it became more sophisticated, found a 
much-needed and long-sought outlet. The rapid 
spread of Buddhism in the Yangtze valley suggests, 
it was maintained, that Buddhism had made con- 
siderable advances among the people at large, and 
especially the lowly, long before it was adopted 
officially in A.D. 68; while the readiness and com- 
pleteness with which it was assimilated is shown by 
the fact that the great persecutions of Buddhism, 
of which the first took place in A.D. 446 and the last 
in A.D. 955, were none of them of lasting effect. At 
the same time, in adopting Buddhist concepts of 
divinity, the Chinese mentality did not fail to mould 
them to its own categories and needs. The god 
Avolokita, for example, changed his sex and became 
the goddess of mercy, while Maitreya becomes the 
familiar figure of a jovial monk. Nevertheless, the 
spread of Buddhism in China is not the least remark- 
able event in the history of that religion, for, as 
Prof. Hu Shih pointed out, there was an essential 
opposition in the two modes of thought, as is shown, 
for example, in the institution of monasticism, which 
made such great inroads on the population and 
wealth of China, though entirely opposed to Chinese 
economic ideas, while asceticism and disregard of 
family ties contradicted the whole of China’s con- 
ception of the family and the obligations of, and to, 
posterity. 


Dominance of Genes in Man 


In a paper on the problem of dominance in man 
(J. Genetics, 33, No. 3), Dr. S. G. Levit has made a 
careful study of a number of pathological genes in 
man, and concludes that a large majority are ‘con- 
ditionally dominant’, showing weak penetrance and 
hence frequently skipping a generation. Thirty-eight 
genes are classed in this category against 14 recessives 
and 3 indeterminates. It is recognized that some of the 
recessives, such as epilepsy and schizophrenia, are 
not always expressed even in the homozygous 
condition. The ‘indeterminates’ are sex-linked genes, 
which are limited to the male sex so that it is 
impossible to distinguish them as dominant or 
recessive. Hemophilia and night-blindness, usually 
` classed as male sex-linked, are placed here, while 
colour-blindness, another sex-linked condition, is 
regarded as intermediate, since female heterozygotes 


have recently been shown to exhibit a partial ex- 
pression of the condition. It is pointed out that genes 
which are conditionally dominant in the heterozygote 
tend to express themselves at a late age, while genes 
which are recessive (in the homozygote) tend to 
appear earlier. The evolution of dominance is dis- 
cussed, and it is concluded that, as natural selection 
has played a decreasing role in civilized man, the 
mutant genes of more recent origin have retained 
some of their original dominance while the less 
numerous recessive genes are older in origin. This 
encounters the difficulty that many genes may be 
expected to have occurred repeatedly at different 
periods. 


Yolk of the Egg of Salmon 


THE egg of the salmon, Salmo salar, contains a 
large quantity of yolk, and F. R. Hayes and D. M. 
Ross (Proc. Roy. Soc., B, Dec. 1936) have studied the 
manner in which this is utilized during development. 
During this process fat is used up (burnt) and stored 
in the embryo, and the total of these two amounts 
is defined as the fat absorbed by the embryo from 
the yolk. The rate at which these processes take 
place is estimated by taking samples of a hundred 
eggs at a time at various intervals from a few hours 
after fertilization until the absorption of the yolk sac, 
and the results are given in graphical form. These 
curves are compared with the well-known curves for 
the chick, and when the necessary corrections for the 
difference in time are made, the resulting curves show 
considerable similarity. Thus it appears probable that 
the sequence of energy sources, that is, carbohydrate- 
protein-fat, is the same in these two widely differing 
forms. 


Metopa Grenlandica in a Lamellibranch 


K. STEPHENSEN and G. Thorson describe an interest- 
ing case of commensalism (Meddelelser om Gronland, 
118. No. 4. 1936). Metopa grenlandica has been 
recorded from inside ascidians both in north and 
west Greenland and in the Mount Desert region, 
Maine, U.S.A., whilst other species of the genus were 
found in Actiloba and in association with the medusoid 
Phialidium from Millport, Scotland ; but apparently 
this is the first time it has been seen in a bivalve 
(Pandora glacialis). This bivalve is a high arctic 
cireumpolar species, the southern limits of which are 
east Canada and the Murman coast, but it does not 
occur in west Greenland and Iceland. Its mantle 
lobes are united almost entirely, and are only free at 
the anterior end to allow the foot to pass out. Thus 
the habitat must be a natural one for the Metopa, 
although peculiar and with little available space as 
the shell has one valve quite flat and the other only 
slightly convex. The Metopa adheres to the gills of 
the molluse by sticking its antennz between the 
lamellze, or it lies free, back downwards, head pointing 
towards the caudal end of the host. Quite young 
specimens of the amphipods and also adults were 
found, which probably indicates that breeding takes 
place within the mantle cavity of the shell. Out of 
twenty-three Pandora, eight contained Metopa. 


334 


Effects of Cyclone on Coral Reef 


Iy the Reports of the Great Barrier Reef Committee, 
vol. IV, Part IT, 1936, Mr. F. W. Moorhouse records the 
effects of a cyclone in 1934 on Low Isles, North Queens- 
land. This was the island on which the Great Barrier 
Reef Expedition had its headquarters in 1928-29. At 
that time, the island and reef were surveyed in great 
detail and Mr. Moorhouse, who was himself a member 
of the expedition, has been able to give valuable 
information on the destructive effects of the cyclone 
and the changes that it wrought in the formation 
of the reef. The effects of lowering of the waters 
of the moats on the perforate coral Porites are dealt 
with in some detail. The polyps of the newly exposed 
zones of the coral appear to become stimulated and 
an increase in lime deposition follows. This deposition 
takes the form of sharp pointed spines. As a result 
of the constant expansion and retraction of the polyps 
over these spines, the tissue becomes penetrated and 
the spines are exposed to the exterior. The bared 
spines become settling points for filamentous alge. 
As the algal growth increases, sediment is held by 
it, which can no longer be removed by the polyps. 
As a result they become smothered. The whole 
process takes several months. 


Cytology of Agave 


TuE century plants of the genus Agave include 
A. sisalana and various other species native to Mexico 
and Central America but now widely grown in the 
eastern tropics as a source of fibre. In connexion 
with breeding experiments at the Amani Agricultural 
Research Station in Tanganyika, Mr. L. R. Doughty 
has examined the chromosomes of various species 
(J. Gen., 33, No. 3). He finds that A. amaniensis, 
a new species of unknown origin found growing 
in the plantations, is diploid, having 2n =60 chromo- 
somes, 10 long and 50 short. In addition to two 
other diploid species, A. cantala is found to be 
triploid, A. Zapupe tetraploid, A. fowrcroydes and 
A. sisalana approximately pentaploid (2n = c. 140). 
That these species are autopolyploids is shown by 
the behaviour of the chromosomes, which frequently 
form trivalents, quadrivalents and pentavalents in 
meiosis. The species are of limited natural distribu- 
tion and nearly related. Breeding experiments 
indicate that they are heterozygous. The diploid 
species will cross with one another and with polyploid 
species. The diploid species fail to set fruits at 
Amani, and even with artificial pollination the setting 
of seed is low. A. sisalana becomes partially fertile 
under certain conditions which appear to be connected 
with the formation of the abscission layer at the base 
of the ovary. 


Phytopathology in India 


A section of “Biochemical and Allied Research 
in India, 1935” (pp. 100-112) summarizes the in- 
vestigations into Indian plant diseases during 1935 
and previous years. A reprint of the section has 
been received from the author, Dr. B. B. Mundkur, 
and shows a gratifying amount of research work in 
progress. Cereal diseases are mainly represented by 
the smuts and Helminthosporium troubles. A new 
disease of gram (Cicer arietinum), caused by a species 
of Mystosporium, was reported by Mitra during the 
year, and a new virus disease of til (Sesamum indicum) 
made its appearance (Pal and Nath). The immunity 
of Indo-American strains of cotton to the Indian 
strain of the fungus Fusarium vasinfectum has been 


NATURE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


compared with the susceptibility of Indian cottons, 
Diseases of the sugar-cane, of fruit trees, and other 
crops, are further considered. Dr. Mundkur has also 
two recent articles in the Indian Journal of Seience, 
on the “Systematic Position of the Smut causing 
Malformation of Vitis quadrangularis” (6, Pt. 3; 
June 1936) and “A Rhizoctonia on Sweet Potatoes 
in Bombay” (6, Pt. 4; Aug. 1936). 


The Geological Time Scale 


ForLowInG up his important work on the deter- 
mination of the age of the Keweenawan basalts 
(510-560 million years) by the helium method, W. D. 
Urry has now applied the latter to small groups of basie 
igneous rocks representative of many of the geological 
horizons above the Keweenawan (Bull. Geol. Soc. 
Amer., 47, 1217). The results include the following : 


Millions of 
years 
Pliocene Basalt, Steens Mt., Oregon 13 ieee 
Miocene Basalt, Douglas Creek, Washington 17+ 1:5 
Oligocene Basalt, Lower Silesia, Germany 36+ 2 
Early Cretaceous Little Hatchet Mts., N. Mexico 85 + 3 
Dykes cutting the Nevadan 90 + 4 
Granodiorite 110+ 7 
Late Jurassic Nevadan Granodiorite 110+ 5 
Triassic Palisade Sill, New Jersey 165 + 8 
West Rock Sill, New Haven, Conn. 170 + 12 
First Flow, Watchung Mt., N. Jersey 180 + 11 
Permian Basalt, Brighton, Mass. 230 + 15 
Devonian Newbury volcanic rock, Mass. 300 + 10 
Ordovician Diabase in Martinsburg Shales, 355 + 15 
Pa. 375 + 15 
Cambrian Basalt, Unicoi formation, Tenn. 440 + 30 
465 + 30 


Brief descriptions are given of the analysed specimens, 
and it is shown that the ages found are consistent 
with those obtained from strongly radioactive minerals 
by the lead method. 


Nature of Atmospherics 


E. V. APPLETON and F. W. Chapman (Proc. Roy. 
Soc., A, 158, 1) have published the latest stage of 
their investigation of atmospherics, which appears 
to mark a distinct advance in the study of atmo- 
spherics and of thunderstorms. An aperiodic elevated 
aerial was used as in the classical experiments of 
C. T. R. Wilson, but the potential changes were 
recorded by a cathode ray tube with a sereen which 
gave a persistent image. This was photographed 
automatically, the camera shutter being itself tripped 
by the transient discharge. As is to be expected, the 
field change produced by a lightning flash nearby is 
mainly due to the electrostatic effect. of the change 
in charge distribution, while the field at a great 
distance is that due to electromagnetic radiation. 
This results in a progressive change in the wave form 
of the atmospheric at increasing distance from the 
source. The picture obtained from a near discharge 
shows a change of field taking place usually in a 
series of steps, as may be expected from moving- 
plate photographs of lightning flashes. The first part 
of the discharge is often comparatively slow, corre- 
sponding to the ‘leader stroke’ of the flash photo- 
graphs. During the period of maximum current, 
there are often superposed pulsations with quasi- 
periods down to 10 micro-seconds, The atmospherics 
observed at great distances commonly show several 
quasi-periodic half-cycles, and sometimes a tail with 
much slower cycles. These changes in shape as the 
disturbance is propagated are possibly caused by 
dispersion in the ionosphere. 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


Automatic Regulation of the Temperature of a Room 


PERHAPS the most difficult problem in connexion 
with the automatic control of the temperature of a 
room is to find the most suitable spot at which to 
fix the thermostat. In an article in the Electrical 
Contractor and Retailer of January, it is stated that 
the British Thermostat Co., Ltd., has been able to 
show that for the vertical walls of the room there 
is a cushion of air extending about 1}in. from the 
wall surface in which, owing to the existence of 
convection currents and other causes, the temperature 
varies considerably. Further, owing to heat exchange 
between the outside and inside of a wall, its tempera- 
ture is continually changing. To avoid these sources 
of error, the British Thermostat Co. has re- 
cently introduced a new design of room thermostat. 
The main features of the design are, first, that 
the sensitive element is spaced sufficiently far from 
the wall to avoid the abnormally heated air cushion ; 
and secondly that the contact area between the back- 
plate and the wall is small and the conductive heat 
path between the back-plate and the main body 
of the instrument ‘housing’ is at the top of the 
instrument, so that conducted heat, already re- 
duced to a minimum, has little effect on the 
sensitive element. The thermostat is contained 
in a vertical bakelite tube open at the top and 
bottom to permit free circulation of air, and thus 
assists rapid operation. The instrument has an 
adjustable setting scale, the standard range being 
from 45° to 75° F., and operates on a differential 
of 3° F. If required, a locking device can be fitted 
to the setting scale so as to prevent unauthorized 
interference. 


Tron-Nickel Alloys of High Permeability 


In a paper read by W. F. Randall before the 
Institution of Electrical Engineers on January 8, a 
most interesting summary is given of the metallurgy 
and magnetic properties of the remarkable group of 
iron-nickel alloys of high permeability. Difficulties 
experienced with the first ‘permalloy’ containing 
78:5 per cent of nickel have led to its substitution 
by iron-nickel alloys containing other metals, and 
in this paper the copper alloy known as ‘Mumetal’ is 
specifically considered. Details of the manufacture 
of the strip and of its practical heat treatment are 
given, together with a fairly detailed treatment of 
the factors which determine its magnetic character- 
istics. The paper ends with a short account of the 
testing methods employed and of the practical 
applications of this material for loading cables, for the 
cores of instrument transformers, transformers and. 
chokes for radio apparatus, magnetic screening, 
magnetic relays and the armatures for moving-iron 
instruments. 


Solubilities in Deuterium Water 


PUBLISHED measurements of solubilities of salts in 
deuterium water have been limited to a few deter- 
minations near room temperature. R. W. Shearman 
and A. W. C. Menzies (J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 59, 185 ; 
1937) have now measured the solubility of potassium 
chloride in 98:2 per cent deuterium water from 0° to 
180°, the total weight of deuterium water used being 
1:39 gm. By comparing the solubilities with those 
in ordinary water, a short linear extrapolation gave 
the solubility in pure deuterium water. The solubility 
was lower than in ordinary water, but increased 


NATURE 


335 


faster with temperature. From about 60° to 180° 
the solubility difference is approximately a linear 
function of temperature; the more rapid increase 
with temperature below 60° may be connected with 
changes of the average configurations in liquid water. 
The authors emphasize that, contrary to a prevalent 
belief, deuterium water is not always a poorer solvent 
for salts than ordinary water (cf. NATURE, 138, 121 ; 
1936). 


Inorganic Chromatographic Analysis 


THE adsorption method of analysis known as 
chromatography, which has been used with such 
marked success in the investigation of the carotenoid 
field of organic chemistry, and in the examination 
of many other complicated organic molecules, has 
now been applied by Schwab and Jockers (Naturwiss., 
25, 44; 1937) to the problem of the separation of 
inorganic cations. The method depends upon the 
fact that the different cations are adsorbed to 
different extents by aluminium oxide. The solution 
containing the cations to be separated is poured over 
a column of alumina. As it runs through, the cations 
are adsorbed at different positions in the column. 
The column is then washed and ‘developed’ by 
passing through it a reagent, usually ammonium 
sulphide, which forms coloured compounds with the 
adsorbed cations. Coloured rings are thus produced 
in different parts of the column, by means of which 
the different cations present in the mixture can be 
detected. From neutral aqueous solutions of nitrates 
of the metals the cations are adsorbed by alumina in 
the following series : antimony, bismuth, chromium, 
ferric, uranyl, lead, mercuric, cupric, silver, zinc, 
cobalt, cadmium, nickel and manganese. In some 
parts of the series, however, the adsorption rings 
are very close, and separation is difficult. Hydro- 
gen ions are themselves adsorbed rather more 
strongly than most cations. The adsorption series 
is different when solutions of the cations in 
ammonia or alkaline tartrate solutions are used. 
A practical use of the method lies in the detection 
of traces of elements lying high up in the adsorption 
series in those adsorbed further down. Thus, a 
trace of iron in copper or cobalt solutions, or a 
trace of copper in cadmium or cobalt solutions, is 
readily detected. 


The Stellar Problem of Three Bodies 


Pror. E. W. Brown has recently published two 
papers on this subject (Mon. Not. Roy. Astro. Soc., 
97, 1; November 1936). He limits the solution to 
those terms which may be capable of being detected 
by observation at present and in the immediate 
future. In the first paper, “Application of Satellite 
Theory”, where he shows how a literal satellite theory 
could be adapted to the stellar problem, the results 
are useful only when the eccentricities and inclinations 
are small. This restriction is removed in the second 
paper, ‘““The Equations of Motion With a Simplified 
Solution”, where nearly all eccentricities and inclina- 
tions can be included. In both cases, however, there 
is one important limitation ; no periodic term which 
has the square or products of the ratio of the periods 
and that of the mean distances as a factor of its 
coefficient can be detected by observation. After 
dealing with the satellite problem a simple rule for 
deducing the stellar problem is given, and it is shown 
that this rule holds good for the second, and hence 
for all higher approximations. 


336 


NATURE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


Optical Lenses moulded from Plastic Material 


N interesting exhibition of optical lenses 
moulded from plastic materials was held 
on February 9 at the Waldorf Hotel, London, 
under the auspices of the Combined Optical In- 
dustries, Ltd. Those responsible for the production 
of the material and for the process of moulding 
it are Mr. A. Kingston, the inventor, and Mr. Peter 
Koch de Gooreynd, chairman of the company, who 
has been associated with the development of the 
process. 
; It is claimed that this invention, which is British 
in origin and development, offers an opportunity for 
the increase of an industry in which Great Britain 
has hitherto taken a comparatively small share. The 
optical medium is produced from various plastic and 
transparent materials of a resinous character. It is 
originally prepared in sheets, which are guillotined 
into strips and then into small squares. These are 
subjected to a special treatment in which compression 
and the maintenance of temperatures of varying 
degrees play an essential part. The refracting sur- 
faces are produced by moulding, and lenses polished 
and ready for mounting are delivered from specially 
designed machines. The long and difficult process of 
grinding at present necessary in the manufacture of 
optical systems is thus avoided, and it is evident 
that the cost of the production of the essential 
parts of optical instruments can be very greatly 
reduced. 
The lenses shown at the exhibition were made of 
a particular form of the plastic material known by 
the trade name of ‘Perspex’. It is a substance of 
high transparency, very light, being about half the 
density of glass, and practically unbreakable. It is 
possible to throw one of the lenses with great force 
on to a marble table without damaging the surfaces 
so far as can be seen by eye. It appears that the 


material can recover from a considerable degree of 
strain without apparent permanent set. 

The refractive index of the material has_ been 
determined by the method of apparent depth and 
was found to be approximately the same as that of 
crown glass. It is extremely transparent in the ultra- 
violet region extending to 2700 A. but is more 
absorbent in the infra-red. 

These properties of the material suffice to show 
that it has the right to be regarded as a valuable 
optical medium, which may well exercise a revolu- 
tionary influence in the optical industry. Cameras, 
spectacles, range-finders and similar apparatus can 
be produced more quickly and cheaply and in a more 
robust form in this material than in glass. A striking 
exhibit was a photograph enlarged about twenty 
times showing excellent detail. Small opera glasses 
exhibited very little colour effect, although it is true 
that the magnification was not more than three 
diameters. 

Certain questions naturally arise as to the possibility 
of the development for the manufacture of accurate 
scientific apparatus, where it is essential to eliminate 
the effects of aberrations. It appears that a number 
of different kinds of plastic materials is available, and, 
if they can be produced with the right dispersive 
powers and refractive indices, there is obviously a 
great future for the material in the field of research. 

It appears that surfaces can be silvered. Can they 
be produced optically flat, and is the medium so 
optically perfect that it can form a Lummer plate ? 
We do not know if information on such points is 
available yet, but enough was shown at the exhibition 
to supply convincing proof that, in the wide and 
extending field where optical instruments come into 
contact with modern life, this medium will play an 
important role. 


The British Electrical and Allied Industries Research Association 


MHE sixteenth annual report, covering the period 
from October 1935 to September 1936, of the 
British Electrical and Allied Industries Research 
Association, now usually called E.R.A., has been 
published. It shows that its research work is rapidly 
increasing in magnitude and importance. When the 
formation of research associations in Great Britain 
was first considered some twenty years ago, their 
value to industry was considered highly problematical 
by many. This distrust is now completely dispelled. 
It can be proved that their work has resulted in the 
saving of millions of pounds every year to the con- 
sumers. In the electrical industry alone it has resulted 
in a great increase in the continuity of the supply and 
the length of life of the cables and the efficiency of 
the lamps. 

Knowledge cannot be gained without expense. The 
funds contributed by the manufacturers and the 
equal contributions from the Government are con- 
verted into ‘knowledge stock’ which the chairman 


of the council of E.R.A. calls a priceless national 
asset which repays the investor by ever increasing 
dividends of prosperity and progress. There are 
450 voluntary workers, some of them well-known 
experts, serving on the various committees of 
E.R.A. The electrical industry is one of the best 
organized in the country and now fully recognizes 
the commercial value of research. Within its present 
field there are many problems still to be solved by 
E.R.A. When solutions are obtained, some of them 
will doubtless lead to the active development of 
profitable branches of the industry. 

A very happy state of affairs is disclosed in the 
report by the way this Association co-operates with 
the leading engineering institutions, with numerous 
international committees, with the Electricity Com- 
mission, with the G.P.O., the B.B.C. and the Radio 
Manufacturers’ Association. Its financial position 
is very sound. It has built up its laboratory at a 
cost of £26,000 out of its own reserve fund. Out of 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


of Scientific and Industrial Research contributed 
£19,000. 
Of individual researches, we may mention the 


research on the electric strength of thin dielectrics . 


and varnish films. The electric strength of mica has 
been found to be constant up to 300°C. This value 
agrees with certain calculations based on recent 
theories. The oscillographic studies of the current 
and voltages which occur during a breakdown have 
led to valuable practical results. A research is 
proceeding on the deleterious effects of ionization 
products and coronz (brush discharges). Two papers 
were presented on behalf of E.R.A. to the British 
Association, by Dr. S. Whitehead and Prof. W. M. 
Thornton respectively. The latter is also revising 
the tables for spark-gap calibration. 

Important tests were carried out with the co-opera- 
tion of the Central Electricity Board, on the Ports- 
mouth—Reading line, on the interference produced 
by high harmonies in neighbouring circuits, and a 


NAEU RE 


a total income of £68,000 last year, the Department - 


337 


report will also be issued, A number of reports on 
interference were presented to the Commission Mixte 
Internationale, and some of the conclusions put for- 
ward were incorporated in the final recommendations. 
The issue of a report by the Institution of Electrical 
Engineers on electrical interference with broadcasting 
brought the large-scale co-operative researches 
co-ordinated by E.R.A. to a close. They have been 
superseded by a series of investigations which aim at 
(1) obtaining accurate data and limits for standard 
specifications and (2) compiling reports upon specific 
matters of interest to manufacturers of electrical 
plant. In railway engineering research, it has been 
found that cadmium-—copper wire shows considerably 
less wear than pure copper as a trolley wire material ; 
the small quantity of cadmium present only reduces 
the conductivity of the wire by a small amount. 
Its freedom from stretching makes this alloy of 
copper very suitable for use as a trolley wire. 

The report is published by E.R.A., 15 Savoy 
Street, W.C.2. 


International Fisheries Research* 


HE twenty-ninth reunion of the Conseil 

Permanent International pour Exploration de 
la Mer was held in Copenhagen in May 1936 under 
the presidency of Mr. Henry B. Maurice. The present 
position being unchanged, all the States now par- 
ticipating will continue for another five years 
as from July 22 of last year. Latvia is now 
desirous of becoming a full member. 

Among the many subjects involved was the 
position of the various countries as regards size limits 
and mesh regulations (Point 7 of the agenda), the 
president having circulated a memorandum previously 
prepared by himself summarizing, so far as was 
possible, the present position with regard to mesh 
regulations and size limits. 

Three special scientific meetings were held during 
the Council meeting of 1936, the first to discuss the 
physiological problems of interest to the marine 
biologist in his studies of the most important species 
of fish, the second to compare stocks of fish in the 
several areas in respect of age composition, the third 
on the measurement of submarine light and its rela- 
tionship to biological phenomena. The programmes 
and reports of the different area committees are 
included in Part 1 of the Rapports et Procés-verbaux. 

Part 2 includes the Administration Report, which 
was passed without amendment. A large part of 
this has to do with the herring. A special meeting 
of herring experts was held at Lowestoft on October 
16-17, 1935. Besides the report with recommenda- 
tions, there are papers on the herring from the 
Skagerak, Kattegat and Baltic, Fladen Ground, 
Western European waters, the Southern Bight, the 
southern part of the Transition Area, Faroes, Iceland 
and Greenland, and from Scotland, also others 
on race questions, populations and larve. M. le 
Gall’s paper on the present state of knowledge 


* Conseil Permanent International pour l’Exploration de la Mer. 
Rapports et Procès-verbaux des Réunions. Vol. ©. lre partie: 
Procès-verbaux (Mai 1936). Pp. 62. 3.00 kr. 2ème partie: Rapport 
administratif (1935-36). gème partie: Appendices. Pp. 111 +25. 
4.00 kr. (Copenhague: Andr. Fred. Høst et fils.) 


concerning the origin and distribution of herring 
populations in western European waters was specially 
discussed. ' 
The following recommendations were made. Any 
group of herring spawning in a given area at a given 
season from year to year should be defined as the 
natural ‘Biological Group’, and morphological char- 
acters should be used as a practical aid in the identi- 
fication of these biological groups outside the area 
and season of spawning. Work on biological groups 
and other local and seasonal population should be 
continued. Vertebral counts of selected material 
should be continued, additional characters such 
as the number of keel scales being also studied when 
necessary. A co-operative study should be under- 
taken on the practicability of utilizing a count of 
separate portions of the vertebral series in such a 
way as to draw distinctions between morphologically 
distinguishable groups with a minimum of labour 
and material. Spawning times should be defined by 
stating the actual month, and in the northern area 
group, characters of the autumn and spring spawning 
populations on the north-west coast of Iceland should 
be investigated and compared. All countries working 
in one way or another in the waters of the Faroes, 
Iceland and Greenland should arrange for material 
of herring to be collected for age determinations and 
distribution of larval stages; fishing experiments 
should be carried out in the open sea between Norway, 
Faroe Isles and eastern Iceland to collect material 
in order to get information as to the exchange of 
population between different parts of this region ; 
and the collecting work concerning age composi- 
tion, population-characters, exact determination of 
maturity and distribution of larve should be carried 
out in all important areas systematically and con- 
tinuously for a period of years. Samples of spawning 
herring from the Viking Bank should be collected and 
investigated as opportunity occurs; samples from 
western Greenland and from Labrador should be 
collected with the view of comparing the population 
characters, age composition, spawning time and 


338 


growth. It is of importance for the international work 
that contact be maintained with the herring investiga- 
tions in Russian northern waters by the U.S.S.R. 
Further, it was recommended that in the North Sea 
and Channel Area the following problems be investi- 
gated: the three subgroups of ‘autumn’ spawning 
herring of the North Sea, the degree of mixing, if 
any, in the winter spawning herrings of the southern 
North Sea and Straits of Dover, the herring of the 
Smalls, the mixing on the Fladen Grounds and the 
herring population in general in the Irish Sea; that 
further investigations be carried out in the Skagerak, 
Kattegat and Baltie as regards the ‘autumn’ spawning 
population of the Kattegat, co-operation being 
necessary between Denmark and Sweden, and that 
population investigations be carried out on the eastern 
coast of the Baltic, on a co-operative basis between 
the countries concerned. 

A second special meeting of experts from the Baltic 
countries met at Copenhagen on December 4-5, 


NATURE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


1935, to examine more closely the question of 
further measures to protect the stocks of fishes in 
the Baltic. The meeting dealt mainly with the 
flounder and salmon, and recommended further 
protective measures, 

The third part of the Report (Appendices) contains 
several papers, including one by F. S. Russell on 
“The Importance of Certain Plankton Animals as 
Indicators of Water Movements in the Western End 
of the English Channel” and ‘““Handliste zur Sicherung 
der Bestimmung nordischen Plankton” by H. H. 
Gran, E. Hentschel and F. 8. Russell. The latter 
paper is an attempt to list the more important 
plankton organisms, both micro- and macro-plankton, 
plant and animal, in order that it may be seen at a 
glance which to record in any preliminary plankton 
investigations. Only those species which can be 
identified easily are included, and if two or more 
important species of a genus are easily confused the 
genus only is given. 


The Natural History of Barra, Outer Hebrides* 


DINBURGH has been enterprising and has 
adopted the island of Barra in the Outer 
Hebrides as a centre of its natural history activities. 
The Biological Society of its University produced 
eight zoologists, seven botanists and four geographers 
and geologists who invaded the island, camping there 
for the first fortnight of July. i 
The island is a useful size for this purpose, about 
84 miles long by 5 miles broad. This gives only 
about twenty-five square miles of land, as it has 
a much indented coast, with many sandy bays 
between rocky headlands. Its central parts are about 
700 ft. high with hills to the south of 1,260 ft. and 
1,092 ft. The geology was already known, the surface 
being peat moor with rocky knolls and ridges of gneiss 
with intervening boggy hollows. The character of 
the coastal scenery is said to suggest recent sub- 
sidence, some of the inlets appearing to have been 
originally freshwater lochs. Heavy south-west winds 
dominate one side, carrying the shell-sand over the 
peaty soil and producing excellent grazing grounds 
(machair). Once completely afforested, there are now 
only three patches of woodland, Lastly, there are 
nine freshwater lochs, these containing about 0-2 per 
cent calcium, 0-02 per cent chlorine and pH 5-6—7°4. 
Clearly, in this diversified island of Barra there 
was plenty of room for the botanists. To commence 
with, one party had to collect and determine all the 
species of plants dwelling there, while another set 
to work to see how far the vegetation had been 
segregated into communities. Coastal areas, moor- 
land, loch, woodland and cultivation were recognized, 
and lists are given of the higher plants found in 
each ; these are obviously incomplete, being collected 
in a restricted season, but serve to indicate the 
associations, The layman would remark that this 
section consists largely of Latin names, whereas the 
botanist would see a necessary start. The lochs are 
particularly interesting, one set with a rich lacustrine 
and a poor marshland flora and a second set with 
opposite characters—it is not clear how far these 
are due to topographical conditions. Of the lower 
plants there is a particularly rich moss and liverwort 
*Proc. R. Phys. Soc., Edin., 22, 241-96 (1936). 


flora, 85 and 21 species respectively. To these must 
be added 27 species of pteridophytes, 42 fungi and 
30 lichens—while evidently one botanist was 
interested in marine alge, of which 78 species were 
named, here an evident correlation with the relatively 
warm, oceanic waters. 

Inasmuch as the fauna is a consequent of the flora, 
it cannot be collected in any completeness without 
a knowledge of the latter—and in any event there 
are many forms which are seasonal. All we can say 
is that an excellent start has been made on the land 
fauna. At this stage it is a mere list of the species, 
for as the authors say, “it would be premature to dis- 
cuss the animal ecology”. The lists vary in value ; thus 
Waterston’s section on land and freshwater Mollusca 
records 51 species in Barra as compared to 64 species 
known from the whole Outer Hebrides and contains 
excellent notes on their distribution. There is an 
element of completeness here, as indeed there is in 
respect to the whole freshwater fauna. In contrast, 
the insect fauna probably does not record a third 
of Barra’s species—and lists of the marine fauna are 
obviously out of place and of little value. 

Now is there to be a sequel of a further expedition 
by the Edinburgh Biological Society to Barra ? The 
preliminary work has been done and upon this the 
plan for a serious attack on the ecology can be based. 
The island must be so mapped as to show the dis- 
tribution of the plant communities and the pro- 
portions of the various species in these determined. 
Then the animals associated with each plant com- 
munity must be collected and such species as are of 
general distribution or are chance visitors eliminated. 
This will entail a study of the physiological con- 
nexions of the animals with their environments and 
of their numbers of individuals. The island is small 
enough and its parts so clearly defined that valuable 
ecological results seem certain, Lists of the species of 
animals and plants in any locality cannot form a 
natural history ; for this science is one of life, not 
of death. Edinburgh has a great University and it 
may perhaps be invited to bring its work to full 
fruition, even if it means student-expeditions at 
different seasons extending over several years. 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


EBastaentiorcan 


W. GREGORY’S classical work on the rift valley 

» in Kenya focused attention on the rift valleys 
of Central Africa, and the historical retrospect given 
by Bailey Willis at the beginning of the recent 
Carnegie Institution volume on the subject provides 
a summary of the views of the pioneers, though there 
are some notable omissions both in this and in the 
bibliography. 

The work consists of two principal parts: the 
first giving the ‘general picture’ with a hypothesis of 
rift valley formation, and the second detailed 
characters of the several areas, which include the 
coastal region of Tanganyika and the Tanganyika 
plateau, Lake Victoria and the central plateau, and 
also the rift valleys, Lake Albert with the Ruwenzori 
range at its southern end, Lake Tanganyika, the 
Rukwa trough, Lake Nyasa, the Ruaha trough, 
the classical rift valley (called Gregory Rift 
Valley throughout the work), and Lake Rudolf. 
A chapter on the volcanoes is given, and shorter 
chapters on earthquake conditions and on gravity 
tests. So little space is devoted to seismology 
that it might be wondered why this volume is one 
of the series in the studies of that science until it is 
realized that the work forms a very suggestive basis 
for a seismological study, and it is probable that the 
seismologist will be best qualified, when more data 
are available, to decide whether the general hypo- 
thesis will stand. It is likely that the physicist will 
object to some of the theories put forward, where 
conceptions such as anti-gravity or levity, downdraft 
and suction, are given the status of scientifically 
defined forces acting in the crust of the earth and 
capable of forming the structures under considera- 
tion. 

A brief outline of the main thesis is here attempted. 
An area of uplift where the high plateaux of Central 
Africa are developed is situated over an astheno- 
sphere consisting of “relatively incompetent but solid 
elastic rock”. By gradual heating, probably by 
radioactive processes, this asthenosphere becomes a 
molten body, or asthenolith, which is covered by the 
competent shell about twenty-five miles (40 km.) 


* Studies in Comparative Seismology: East African Plateaus and 
Rift Valleys. By Bailey Willis. (Publication No. 470.) Pp. x+3858+ 
73 plates. (Washington: Carnegie Institution, 1936.) 


Breeze and Clinker 


HE Department of Scientific and Industrial Re- 
search has issued a revised edition of a bulletin 
published some years ago on ““The Properties of Breeze 
and Clinker Aggregates and Methods of Testing their 
Soundness” (Building Research Bulletin No. 5. 
London: H.M. Stationery Office. 6d. net). Since 
the original publication, investigations carried out at 
the Building Research Station have established the 
cause of the occasional failures of these materials and 
have enabled tests to be devised which are suitable 


for application under ordinary working conditions. - 


NATURE 


339 


imie Valleys” 


thick. The melting of the magma causes an expansion 
in volume and hence a forcing up of the central area, 
while various forces at the margins, which are rather 
convincingly described, cause the edges to sink down. 
The author points out that the great plateaux 
“exhibit a tendency to a circular form” and shows 
(p. 72) that “this is strikingly the fact in the case of 
that plateau which is most completely surrounded by 
rift valleys of Hast Africa, the Tanganyika plateau 
and its northern extension beyond Lake Victoria”. 

We are to suppose that the large central plateau 
is the raised cover of the asthenolith of molten 
magma twenty-five miles below, and that the rift 
valleys and troughs, and the upraised masses of 
Ruwenzori and Elgon(?) are round the edges, and 
that any escapes of magma to give volcanic eruptions 
also lie round the margins. This roughly fits the facts, 
and it must be noted that the central cover is thick 
enough to have prevented any eruptive or intrusive 
activity since Karroo times, 

The details of structures which form the second 
part of the volume constitute a mass of information 
very usefully assembled together. Bailey Willis is to 
be congratulated on having reached the top of the 
rim of the great Ngorongoro hollow and found that 
it is not a giant crater as stated by Jaeger. He warns 
the reader who visits Lake Tanganyika not to be 
disappointed, as he was, on first seeing that mighty 
trough which is almost filled with water (p. 185). 
There is very little evidence for a central core of 
greenstone to the Ruwenzori range, as postulated by 
the author, and the basic intrusive rocks known on 
the mountains are far older than the uplift of the 
mass. There is some confusion between Mgahinga, a 
voleano almost as Jarge as Muhavura and Sabinyo, 
and Gihinga, a small cone to the north-east. 

This important and stimulating work is beautifully 
printed, with few misprints, while the plates (many 
of which appear to be from infra-red photographs and 
most of which are by the author) much enhance the 
value of the volume. It will be read by all geo- 
graphers and geologists, as well as by seismologists, 
who are interested in rift valleys in Central Africa, 
and will be referred to by those who are now working 
in, or studying, that most impressive part of the 
globe. WILLIAM C. SIMMONS. 


Aggregates 


‘Clinker’, or well-burnt furnace residue, and ‘breeze’ 
—the name applied to the smaller and less definite 
residues—usually contain a proportion of unburnt 
fuel, which has been proved to be the cause, when 
these materials are used as aggregates, of cracking 
which develops and becomes visible in the set con- 
crete at various periods after pouring, by reason of 
the swelling movements which these unconsumed 
coals undergo in the mass. Certain types of coal are 
more likely to give trouble of this kind than others 
and, it is stated, the extent of the action can be 


340 


predicted from the physical properties of the coal from 
which these aggregates were originally derived. For 
laboratory purposes, samples of coal are distinguished 
by their power of removing the colour from an 
aqueous solution of methylene blue and by their 
relative moisture absorption properties, and it is 
suggested that the presence in the aggregate of as 
little as 4 per cent of a coal of the most dangerous 
class may be sufficient to cause failure. 

Investigations made on the setting and maturing 
movements in breeze and clinker concretes, and 
on the influence of sulphur and of water content, 
are described, while it is also explained why 
these aggregates may not be used in reinforced 
concrete construction owing to the rapid cor- 
rosion resulting from their permeability. Of the 
two tests recommended, the ‘pat test’ is said to 
be reliable in the majority of cases. A standard 
pat is made by mixing a sample of the material under 
test with fine white plaster of Paris, and a normal 
Portland cement; if in a period of l-4 days this 
exhibits certain defined symptoms of movement, the 
material is to be judged unsound and must be 
rejected. 


Fossil Alge in Boghead Deposits 


OGHEAD coal is a comparatively rare and 
valuable material yielding gas and paraffin on 
distillation. It is characterized structurally by the 
presence of minute ‘yellow bodies’, the nature of 
which has been a subject of discussion. An algal 
nature was suggested for these in 1889 by Edgeworth 
David, but their peculiar properties in resisting decay 
and compression prevented any general acceptance 
of this view. Since that time, reports of C. E. Bertrand 
and Renault, Zalessky, and Thiessen have supported 
the algal view, and finally P. Bertrand in 1930 came 
to the conclusion that the Pila of C. E. Bertrand and 
Renault was Botryococcus and their Reinschia a 
member of the Volvocales. 

The subject has now been placed on a much surer 
basis by a detailed study of living Botryococcus 
Braunii and material from the muds of glacial lakes 
and more recent peat deposits by Dr. K. B. Black- 
burn, and a re-examination of the ‘yellow bodies’ of 
boghead deposits by Dr. B. N. Temperley (Trans. 
Roy. Soc. Edin., 58, 1935-36). Dr. Blackburn has 
followed the alga through its many variations in 
form; she shows that the inner membranes of the 
cells are cellulose, but external to this each cell has, 
towards the periphery of the colony, a cellulose and 
pectin cap, which contributes to the general mucilage 
surrounding the colony, whilst towards the centre of 
the colony, a thick fatty thimble forms around each 
cell, and these constitute the general matrix of the 
colony. The cuticular nature of these thimbles would 
explain their resistance to decay. The cells are rich 
in oil and also contain appreciable quantities of starch. 

Dr. Temperley finds that the ‘yellow bodies’ 
described as Pila show extremely close agreement 
with Botryococcus Braunii, the various polymorphic 
forms of which are recognizable in the deposits. The 
form Reinschia, formerly ascribed to the Volvocales, 
differs from Pila in the hollow form of the colonies, 
but the details of structure correspond so closely 
with those of Botryococcus that Dr. Temperley con- 
cludes that ‘“‘there is no doubt that the various forms 
of Reinschia and Pila are fossil colonies of the same 
type of alga”. 


NATURE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


Science News a Century Ago 

Medicine in Chili 

“THE science of medicine has hitherto made but 
small advances in Chili. . . . Twenty years ago 
medicine was practised by men of colour and the 
most ignorant quacks, the hospitals were entirely 
under the control of the monks, and the few well 
informed physicians, those, namely, who had received 
an European education found in Lima a more 
lucrative field for their exertions than was offered to 
them anywhere in Chili. This state of things, however, 
no longer obtains, for the number of physicians is 
now even greater than necessity requires, and there 
is a college at Santiago at which medicine is taught, 
although on a somewhat compendious plan. Still 
there is. a scarcity of educated practitioners in the 
country, where the healing art is chiefly exercised by 
matrons and old Indian women. The country people 
are tolerably familiar with the virtues of the rather 
numerous indigenous plants, but to many of them 
properties are attributed which the individuals in 
question do not really possess, and many other 
remedies supposed to be of great efficacy are solely 
indebted for the estimation in which they are held 
to a credulous superstition. When any particular 
part of the body is the seat of disease, the remedy is 
sought for in the corresponding part of some animal, 
variously prepared; thus for ophthalmic disorders 
the carbonized eyes of birds of prey are administered, 
the claws of the condor are given for gouty pains of 
the hands, and the flesh of the smooth-skinned 
lizard for scurfy affections of the skin.” (London 
Medical and Physical Journal, February 18, 1837.) 


The Colony of Western Australia 


AT a meeting of the Statistical Society held on 
February 20, 1837, Lord Glenelg, then Colonial 
Secretary under Lord Melbourne, communicated “A 
Report of the Committee of Correspondence of the 
Colony of Western Australia’. Known first as Swan 
River Settlement, Western Australia was formed 
into a province in 1829, and the towns of Perth, 
Freemantle and Guildford were founded the same 
year. The development of the colony, however, had 
been slow. The report consisted of nine sections 
written by different individuals and dealt with 
agriculture, live stock, shipping, commerce, popula- 
tion, crime, religion and other matters. The total 
population of the Swan River Settlements west and 
east of the Darling Mountains was but 1,550. Sheep 
farming was the principal industry, there being in 
the York district east of the Darling Hills about 
5,000 sheep in excellent condition. The original 
flocks were imported from “Van Diemen’s Land”. 
The animals were a large-framed and very coarse- 
wooled breed, but being crossed with Merino rams, 
the quality of the wool was constantly improving. 
The merino flock consisted of about 900 pure de- 
scendants of the choice Spanish flock presented in 
1791 to George III by the King of Spain. This 
breed had much improved since imported into the 
colony. The amount of wool shipped for England 
and the Cape of Good Hope in 1836 was 12,500 lb. 


The East India Company’s S.S. Berenice 
ACCORDING to The Times, on February 22, 1837, 


. the East India directors gave a dinner at the West 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


India Dock Tavern, Blackwall, to Captain Grant and 
the officers of the S.S. Berenice, which was being 
prepared to leave for India. This vessel was the first 
steamship for the East India Company contracted 
for by the famous engineer and shipbuilder Robert 
Napier (1791-1876), and her success had much to 
do with Napier being entrusted with the contracts 
for the earliest ships of the Cunard Company. The 
Berenice was 170 ft. long by 28-8 ft. broad and of 
646 tons with engines of 250 nominal horse power. 
She was a wooden paddle vessel ; her boilers working 
at a very low pressure were of copper and her engines 
were of the ordinary side-lever type. Leaving Fal- 
mouth on March 16, 1837, she reached Bombay on 
June 13, having called at Santa Cruz, Mayo, Fernando 
Po, Table Bay and Port Louis. Her average speed 
was about 8 knots. 


Therapeutic Use of Odours 


At a meeting of the Medico-Botanical Society on 
February 22, 1837, reported in the Lancet of March 4, 
Dr. George G. Sigmond read a paper on odours. 
Though not now used therapeutically, the older 
physicians employed them, and, according to Dr. 
Sigmond, they might once again be found of service 
in medicine. Travellers, he remarked, who sleep in 
houses made of cinchona wood, escape intermittent 
fever, probably from the odour of sulphate of quinine, 
A similar odour has also relieved tic douloureux, 
In a work published by a pupil of Linnzus after the 
death of that eminent botanist, who, however, super- 
intended the construction of the volume, plants were 
divided into seven classes according to their smells 
as the aromatica, the fragrantia, ete., each odour 
having an action peculiar to itself, and some sugges- 
tions were made for imparting odours to scentless 
flowers through the roots, etc. 


Davenport’s Invention of an Electric Motor 


On February 25, 1837, Thomas Davenport 
(1802-51) secured a patent for an electric motor, the 
first of its kind taken out in the United States. 
Davenport was a blacksmith of Brandon, Vermont, 
who about 1833, with his friend Orange Smalley, 
began experimenting with magneto machines, unaware 
of what Henry had already accomplished. By 
December 1834 they had made a machine having 
twelve permanent magnets and two electromagnets 
connected through a form of commutator consisting 
of wires dipping into mercury cups to an electric 
battery. By May 1835 he had substituted for the 
mercury cups insulated segments on the lower part 
of the wheel shaft, which were rubbed by contact 
springs made of flattened wire. His new machine 
he showed to Henry at Princeton, and there saw 
Henry’s own electromagnetic engine. 

On Henry’s advice, Davenport showed his machine 
to Alexander Bache and to a group of men at the 
Franklin Institute, but being short of money, sold 
it to the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute for 30 
dollars. Encouraged by Prof. Eaton, he made a 
new machine adapted for traction purposes, and this 
was exhibited at Troy on October 14, 1835. He 
was joined by Ransom Cook, and new models were 
built and exhibited, and Davenport lodged a model 
and applied for a patent, but at the Patent Office 
fire of December 15, 1836, both model and papers 
were destroyed. Soon after this, however, he secured 
his patent of February 28, 1837, and his model is 


NAT Roe 


341 


now preserved in the National Museum at Washing- 
ton. The inventor, however, reaped no reward for 
his ingenuity and died on July 6, 1851, on a small 
farm in Salisbury, Vermont. 


Faraday on Marshall Hall 


THE Lancet of February 25 contains the following 
note on a lecture delivered at the Royal Institution 
by Prof. Faraday on “Dr. Marshall Hall’s Discoveries 
in the Nervous System”: “The principal feature in 
these discoveries appears to be the fact that in the 
medulla oblongata and the spinal marrow resides a 
function which is distinct from sensation and volition, 
and termed by Dr. Hall the reflex excito-motory 
function, from its generally proceeding along the 
nerves from the point of excitement to the spinal 
marrow, and being reflected from thence to some 
muscular organ. For this reason the seat of this class 
of action is called by him the excito-motory system. 
Müller, of Berlin, Mr. Faraday stated, has in a 
remarkable manner confirmed the truth of Dr. Hall’s 
discoveries by a recent and separate investigation, 
although the former still confounds the nature of 
the function with sensation. . . . Mr. Faraday con- 
cluded by observing that Dr. Hall’s views are original, 
all preceding physiologists having confounded the 
phenomena alluded to with sensation. The subject 
appears to have interested Mr. Faraday, as not 
improbably preparing the way for some future dis- 
covery relating to electricity as connected with the 
nervous system; for, as he said, the division of the 
nervous system into distinct portions was somewhat 
simplifying any investigation with regard to 
electricity, considered as a nervous agent.” 


University Events 


CAMBRIDGE.—G. E. Briggs, of St. John’s College, 
has been appointed reader in plant physiology. 

The Raymond Horton-Smith Prize awarded to 
that candidate for the degree of doctor of medicine 
who presents the best thesis for the degree during 
the year has been divided between Dr. F. Goldby, of 
Queens’ College, and Dr. J. Gray. 

Mr. Thomas Dalling has been elected to the pro- 
fessorship of animal pathology, in succession to Prof. 
J. B. Buxton, Queens’ College, who resigned last term 
on being appointed principal of the Royal Veterinary 
College. 

Dr. R. G. W. Norrish, formerly fellow of Emmanuel 
College, H. O. Jones lecturer in physical chemistry, 
has been elected to the professorship of physical 
chemistry vacant by the death of Prof. T. M. Lowry. 


Oxrorp.—The Herbert Spencer Lecture for 1937 
will be given by Dr. Joseph Needham on May 27 at 
5 p.m. in the Examination Schools. The subject is : 
“Integrative Levels, a Revaluation of the Idea of 
Progress”. 

Prof. The Svedberg, of Uppsala, will give two 
public lectures in English in the Museum, Oxford, at 
5 p.m. on February 26 and 11.15 a.m. on February 27, 
The subject is: “Sedimentation, Diffusion and 
Electrophoresis Technique for the Study of High- 
Molecular Compounds”. 


342 


Societies and Academies 


London 
Royal Society, February 11. 


N. G. Heatitey and P. E. LINDAHL: Studies on 
the nature of the amphibian organization centre. 
(5) The distribution and nature of glycogen in the 
amphibian embryo. N. G. HEATLEY, C. H. WADDING- 
TON and J. NEEDHAM : (6) Inductions by the evocator- 
glycogen complex in intact embryos and in ectoderm 
removed from the individuation-field. Total glycogen, 
lyo-glycogen and desmo-glycogen have been estimated 
by quantitative micro-chemical methods in the 
amphibian embryo around the gastrulation period. 
Prior to gastrulation, the glycogen concentration is 
highest at the animal, lowest at the vegetal, pole. 
During gastrulation, the total glycogen decreases in 
amount all over the embryo, but especially markedly 
(30 per cent) in the material which invaginates 
through the dorsal lip of the blastopore. Desmo- 
glycogen also decreases in all regions. It is thought 
unlikely that desmo-glycogen can be identical with 
that fraction of glycogen to which the evocator may 
be attached in the cells. The finding that both lyo- 
glycogen and desmo-glycogen preparations produce 
successful neural inductions in the chick embryo 
makes this still more unlikely. The distinction 
between evocation and individuation has been 
studied by implanting desmo-glycogen preparations 
(containing the adsorbed evocator) into isolated pieces 
of competent ectoderm. Massive neural inductions 
are produced, but these have not the character either 
of recognizable parts of the nervous system or of 
sections of a normal neural tube. On the other hand, 
the cells are not oriented entirely at random. This 
is believed to demonstrate the effect of the homo- 
geneous stimulus of the primary evocator. Following 
on the induction of neural tissue in these explants, 
the repulsion of overlying ectoderm and the forma- 
tion of melanophores were observed. These two 
effects are interpreted as dependent differentiations 
brought about by the presence of neural tissue as 
such. 

A. Happow and A. M. Rosryson: The influence 
of various polycyclic hydrocarbons on the growth- 
rate of transplantable tumours. A. Happow, C. M. 
Scorr and J. D. Scorr: The influence of certain 
carcinogenic and other hydrocarbons on body-growth 
of the rat. While intra-peritoneal administration of 
a number of carcinogenic hydrocarbons produced 
considerable inhibition in the rate of growth of the 
Jensen and Walker tumours, a series of related non- 
carcinogenic compounds gave no such inhibition. 
One synthetic cestrogen was moderately inhibitory 
and another quite inactive. Inhibitory activity 
was also shown to a variable extent by chrysene 
and by 1:2-benzanthracene and certain of its 
derivatives (3-, 4- and 7-methyl-), the carcino- 
genicity of which is either very feeble or nil. In 
comparative experiments on body-growth, X-radia- 
tion, lead, and colchicine were found to produce a 
temporary interference which was followed by 
recovery to the normal growth-rate, with or without 
compensation. Although the carcinogenic hydro- 
carbons must be regarded as toxic substances, their 
growth-inhibiting action is apparently independent 
of toxicity in any non-specific sense. The inhibition 
produced by the carcinogenic compounds was ex- 
tremely prolonged, even after a single injection. 


NATURE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


There is thus a correlation in compounds of this 
type between carcinogenicity and growth-inhibitory 
power. The mode of action of these substances seems 
to be indirect; they operate by producing a pro- 
longed retardation of the growth of normal cells, 
which eventually react by a process of discontinuous 
variation to give a new cell race with a greatly 
increased fission rate. 


Paris 
Academy of Sciences, January 18 (C.R., 204, 161-200). 
Lion Lecornu: Obituary notice of Joseph 
Auclair. 


GABRIEL BERTRAND and GrorcEes Brooks: The 
composition of the wood of the trunks and branches 
of the principal French trees. Determinations of 
xylose, mannose and cellulose. 

SERGE Frymkorr: (T) Configurations admitting an 
infinity of Calapso transformations. 

DoucHan Avsec: The wave forms of vortices in 
longitudinal bands. 

Jean Héry: A synthetic theory of gravitation 
and of electromagnetism. 

Maurice Corre: The convergence and achro- 
matism of centred systems of electronic optics. 

PIERRE Jacquet: The application of electrolytic 
polishing to the study of metallic deposits. The 
crystalline nature of the supporting metal is destroyed 
by the usual mechanical polishing methods ; but the 
electrolytic method recently suggested by the author 
gives smooth, brilliant surfaces without altering the 
structure of the underlying metal. Some experimental 
results with copper are described. 

SALOMON ROSENBLUM, Marcen GUmLror and 
MLLE. MARGUERITE PEREY : The « magnetic spectra 
in the actinium family. 

PAuL BAYARD. The infra-red absorption spectrum 
and molecular structure of pyruvic acid. From the 
data given, it appears that pure pyruvic acid exists 
almost entirely in the ketonic form, but the presence 
of a band attributable to the (OH) vibration proves 
the existence of a certain proportion of the enolic 
form. 

PAUL LAFFITTE and ANDRÉ Parisor: The in- 
fluence of the velocity of detonation of an explosive 
on the velocity of the shock wave. The results of 
experiments proving that the velocity of the explosive 
wave and that of the shock wave increase at first 
with the density of the charge. This disagrees with 
the results of Gawthrop, and possible causes for the 
difference are discussed. 

FERNAND GALLAIS: The constitution of solutions 
of potassium iodobismuthates. These solutions 
possess an exceptionally high magnetic rotatory 
power, and utilizing this property it was found that 
the chief complex ion in solutions of potassium 
iodobismuthate was either (Bil,)* or (Bil,)*, and it 
was not possible to decide between the two formule. 
Compounds of both types have already been isolated. 

EMILE THELLIER: The magnetization of baked 
clay : application to the study of the intensity of the 
earth’s magnetic field in the past. A method is 
described for deducing the intensity of the earth’s 
magnetic field at the time the brick was baked. 

JEAN FELDMANN and RoBERT Lamr: The marine 
vegetation of Guadeloupe. 

JULIEN DE SAINT-LAURENT: The formation of 
resiniferous canals in the ligneous tissue of the seed- 
lings in Pinus halepensis and Pinus Pinaster. 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


JEAN MICHEL GUILCHER: The comparative re- 
spiratory intensity of the androecium and gynzcium 
in flowers. 

Roger Durravu: The influence of B avitaminosis 
on the composition of the muscle of the pigeon. 

Mur. VéRA DANTCHAKOFF: The experimental 
production of free-martins in the guinea pig, and the 
nature of the factor conditioning their sexual histo- 
genesis. 

Yves Raout: The estimation of tyrosine in raw 
material from plants. 


Copenhagen 


Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters, 
October 16. 


HARALD Bour: Contributions to the theory of 
almost periodic functions (7, 8). : 

TH. MORTENSEN : Studies on the development of 
echinoderms : from the Biological Station, Ghardaqa 
(Red Sea). 


November 13. 


THORVALD MApsEN: The negative phase of the 
immunity curve. 


November 27 


A. LANGsETH: Constitution of the benzole mole- 


cule. ; 
December 11. 


ELIS StrROMGREN and H. Q. RASMUSEN : 
origin of Comet 1863 VI. 

Eis STRÖMGREN: Description of Ole Römer’s 
micrometer after Horrebow’s “Basis Astronomiae”. 

C. M. STEENBERG: A morphological and bio- 
logical investigation of the larva and pupa of Delopsis 
aterrima Zett. 

GEORGE Hevesy, O. Cuwæwrrz and G. HEVESY : 
Studies on the metabolism of phosphorus in animals. 
Radioactive phosphorus (phosphate) prepared from 
sulphur is added to the diet of animals and the path 
of the phosphorus in the body followed up by radio- 
active measurements. 


The 


Moscow 
Academy of Sciences (C.R., 4, No. 4; 1936). 


M. KetpyS: A class of extreme polynomes. 

M. Sussorrmy: A new anomaly which comprises, 
.as particular cases, the eccentric, true and tangential 
anomalies. 

M. A. ROSENBERG and K. E. AVALIANI : Dissolu- 
tion of the ‘vacuum films’ of metals in acids (2). Dis- 
solution of iron and nickel in sulphuric acid. 

I. I. Ceragasev and A. D. German: Isomerism 
of ethylene compounds of platinum. 

B. N. Forscu : The problem of a field of thermal 
waters. 

M. V. Krenova: Sediments of the Kara Sea. 

O. S. Vsatov and V. I. Sorun: Paleogenic 
Turritellide of Ferghana. 

J. A. BIRSTEIN: Growth and propagation of 
Cardium edule in Uertvy Kultuk and Kaidak in the 
Caspian Sea, in connexion with salinity. 

A. N. DRUŽINI : Contribution to the knowledge 
of the anatomy of the yak (Poephagus grunniens L.). 

G. U. Linpsrre and D. I. OCHRJAMKIN : The flat- 
fishes of the Japan Sea, Liopsetta obscura Lichtenstein 
and Limanda schrenki Schmidt. 


NATURE 


343 


(C.R., 4, No. 5; 1936.) 


G. V. PFEIFER: The expression of functions by 
‘functions. 

M. LAvRENTIEY : 
functions, 

L. Kayroroyié: A class of functional equations. 

Q. FICHTENHOLZ : Linear functions continued in 
generalized direction. 3 . 

V. Fock: The impossibility of a neutrino theory 
of light (1). Contradictions between the neutrino 
theory of light and the principle of superposition 
(see Nature, Dec. 12, 1936, p. 1011). 

F. N. Kirmov: The sand-eel of Novaya Zemlya 
(Ammodytes marinus Raitt). 

D. M. Feporov : The late post-embryonic develop- 
ment of Operophthera Crumata L. 


The continuity of univalent 


Rome 


Royal National Academy of the Lincei 
(Atti, 23, 643-713; 1936). 


L. Puccrantr: Inductances and fields of force. 

S. CHERUBINO : Reduction of matrices to canonical 
form (2). 

B. SEGRE: Oblique ovals, and the extension of the 
theorem of Cavalieri-Lagrange to functions of two 
variables. 

M. Manarint: Vectorial homographies with kine- 
matic applications in Sn spaces (3). General formula 
for the velocity and composition of the instantaneous 
motions of rotation. 

E. VOLTERRA : Plane elastic arches (3). 

C. AGOSTINELLI : The helicoidal vortex. 

B. Fxzı : Plastic rotations. 

C. Jopr: Procedures for experimental researches 
on elastic floors. 

R. BRUSCAGLIONI : Investigation of the resolving 
power of sensitive photographic materials by means 
of a new type of interferometer. 

P. Guarescut: Viscosity of liquids (2). 

A. ©. Branc: Submarine deposit of Cyprina 
islandica L. in the gulf of Terranova Pausania 
(Sardinia). 

A. GALAmini and E. SERIANNI : Survival of Bufo 
vulgaris after bilateral pneumectomy. 

V. Zacamr: Further observations on the be- 
haviour of creatin bodies and of urinary sulphur, 
phosphorus and chlorine during fasting and subse- 
quent feeding. 

V. Fiaura: Alimentary and nutritive value of the 
acorn and the possibility of utilizing it in human 
nutrition. 

C. Rizzo: Movements of teleosts in relation to 
experimental lesions of the peripheral apparatus of 
movement and of sensation (4). Labyrinthine lesions. 


Sydney 
Royal Society of New South Wales, October 7. 


M. D. Garretty: Some notes on the physio- 
graphy of the Lake George region, with special 
reference to the origin of Lake George. 

G. J. Burrows and A. Lenca : (1) The action of 
lead tetrachloride on primary and secondary halo- 
genated arsines and on tertiary arsines. (2) Note on 
diphenyl dihydroxy arsonium chloride, Ph,As(OH),Cl. 

O. U. VONWILLER : Interference by reflection from 
a concave spherical mirror. Interference bands may 
be observed when light is reflected at large angles 


344 


of incidence ..om a -spherical concave mirror, the 
result of the superposi* on of beams which have under- 
gone different numbers of reflections. Two, three or 
more beams may contribute. An examination is 
made of the conditions for the oecurrence of the 
bands and of the ranges over which those due to 
particular pairs of beams are observed. The band 
interval for a given system is qæì/0?, 0 being the 
deviation of the light and a depending on the numbers 
of reflections of the two beams concerned. The 
factors controlling intensity are investigated. A 
convenient and reasonably accurate method for the 
determination of wave-length is based on the effect. 

J. C. EARL and N. G. Hints: The action of 
nitrous acid on amines. A comparison has been made 
of the behaviour of aniline and methyl aniline, 
respectively, with nitrous acid. The possibilities of 
interference by secondary reactions in the case of 
aniline has to be kept in view. Allowing for this 
the experimental results recorded indicate that the 
reactions are essentially similar. Dilatometric and 
conductimetric methods were used in making the 
comparison. 


Forthcoming Events 
[Meetings marked with an asterisk are open to the public.] 


Monday, February 22 


VICTORIA INSTITUTE, at 4.30.—Alan Stuart : “Science and 
the Interpretation of Scripture”. 


BEDFORD COLLEGE FOR Women, at 5.15.—Dr. Friedrich 
Zeuner: ‘Some Aspects of Evolution revealed by the 
Study of Fossils’’.* 


UNIVERSITY OF LEEDS, at 5.15.—Prof. F. A. Lindemann, 
F.R.S.: “Low Temperature Research’’.* 


ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL Society, at 8.30.—Erie Shipton : 
“More Explorations round Nanda Devi”. 


Tuesday, February 23 


WARBURG INSTITUTE, at 5.30.—Prof. J. Huizinga: “The 
Play Element in Culture’’.* 


Wednesday, February 24 


SOCIETY FOR THE STUDY OF ALCHEMY AND EARLY 
CHEMISTRY, at 8—(at University College, Gower 
Street, W.C.1).—Discussion on “Alchemical and Chem- 
ical Symbols”. 


Royat Socrery or ARTS, at 8.15.—Prof. W. L. Bragg, 
F.R.S.: “Alloys”. 


Friday, February 26 


INSTITUTION OF CHEMICAL ENGINEERS, at ll a.m.— 
Fifteenth Annual Corporate Meeting to be held at the 
Hotel Victoria, Northumberland Avenue, London, 
W.C.2. 


GrornysicaL Discussion, at 4.30—(at the Royal Astro- 
nomical Society):—Discussion on ‘Radio Observations 
in High Latitudes” to be opened by Prof. E. V. Apple- 
ton, F.R.S. 


University OF Oxrorp, at 5—(in the Museum).—Prof. 
The Svedberg : “Sedimentation, Diffusion and Electro- 
phoresis Technique for the Study of High-Molecular 
Compounds” (succeeding lecture on February 27 at 
11.15 a.m.).* 

BRITISH Psycnonocicat Socimmry, at 8.30—(at the 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, 
Keppel Street, W.C.1).—Prof. T. H. Pear: “Psycho- 
logical Problems of Television”. 


NADU RE 


FEBRUARY 20, 1937 


ROYAL INSTITUTION, at 9.—Lord Horder: “Old Diseases 
and New”. 


ASSOCIATION OF TECHNICAL InstITUTIONS, February 26— 
27.—Annual General. Meeting to be held in the Car- 
penters’ Hall, Throgmorton Avenue, London, E.C.2. 

February 26, at 10.45.—The Right Hon. Lord 
Kennet: Presidential Address. 


Appointments Vacant 


APPLICATIONS are invited for the following appointments, on or 
before the dates mentioned : 

ASSISTANT IN MATHEMATICS AND ENGINEERING SCIENCE and 
ASSISTANT IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING in the Willesden Technical 
College—The Secretary, Willesden Local Higher Education Committee, 
Education Offices, Dyne Road, Kilburn, N.W.6 (February 26). 

b: SCIENTIFIC OFFICER (BALLISTIO PROBLEMS) in the Air Ministry— 
The Secretary, Air Ministry S.2.D., Adastral House, Kingsway, W.C.2. 
Quote No. B348.) (February 26). 

LECTURER IN CHEMISTRY in the Wigan and District Mining Technical 
College—The Principal (February 27). 

INSPECTOR OF MINES, BURMA—The High Commissioner for India, 
Sonora] Department, India House, Aldwych, London, W.C.2 (February 

SENIOR AGRICULTURAL ADVISORY OFFICER for West Norfolk—The 
Director of Agricultural Education, Agricultural Station Offices, 
Sprowston, Norwich (February 27). 

PHARMACIST in Runwell Hospital, -near Wickford, Essex—The 
Clerk to the Visiting Committee (February 27). 

GOVERNMENT CHEMIST, CyprUS—The Director of Recruitment 
(Colonial Service), 2 Richmond Terrace, London, S.W.1 (March 6). 

ASSISTANT LECTURER IN MATHEMATICS AND ASSISTANT LECTURER 
IN ZOOLOGY in University College, Exeter—The Registrar (March 6). 

X-RAY AND RADIUM PHYSICIST in the National Research Council 
of Canada—The Secretary, National Research Council, Ottawa 
(March 15). 

PROFESSOR OF PHYSIOLOGY in the Lady Hardinge Medical College, 
New Delhi, India—The Principal (April 15). 

LECTURER IN DOMESTIO ScreENCE in the Gloucestershire Training 
coneza of Domestic Science, Barrack Square, Gloucester—The 

ecretary. 


Official Publications Received 


Great Britain and Ireland 


Air Ministry: Aeronautical Research Committee: Reports and 
Memoranda. No. 1687 (1792): Performance and Longitudinal 
Stability of a Single-Engined High Wing Monoplane; Experiments 
on a Quarter Scale Model with Airscrew Running. By L. W. Bryant, 
D. H. Williams and A. F. Brown. Pp. 31+ 41 plates. 3s. 6d. net. 
No. 1691 (2238): Comparison of Drag of Trousered and Retractable 
Undercarriages. By Dr. R. Jones, A. H. Bell and A. F. Brown. Pp. 6. 
1s. net. No. 1701 (2004): The Effect of Central Cutaway in Split 
Flaps on the Trim of a Low Wing Monoplane. By D. W. Bottle, 
C. Callen and K. W. Kirkby. Pp. 17. 3s. net. No. 1704 (2212): 
Structure of Turbulence in a Natural Wind, with a Description of a 
Sensitive Pressure Gauge. By A. Graham. Pp. 16, 2s. 6d. net. No. 
1707 (1939): Trailing Edge Flaps in relation to Take-off and Landing 
of Landplanes. By S. B. Gates. Pp. 31. 48. 6d. net. No. 1711 (2072) : 
A Successive Approximation Process for Solving Simultaneous Linear 
Equations. By J. Morris. Pp. 12. 2s. net. No. 1712 (2107): Full 
Scale and Model Porpoising Tests of the Singapore IIc. By W. G. A. 
Perring and J. L. Hutchinson. Pp. 26. 3s. 6d. net. No. 1713 (2087) : 
Full Scale Tests of Slots and Flaps on a Heinkel He.64, with Special 
Reference to Landing. By J. E. Serby and H. B. Squire. Pp. 15. 
2s. 6d. net. No. 1718 (2186): The Use of Dynamically Similar Models 
for Determining the Porpoising Characteristics of Seaplanes. By 
L. P. Coombes, W. G. A. Perring and L. Johnston. Pp, 14. 2s. 6d. 
net. No. 1719 (2146): Full Scale Tests of the Hendy Heck (with an 
Appendix giving Pilot’s Notes). By A. E. Woodward Nutt and P. A. 
Hufton. Pp. 18+2 plates. 3s, net. No. 1722 (2038): The Effect of a 
Reduction of Aileron Torsional Stiffness on the Flutter of a Model 
Wing. By V. M. Falkner, W. P. Jones and C. Scruton. Pp. 8. 1s. 3d. 
net. (London: H.M. Stationery Office.) [281 


Other Countries 


Commonwealth of Australia: Council for Scientific and Industrial 
Research. C.S.I.R.: Ten Years of Progress, 1926-1936. Pp. 67. 
(Melbourne : Government Printer.) [251 

Mikrochemie: Internationale Zeitschrift fiir deren Gesamtgebiet. 
Festschrift zum 80 Geburtstag von Prof. Dr. Hans Molisch. Pp. 
viii-+454+1 plate. (Wien und Leipzig: Emil Haim und Co.) 28 
gold marks. (261 

U.S. Department of the Interior: Office of Education. Leaflet 
No. 37: Physique of School Children. By Dr. James Frederick 
Rogers. Pp. 17. 5 cents. Bulletin, 1936, No. 9: Testing Practices of 
High School Teachers. By J. Murray Lee and David Segel. Pp. v+42. 
10 cents. (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.) [271 


