The Raychaudhuri equations: a brief review
Sayan Kar
Department of Physics and Centre for Theoretical Studies,
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 721 302, INDIA

arXiv:gr-qc/0611123v1 23 Nov 2006

Soumitra SenGupta
Department of Theoretical Physics,
Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science,
Jadavpur, Kolkata 700 032, INDIA

Abstract
We present a brief review on the Raychaudhuri equations. Beginning with a summary of the
essential features of the original article by Raychaudhuri and subsequent work of numerous authors,
we move on to a discussion of the equations in the context of alternate non–Riemannian spacetimes
as well as other theories of gravity, with a special mention on the equations in spacetimes with
torsion (Einstein–Cartan–Sciama–Kibble theory). Finally, we give an overview of some recent
applications of these equations in General Relativity, Quantum Field Theory, String Theory and the
theory of relativisitic membranes. We conclude with a summary and provide our own perspectives
on directions of future research.

1

I.

THE BEGINNINGS

About half a century ago, General Relativity (GR) was young (just forty years old!),
and even the understanding of the simplest solution, the Schwarzschild, was incomplete.
Cosmology was virtually in its infancy, despite the fact that the Friedmann–Lemaitre–
Robertson–Walker (FLRW) solutions had been around for quite a while. The question
about the then–known exact solutions of GR, which worried the serious relativist quite a
bit, concerned their singular nature. Both the Schwarzschild and the cosmological solutions
were singular. It is well–known that the creator of GR, Einstein himself, was quite worried
about the appearance of singularities in his theory. Was there a way out? Was it correct to
believe in a theory which had singular solutions? Were singularities inevitable in GR?
It was during these days in the early 1950’s, Raychaudhuri began examining some of
these questions in GR. One of his early works during this era involved the construction
of a non–static solution of the Einstein equations for a cluster of radially moving particles
in an otherwise empty space [1]. A year before, he had also written an article related to
condensations in an expanding universe [2] where he dealt with cosmological perturbations
(in a sense, this article deals with what is today known as structure formation). Subsequent
to these papers, in 1955, appeared Relativistic Cosmology I [3], which contains the derivation
of the now–famous Raychaudhuri equation.
Fifty years hence, the Raychaudhuri equations have been discussed and analysed in a
variety of contexts. Their rise to prominence was largely due to their use (through the notion
of geodesic focusing) in the proofs of the seminal Hawking–Penrose singularity theorems of
GR. Today, the importance of this set of equations, as well as their applicability in diverse
scenarios, is a well-known fact.
This article is a brief review on these equations. We shall deal with some selected aspects
in greater detail. We, of course, would like to emphasize that there are many topics which
we leave untouched or, barely touched. We hope to do justice to these in a later, and more
extensive article.
The overall plan of this article is as follows. In the remainder of this section, we shall recall
the basic ideas and results in the 1955 paper and the singularity theorems. The next section
introduces (with illustrative examples) the kinematical quantities (expansion, rotation and
shear) which govern the characteristics of geodesic flows and also outlines the derivation and
2

consequences of the equations. Section 3 considers the equations in alternative Riemannian
and non–Riemannian theories of gravity (R + βR2 theory and the Einstein–Cartan–Sciama–
Kibble (ECSK) theory, in particular). In Section 4, we give a glimpse of the diverse uses of
these equations in contexts within, as well as outside the realm of GR. Finally, we present
a summary and provide our perspectives on possible future work.

A.

The original 1955 paper

The derivation of the Raychaudhuri equation, as presented in the 1955 article, is somewhat different from the way it is arrived at in standard textbooks today. It must however be
mentioned, that in a subsequent paper in 1957 [4], Raychaudhuri presented further results
which bear a similarity with the modern approach to the derivation. Let us now briefly
summarise the main points of the original derivation of Raychaudhuri.
(a) Raychaudhuri’s motivation behind this article is almost entirely restricted to cosmology.
He assumes the fact that the universe is represented by a time–dependent geometry but does
not assume homogeneity or isotropy at the outset. In fact, one of his aims is to see whether
non–zero rotation (spin), anisotropy (shear) and/or a cosmological constant can succeed in
avoiding the intial singularity.
(b) The entire analysis is carried out in the comoving frame (in the context of cosmological
line elements) –the frame in which the observer is at rest in the fluid.
(c) The quantity R44 (spacetime coordinates in the 1955 paper are labeled as x1 , x2 , x3 , x4
with the fourth one being time), is evaluated in two ways–once using the Einstein equations
(with a cosmological constant Λ) and, again, using the geometric definition of R44 in terms
of the metric and its derivatives. In the second way of writing this quantity, Raychaudhuri
introduces the definitions of shear and rotation.
(d) Finally, equating the two ways of writing R44 the equation for the evolution of the
expansion rate is obtained. Note that the definition of expansion given in this paper refers
to the special case of a cosmological metric.
(e) Apart from obtaining the equation, the article also arrives at the focusing theorem
(though it is not mentioned with this name) and some additional results (the last section).
In the same year (1955), Heckmann and Schucking [5], while dealing with Newtonian
cosmology arrived at a set of equations, one of which is the Raychaudhuri equation (in the
3

Newtonian case). Prompted by this work, Raychaudhuri re–derived his equations in a somewhat different way in an article where he also showed that Heckmann and Schucking’s work
for the Newtonian case could be generalised without any problems to the fully relativisitic
scenario. It must also be noted that Komar [6], a year after Raychaudhuri’s article appeared,
obtained conclusions similar to what is presented in Raychaudhuri’s article. Raychaudhuri
pointed this out in a letter published in 1957 [7].
Subsequently, in 1961, Jordan, Ehlers, Kundt and Sachs wrote an extensive article on the
relativistic mechanics of continuous media where the derivation of the evolution equations of
shear and rotation seem to appear for the first time [8]. Furthermore, for null geodesic flows,
the kinematical quantities: expansion, rotation and shear (related to the so–called optical
scalars) and the corresponding Raychaudhuri equations, were first introduced by Sachs [9].
The Raychaudhuri equation is sometimes referred to as the Landau–Raychaudhuri equation. It may be worthwhile to point out precisely, the work of Landau, in relation to this
equation. Landau’s contribution appears in his treatise The Classical Theory of Fields [10]
and is also discussed in detail in [6, 11]. Working in the synchronous (comoving) reference
frame, Landau defines a quantity χαβ =

∂γαβ
, where γαβ
∂t

is the 3–metric. Subsequently,

∂
using the fact that χαα = ∂t
γ, where γ is the determinant of the 3–metric, he writes down an
∂ α
χα + 16 (χαα )2 ≥ 0. While deriving the inequality,
expression for R00 and then, an inequality ∂t

Landau implicitly assumes the Strong Energy Condition (though it is not mentioned with
this name). Then, using it, he is able to show that γ must necessarily go to zero within a
finite time. However, he mentions quite clearly that this does not imply the existence of a
physical singularity in the sense of curvature. Though Landau’s work captures the essence of
focusing, he does not explicitly mention geodesic focusing–moreover, he does not introduce
shear and rotation or write down the complete equation for the expansion.
Even though it was mentioned in [11] and [8], Raychaudhuri’s contribution found its true
recognition only after the seminal work of Hawking and Penrose which appeared a decade
later. It was at that time, along with the proofs of the singularity theorems, the term
Raychaudhuri equation came into existence in the physics literature.

4

B.

The singularity theorems

It must be mentioned that Raychaudhuri did point out the connection of his equations
to the existence of singularities in his 1955 article. However, more general results (based on
global techniques in Lorentzian spacetimes) appeared in the form of singularity theorems following Penrose’s work [12] and, then, Hawking’s contributions [13, 14]. The crucial element
of the singularity theorems is that the existence of singularities is proved by using a minimal
set of assumptions (loosely speaking, these are : Lorentz signature metrics and causality, the
generic condition on the Riemann tensor components, the existence of trapped surfaces and
energy conditions on matter). In fact, a precise definition of ‘what is a singularity?’ first
appeared in the works of Hawking and Penrose. The notion of geodesic incompleteness and
its relation to singularities (not necessarily curvature singularities) was also born in their
work. One should also realise that the focusing of geodesics arrived at by Raychaudhuri
and discussed in much detail in later articles by other authors could be completely benign
(irrespective of any actual singularity being present in the manifold). Thus, a singularity
would always imply focusing of geodesics but focusing alone cannot imply a singularity (also
pointed out by Landau [10]). We refrain from discussing the singularity theorems any further
here–excellent discussion on global aspects in gravitation as well as the Hawking–Penrose
theorems are available in [15, 16, 17].

II.

THE GEOMETRY AND PHYSICS OF THE EQUATIONS

Let us now review the basic ingredients and the derivation of the equations. First, of
course, we need to know– what do these equations deal with? In a sentence, one may say
that they are concerned about the kinematics of flows. Flows are generated by a vector
field–they are the integral curves of the given vector field. These curves may be geodesic
or non–geodesic, though the former is more useful in the context of gravity. Thus, a flow
is a congruence of such curves –each curve may be timelike or null or, in the Euclidean
case, have tangent vectors with a positive definite norm. One does not, in the context of
these equations, ask, how the flow is generated. In other words, we are more interested,
in deriving the kinematic characteristics of such flows. The evolution equations (along the
flow) of the quantitites that characterise the flow in a given background spacetime, are the

5

Raychaudhuri equations. Historically speaking, it is the equation for one of the quantitites
(the expansion), which is termed as the Raychaudhuri equation. However, in this article,
we will refer to the full set of equations as Raychaudhuri equations.

A.

Expansion, rotation, shear

What quantities characterise a flow? If λ denotes the parameter labeling points on the
curves in the flow, then, in order to characterise the flow, we must have different functions
of λ. In other words, the gradient of the velocity field being a second rank tensor is split
into three parts : the symmetric traceless part, the antisymmetric part and the trace. These
define for us the shear, rotation and the expansion of the flow. Specifically,

∇b va = σab + ωab +

1
hab Θ
n−1

(1)

1
hab Θ,
where the symmetric, traceless part, the shear, is defined as σab = 21 (∇b va + ∇a vb )− n−1

the trace, expansion, is Θ = ∇a v a and the antisymmetric rotation is given as, ωab =
1
(∇b va − ∇a vb ).
2

n is the dimension of spacetime, and hab = gab ± va vb is the projection

tensor (the plus sign is for timelike curves whereas the minus one is for spacelike ones). Also,
correspondingly, va v a = ∓1. We shall discuss the case of null geodesic congruences briefly,
later.
The geometric meaning of these quantities is shown through Figure 1 and Figure 2.
The expansion, rotation and shear are related to the geometry of the cross sectional area
(enclosing a fixed number of geodesics) orthogonal to the flow lines (Figure 1). As one moves
from one point to another, along the flow, the shape of this area changes. It still includes
the same set of geodesics in the bundle but may be isotropically smaller (or larger), sheared
or twisted. The analogy with elastic deformations or fluid flow is, usually, a good visual
aid for understanding the change in the geometry of this area. A recent, nice discussion is
available in [18]. Earlier references where these quantities are explained in quite some detail
are [19],[20].

6

Area enclosing a set of flow lines

A

FIG. 1: The cross sectional area enclosing a congruence of geodesics

Isotropic Expansion

Shear

A2

A1
Area at λ 1

Area at λ 2

Area at λ 1

Area at λ 2

Rotation
Note similarity with
(i) Elastic deformations
(ii) Fluid flow
Area at λ 1

Area at λ 2

FIG. 2: Illustrating expansion, rotation and shear
B.

Examples

It is useful to illustrate these quantities with a set of examples. We first choose to work
with Schwarzschild spacetime. Our examples here will involve (i) rotation–free timelike
geodesic flows and (ii) timelike flows with all three kinematical quantities non–zero. We
focus on examples with non–zero shear and rotation because these are not usually available
in standard texts on GR. Our choice of examples are primarily based on the problems
suggested in a recent monograph by Poisson [18]. In a third example (iii) we discuss briefly
a timelike geodesic flow in the FLRW universe. Finally, in (iv) we briefly deal with geodesic
7

flows in wormhole spacetimes.
(i) From the Frobenius theorem [18], we know that hypersurface orthogonal vector fields
must necessarily have zero rotation though the shear can have non–zero components. In
Schwarzschild spacetime, we construct a congruence which has the above properties (i.e. it
is irrotational but has nonzero shear and expansion). Consider the vector field:
1
ua ∂a =
∂t ±
1 − 2M
r

s

2M
∂r
r

(2)

The geodesics corresponding to the above vector field are marginally bound (i.e. ut = −1)
and the upper and lower signs refer to outgoing and incoming geodesics. It is easy to show
that the above vector field can be written as ua = ∂a φ, where φ(xa ) = constant would
represent the hypersurface with respect to which ua is orthogonal. In fact, φ is the same as
the new time T (the proper time as measured by a freely falling observer starting from rest
at infinity and moving radially inward) used in the Painleve–Gullstrand representation [18]
of the Schwarzschild line element.
It is easy to calculate the expansion, which turns out to be:
s

3 2M
(3)
Θ=±
2 r3
Notice that the expansion is positive for outgoing and negative for incoming geodesics. We
can also find the nonzero shear tensor components which are given as:

2M
σtt = ∓ 2
r
2M
r2
σtr =
1 − 2M
r

s

q

2M

2M
r3
; σrr = ∓ 
2
r
1 − 2M
r

s

; σθθ = ±

Mr
1
=
σφφ
2
sin2 θ

(4)
(5)

One can then check that the Raychaudhuri equations (given in the next sub–section) hold
with the above expressions for the shear and expansion.
(ii) We now move on to an example where all three kinematical quantities are non–zero.
Consider the following vector field in Schwarzschild spacetime:


1

∂t +
ua ∂a ≡ q
3M
1− r

8

s



M 
∂θ
r3

(6)

where M is the usual mass. It can be verified that the geodesics corresponding to this
vector field are timelike and they are circular (r is a constant). We intend to calculate the
expansion, rotation and shear of the above vector field. The expansion is given as :
v
u
u M/r 3
Θ = cot θt

(7)

1 − 3M
r

Notice that the expansion is positive in the northern hemisphere and negative in the southern
hemisphere.
Following the definition, one can show that the rotation tensor for this vector field is
given as:

and the shear tensor is:

M 1 − 6M
r
ωtr = 2 
3 =
4r
3M 2
1− r

s

M
ωrθ
r3

(8)





1 − 2M
M
M
r
 σφφ
σtt = 3 σθθ = − 3 2 
r
2r sin θ 1 − 3M

(9)

r

s

=−



2

2M
)
1
M
M 3 (1 − 2M
M 1− r
r


σ
=
−
σ
=
cot
θ
rr
tθ
3


r3
r 1 − 3M
3
r5
2
1 − 3M
r
r

s

σtr =

s

)
M
3M (1 − 2M
r
σ
=
−
rθ
3


r3
4r 2
2
1 − 3M
r

One can further verify that here too, the Raychaudhuri equations (given below) are satisfied
for the above quantities. One can also evaluate σ 2 − ω 2 and show that it is positive for
r > 3M. The expansion is defined for this domain of r (> 3M) and can diverge to negative
infinity (focusing) at θ = π (south pole).
(iii) As a third example, we now quickly discuss the expansion, rotation and shear with
respect to the vector field ua ∂a = ∂t in the standard cosmological line element (FLRW). The
shear and rotation are identically zero. The expansion is given as:
1 d √ 6 
ȧ
a
Θ=3 = √
a
a6 dt

(10)

Note that a6 is the volume of the expanding 3–space. Hence the term ‘volume’ expansion
is also used in the literature. Raychaudhuri, in his original article, defined the expansion
9

in the this way. However, his treatment did include nonzero shear and rotation because he
did not assume, to start with, maximally symmetric metrics on spatial slices representing
R3 , S 3 or H 3 . It may be mentioned here that the equation for the expansion reduces to the
equation for aä = 4πG
(ρ + 3p).
3
(iv) Our final example concerns the case of geodesic flows in a traversable wormhole [21].
It is known that traversable wormholes require energy–condition–violating matter. These
are non–singular spacetimes where the spatial slices resemble two asymptotically flat regions
connected by a throat. Thus a geodesic congruence passing through the throat from one
asymptotic region to the other would necessarily tend to focus first, not quite reach a focal
point, and then defocus. For a typical wormhole, the line element is given as:


ds2 = −χ2 (l)dt2 + dl2 + r 2 (l) dθ2 + sin2 θdφ2



(11)

where, for a wormhole, χ(l) is nonzero and finite for all l and r(l = 0) = b0 with r(l →
′

±∞) ∼ l. It is easy to check that the expansion is proportional to rr (the prime denoting

a derivative w.r.t. l). Thus, the expansion never becomes negative infinity and thus there
is no focusing. One can work out the expansion for a typical example using r(l) =
(the so–called Ellis wormhole) [21].

C.

q

b20 + l2

The equations and the focusing theorem

We now turn towards writing down the evolution equations for the expansion, shear and
rotation along the flow representing a timelike geodesic congruence. A fact worth mentioning
here is that, these evolution equations (and their generalisations) are essentially geometric
statements and are independent of any reference to the Einstein field equations.
The modern (textbook) way to derive these equations (see [15]) is as follows. Consider
the quantity v c ∇c Bab (where Bab = ∇b va ). Evaluate this as an identity and then split it
into its trace, antisymmetric and symmetric traceless parts. The equations that emerge are
the ones given below (for n ≡ the dimension of spacetime = 4).
dΘ 1 2
+ Θ + σ 2 − ω 2 = −Rab v a v b
dλ
3

10

(12)



dσab
2
1
= − Θσab − σac σ cb − ωac ω cb + hab σ 2 − ω 2
dλ
3
3
1
+Ccbad v c v d + R̃ab
2

dωab
2
= − Θωab − 2σ c[b ωa]c
dλ
3

(13)

(14)

where σ 2 = σab σ ab , ω 2 = ωab ω ab , Ccbad is the Weyl tensor and the quantity R̃ab = hac hbd Rcd −
1
h h Rcd .
3 ab cd

There are a few points to note here. Firstly, one must realise that these are not equations
but, essentially, identitites. Hence, in some references [22, 23, 24] we find the usage Raychaudhuri identity or Codazzi–Raychaudhuri identity (in the context of surface congruences
to be discussed later) which is, indeed, rigorously correct. The identities, however become
equations once we use the Einstein equations or any other geometric property (e.g. Einstein
space, or vacuum, etc.) as an extra input. However, we shall continue to use the term
equations in this article.
Furthermore, the equations are coupled, nonlinear and first order. The equation for the
expansion is of central interest (in the context of the singularity theorems) and it is rather
straightforward to analyse. In mathematical parlance, it (the equation for the expansion)
is known as a Riccati equation. Such equations can be transformed into a second order
linear form (more precisely a Hill–type equation or a harmonic oscillator equation with a
′

time-varying frequency) [25, 26]. Redefining Θ = 3 FF one gets:

1
d2 F
a b
2
2
F =0
R
v
v
+
σ
−
ω
+
ab
dλ2
3

(15)

The analysis of the expansion equation can be done using the above form. One notes that
the expansion Θ is nothing but the rate of change of the cross–sectional area orthogonal
to the bundle of geodesics. Therefore, the expansion approaching negative infinity implies
a convergence of the bundle, whereas a value of positive infinity would imply a complete
divergence. What are the conditions for convergence? Firstly, for convergence we must have
an initially negative expansion. Finally, with F ′ negative we must end up at a zero of F
(at a finite λ), in order to have a negatively infinite expansion [25, 26]. Thus, the criterion
for the existence of zeros in F at finite values of the affine parameter is what is required for
11

convergence. Using the well-known Sturm comparison theorems in the theory of differential
equations one can show that convergence occurs if :
Rab v a v b + σ 2 − ω 2 ≥ 0

(16)

Thus, rotation defies convergence, while shear assists it. The equation for the evolution
of the rotation ωab , has a trivial solution ωab = 0. The criterion for convergence then
becomes particularly simple for such hypersurface orthogonal congruences (zero rotation) :
Rab v a v b ≥ 0. This leads to geodesic focusing.
If we make use of the Einstein field equations and rewrite the Ricci tensor in terms of the
energy–momentum tensor Rab = Tab − 12 gab T the the so–called timelike convergence condition




becomes a condition on matter stress energy. This, given as, Tab − 21 gab T v a v b ≥ 0 is known
as the Strong Energy Condition (SEC). For a diagonal Tab (with T00 = ρ, Taa = pa ) we must
have ρ + pa ≥ 0, ρ +

P

a pa ≥ 0 if the SEC is to be obeyed. In other words, geodesic focusing

encodes the simple statement that if matter is attractive, geodesics must be eventually drawn
towards each other. This seemingly trivial statement is proved via the focusing theorem.
In the late seventies, Tipler [25, 26] realised that the assumption of the SEC imposed to
prove focusing and hence the existence of singularities could be further weakened. Among
other results, he was able to show how, in the proof of the Hawking–Penrose theorem one
might replace SEC by the Weak Energy Condition (WEC: Tab v a v b ≥ 0 ∀ non–spacelike v a ).
Tipler also introduced in his article, for the first time, the notion of an averaged energy
condition (the Averaged Strong and Weak Energy Conditions (ASEC and AWEC) which
are global in nature. For instance the AWEC is obtained by integrating the WEC along a
non–spacelike geodesic and gives a number ( λλ12 Tab v a v b dλ ≥ 0). The question of whether a
R

violation of the energy conditions could lead to a non–singular solution was also addressed
by him. One should mention here that a few years before Tipler’s work, Bekenstein [27] and
Murphy [28] had proposed certain non–singular spacetimes. These models turned out to be
singular, following the above–mentioned generalisations of the singularity theorems. Tipler
also quotes, in his paper, the well–known Epstein–Glaser–Yaffe theorem in quantum field
theory where it is said that there can exist a quantum state w.r.t. which the expectation
value of the stress–energy tensor can be negative [29]. However, he does mention that
the existence of one state w.r.t. which the hT00 i is less than zero cannot really lead to the
prevention of singularities. Of late, however, energy–condition violations have been discussed
12

in great detail in the context of wormholes [21], dark energy [30], braneworld models [31] and
semi–classical gravity (quantum field theory in curved spacetimes) [32]. The experimentally
observed Casimir effect (the feeble attraction between parallel, conducting capacitor plates)
[33] has been cited as an example of the existence of negative energy density (though, truly
speaking this effect is concerned with negative pressures as opposed to actual negative energy
densities).
The quest for further weakening the criteria for geodesic focusing and thereby making the
singularity theorems stronger was continued later through the work of Borde [34] and Roman
[35]. Further work on issues related to geodesic focusing, singularites, energy conditions and
causality violations have been carried out in [36, 37, 38, 39, 40].

D.

Null geodesic congruences

The Raychaudhuri equations for null geodesic congruences were first derived by Sachs [9]
in 1961. Let us briefly recall the salient features of these equations. It must be mentioned,
however, that these equations are not very different (in structure as well as consequences
thereof) from the equations for timelike congruences.
The central issue in the case for null geodesic congruences is the construction of the
transverse parts of the deviation vector and the spacetime metric. Assuming an affine
parametrisation in the sense dxa = k a dλ with k a ka = 0 and k a ξa = 0 (with ξ a being the
deviation vector) we realise that we are in trouble because of the above two orthogonality
relations. Naively writing hab = gab + ka kb will not work here (k a hab 6= 0). The transverse

metric is thus constructed by introducing an auxiliary null vector N a with ka N a = −1.
(the choice of minus one is by convention, the essence is that the quantity must be non–
zero). If we choose ka = −∂a u (u = t − x) then we can have Na = − 12 ∂a v and hence

hab = gab + ka Nb + kb Na . This satisfies k a hab = 0 and N a hab = 0. Note that hab now is
entirely two dimensional. Keeping this transverse metric in mind we can proceed in the
same way as for the timelike case by constructing B̂ab = ∇b ka . We quote below the equation
for the expansion:
dΘ̂ 1 2
+ Θ̂ + σ̂ 2 − ω̂ 2 = −Rab k a k b
dλ 2

(17)

where the hatted quantitites are the expansion, rotation and shear for the null geodesic
13

congruence. The focusing theorem for null geodesic congruences follows in the same way
as for timelike congruences, with the null convergence condition Rab k a k b ≥ 0 being the
requirement. Using Einstein equations one can obtain the so–called Null Energy Condition
Tab k a k b ≥ 0. Similar to the case for timelike congruences, we have corresponding equations
for the evolution of shear and rotation for null geodesic congruences too. These are available
in [15, 18].

E.

The acceleration term and non–affine parametrisations

The discussions above were exclusively for geodesic congruences. In the non–geodesic
(i.e. timelike or null congruences) case, it is obvious that there will be differences. We
state below, how the equation for the expansion changes via the addition of the so–called
acceleleration term. The equation is now given as:


dΘ 1 2
+ Θ + σ 2 − ω 2 − ∇a v b ∇b v a = −Rab v a v b
dλ 3

(18)

where the fifth term on the R. H. S. is the acceleration term. Notice that this term is zero
for geodesic congruences (zero acceleration). The average distance between the world lines
in the flow is changed due to the divergence of the acceleration. The non–geodesic character
of the flow also affects the equation for the shear.
For a non-affine parametrisation of null geodesic congruences, with k a ∇a k b = κk b (κ,
a constant, defined through the above equation) the definition of the expansion changes :
Θ = ∇a k a − κ and the Raychaudhuri equation for the expansion takes the form:
dΘ̂
1
− κΘ + Θ̂2 + σ̂ 2 − ω̂ 2 = −Rab k a k b
dλ
2

(19)

The new feature here is the presence of the linear (in Θ) term. The conclusions on geodesic
focusing however do not change, except for differences in the values of the expansion.

F.

A theorem for non–rotating singularity–free universes : Raychaudhuri’s later

papers

Over the entire period of more than forty years, Raychaudhuri did not work much on
the equations which bear his name today. Interestingly, he came back to have a look at
14

them once again in the late nineties with a series of papers [41, 42]. In these articles, he
constructed a theorem on non–rotating singularity–free universes. The main inspiration
behind these papers were the singularity–free cosmological solutions due to Senovilla [43],
which created a lot of interest and curiosity among relativists in the 1990’s. In fact, the
work of Raychaudhuri sets out to show that these solutions may not quite be physically
relevant, though surely, mathematically correct. Let us now briefly recall the theorem of
Raychaudhuri.
The basic premise of [41, 42] is the use of spacetime averages of quantitites, defined as:
R

q

x0 R x1 R x2 R x3
−x0 −x1 −x2 −x3 χ

|g|d4 x




hχi =  R x R x R x R x q
0
1
2
3
4
|g|d x
−x0 −x1 −x2 −x3

(20)
limx0,1,2,3 →∞

Raychaudhuri shows that for a singularity–free non–rotating universe, open in all directions,
the spacetime average of all stress–energy invariants, including the energy density vanishes.
The proof is worked out using the spacetime averages of the scalars that appear in the
Raychaudhuri equation for the expansion. Following the statement of the theorem, Raychaudhuri claimed that an observationally consistent universe cannot have a zero average
density and hence one must necessarily give up the hope of having singularity–free solutions. Subsequent to Raychaudhuri’s work, Saa and Senovilla wrote a couple of comments
which were mainly concerned with the converse of Raychaudhuri’s theorem and the question whether spacetime averages could really be a property which can distinguish between
singular and non–singular models. In fact, one must note that the theorem does not say
that if the spacetime averages are zero the spacetime must be non–singular. Therefore,
the theorem cannot really be used to distinguish between singular and non–singular cosmological models. Furthermore, Senovilla, in his comment, made a conjecture that spatial
and not spacetime averages could be a distinguishing property between singular and non–
singular models. More precisely, his claim was that for non–singular, non–rotating, globally
hyperbolic and everywhere expanding models where SEC holds, the spatial averages of all
stress–energy invariants must vanish. Therefore, if such spatial averages do not vanish then
the model must be singular. More details and a recent proof of the conjecture is available in
the article by Senovilla in this volume [44]. Despite the conflict between whether spatial or
spacetime averages was the crucial distinguishing factor between singular and non–singular
models, it goes without saying that Raychaudhuri’s idea about averages being a deciding
15

factor will surely be remembered as a lasting contribution apart from his coveted equations.

III.

THE EQUATIONS IN DIFFERENT GEOMETRIES AND DIFFERENT THE-

ORIES OF GRAVITY

The Raychaudhuri equations discussed in the previous sections do not change as long as
we respect the Riemannian (pseudo–Riemannian) metric structure of space or spacetime.
However, in an alternative theory of gravity, the Einstein field equations are of course different and hence the relation between the energy–momentum tensor and other geometric
quantities do change. This results in a modification of the consequences that arise while
analysing these equations. On the other hand, if the usual Riemannian structure of spacetime changes, such as in the case of spaces with torsion (Einstein–Cartan–Sciama–Kibble
theory), then the Raychaudhuri equations are surely different. We shall give an example
of both these scenarios in the following two subsections. The equations in spacetimes with
torsion is discussed in relatively greater detail because, this is one scenario where we actually
notice a generalisation of the usual Raychaudhuri equations.

A.

Metric theories with symmetric connections

As mentioned above, for theories with a symmetric connection, the Raychaudhuri equations do not change, though the R.H.S. of the expansion equation when written using matter stress-energy can be very different from what it is in GR. This change can surely affect
geodesic focusing. It must be noted here that any change in the conclusions about geodesic
focusing in this case is inherently due to the new solutions (spacetime geometries) of the
modified Einstein equations for a given stress–energy. The abovementioned aspects have
been analysed in the context of the Brans–Dicke and Hoyle–Narlikar theories [45, 46, 47] as
well as the R + βR2 theory [48], on which we focus our attention below.
The study of the Raychaudhuri equations in the presence of higher curvature terms in the
action has been a subject of interest for a long time[49]. The equation for the expansion, in a
spacetime background solution of R+βR2 gravity in the presence of matter (ρ ∝ a(t)−n ) has
been analysed in [50]. The Strong Energy Condition (SEC) is examined and it is shown that
the condition for a big-bang singularity changes in such a scenario. Recall that in GR, the

16

singularity theorem indicates the inevitable presence of singularities when the SEC (as well
as some other conditions) are satisfied. However, at the microscopic scale, in the evolution of
the expansion of a geodesic congruence, quantum effects are expected to show up – which,
in turn, may completely change classical predictions. One such quantum effect leads to
the appearance of higher curvature terms, namely, quadratic gravity [48]. Even though it
might seem that the analysis in [50] for quadratic gravity is classical, it is, in a broader
sense, a semi-classical analysis. Classical solutions of quadratic gravity have been studied
to explore the nature of singularities and it has been shown that the big-bang singularity
may be avoided [51]. In [50], quadratic gravity, i.e. R + βR2 gravity, was considered as a
a backreaction effect on pure Einstein’s gravity . It was found that the SEC for R + βR2
gravity is different from that of Einstein gravity. We briefly summarize the results of [50]
below.
In GR, the SEC follows from the use of Einstein’s equations through the relation:
1
Rab v a v b = 8πG Tab − T gab v a v b ≥ 0
2




(21)

for all timelike v a . This, as mentioned before, leads to focussing.
The author in [50] is primarily interested in the cosmological singularity. To analyse the
effects of the quadratic terms one only needs to find the new expression for the Ricci tensor
Rab in terms of the energy momentum tensor Tab . Therefore, we require the modified field
equations for quadratic gravity. It is known that this equation is
− Gab + 16πGβ



1 2
;n
R gab − 2RRab − 2R;n
gab + 2R;a;b = −8πGTab
2


(22)

In a perturbative analysis, we are primarily interested in the first order contribution from
βR2 to the Raychaudhuri equation. After some algebra one arrives at,
1
Rab v v = G̃(Tab − T gab )
2
a b

2β G̃

2





1 2
T gab G̃ − 2T Tab G̃ − T;n;n gab − 2T;a;b
2



v a v b + O(β 2)

(23)

where G̃ = 8πG.
Comparing the above equation with that in Einstein gravity, we find that an effective energy
momentum tensor appears in the RHS of the above equation. Assuming a matter dominated

17

universe with a characteristic dependence on the scale factor (i.e., ρ = aρn0 ) and a local
ρ0
. Thus, finally, we have,
conservation of Tab leads to p = n−3
3 an

h
i
n−2
G̃ρn + β G̃2 3n(n − 1)(n − 4)G̃ρ2n + 6n2 (n − 4)ka−2 ρn +
2
h
i
n
2
(A − 1) − G̃ρn + β G̃2 2n2 (n − 4)G̃ρ2n + 4n(n + 2)(n − 4)ka−2 ρn
3

Rab v a v b = −

(24)

The above expression is the modified term which appears in the R. H. S. of the Raychaudhuri
equation for the expansion. It is thereafter analysed in the context of different values of n and
the possiblities of avoiding the big–bang singularity or its inevitable occurence are pointed
out for different cases.
We repeat once again that for any modified theory of gravity (eg. Brans–Dicke, Einstein–
Gauss–Bonnet in higher dimensions, induced gravity, low energy effective stringy gravity etc.
) as long the Riemannian structure of spacetime is respected, changes in conclusions related
to geodesic focusing can arise only through the modified field equations and its use in the
convergence condition.

B.

The Raychaudhuri equation in spacetimes with torsion

The symmetric nature of the affine connection is one of the underlying assumptions of
Riemannian geometry. This fact is also assumed while constructing GR. An antisymmetric
connection may originate from the presence of spin matter fields in spacetime leading to a
transition from the V4 to U4 manifolds [52]. This asymmetric part is known as torsion.
Generalization of the theory of gravity in such a spacetime with torsion was proposed by
Einstein–Cartan–Sciama–Kibble (ECSK).[53]. Absence of any experimental signature of
torsion however is the primary criticism of such models although there has been a renewed
theoretical interest in the context of superstring theories [54] where spacetime torsion appears in the form of a massless string mode. The third rank field strength of the massless
second rank antisymmetric tensor field of string theory (known as the Kalb-Ramond field) is
identified with spacetime torsion in the low energy limit of the theory. Torsion also appears
naturally in a theory of gravity where twistors are used [55] as well as in the supergravity
scenario where torsion, curvature and matter fields are treated in an analogous way [56]. It
has been shown in several articles [57] that in string inspired models such a background with
18

torsion results in a departure from the experimentally predicted values of the well known
phenomena like gravitational lensing, perihelion precession of planetary orbits, gravitational
redshift, rotation of the plane of polarization of the distant galactic radiowaves etc. All
the above arguments, and several more, compel us to include torsion in any comprehensive
theory of gravity. In the context of geodesic congruences it has further been shown that the
kinematical quantities– shear, rotation, acceleration, expansion and their evolution equations are modified by the presence of torsion. This naturally leads to a generalization of
the Raychaudhuri equations in presence of torsion leading to a more general understanding
of the phenomenon of geodesic focusing. Here we give a brief review of the work presented
in [58] where the role of torsion in modifying the Raychaudhuri equations and some of its
implications have been discussed.
The torsion tensor Tab c which is the antisymmetric part of the affine connection Γcab , is
given by,
Tab c =

1 c
(Γ − Γcba ) ≡ Γc[ab] ,
2 ab

(25)

where a, b, c = 0, . . . 3.
In GR, Tab c is postulated to be zero.
From the torsion tensor one constructs the contortion tensor as,
Kab c = −Tab c − T cab + Tb ca = −Ka cb ,

(26)

This leads to a general expression for the affine connection given as,
Γcab = {cab } − Kab c ,

(27)

where {cab } is the symmetric part of the connection (Christoffel symbols). With this modified
connection the commutator of the covariant derivatives of a scalar field φ is
˜ [a ∇
˜ b] φ = −T c ∇
˜ c φ;
∇
ab

(28)

which is zero in absence of torsion.
Similarly for a vector v a the commutator of the derivative gives,
˜
∇[a ˜
∇b] v c = Rabdc v d − 2Tab d ˜
∇d v c ,
19

(29)

where the Riemann tensor is defined as,
Rabcd = ∂a Γdbc − ∂b Γdac + Γdae Γebc − Γdbe Γeac .

(30)

The contribution of torsion, to the Riemann tensor, is explicitly given through the following
expression:
d

Rabc d = Rabc d ({}) − ∇a Kbc + ∇b Kac d + Kae d Kbc e − Kbe d Kac e

(31)

˜ and ∇
where Rabcd ({}) is the tensor generated by the Christoffel symbols. The symbols ∇
have been used to indicate the covariant derivative with and without torsion respectively.
From Eq.(31), the expressions for the Ricci tensor and the curvature scalar are
Rab = Rab ({}) − 2∇a Tc + ∇b Kac b + Kae b Kbc e − 2Te Kac e

(32)

R = R({}) − 4∇a T a + Kceb K bce − 4Ta T a .

(33)

Ta = Tab b .

(34)

and

where,

Ta can be either time-like, space-like or light-like.

1.

Contributions of torsion to shear, expansion, vorticity and acceleration

Beginning with the behaviour of fluids and moving on to the initial singularity problem in
cosmological models, the Raychaudhuri equations have been shown to be the key equation to
explore the role of torsion in such diverse phenomena.[59],[60],[61],[62]. In [63] an inflationary
model of the universe in the context of ECSK theory was considered. [64] and [65] addressed
the crucial role of Raychaudhuri equation in the context of a gauge invariant formalism
for cosmological perturbations in theories with torsion. We now explain the kinematical
quantities mentioned before, in a scenario with torsion.
Torsion in a space-time modifies the definition of kinematical quantities. The covariant
derivative of the four velocity Ua [16] can be decomposed as,
˜ a Ub = σ̃ab + 1 hab Θ̃ + ω̃ab − Ua ãb
∇
3
20

(35)

where hab = gab + Ua Ub and
˜ a U a = Θ − 2T c Uc ,
Θ̃ = ∇

(36)

˜ (c Ud) = σab + 2hc hd K e Ue ,
σ̃ab = hca hdb ∇
a b (cd)

(37)

˜ [c Ud] = ωab + 2hc hd K e Ue ,
ω̃ab = hca hdb ∇
a b [cd]

(38)

˜ a Uc = ac + U a K d Ud .
ãc = U a ∇
ac

(39)

and the acceleration

The quantities without the tilde are the value of the corresponding expressions in a spacetime
without torsion.

2.

The Raychaudhuri equation

Using the identity for the four-velocity Ua (Ua U a = −1),
˜ c∇
˜ b Ua = ∇
˜ c (U b ∇
˜ b Ua ) − ∇
˜ cU b∇
˜ b Ua
U b∇

(40)

˜ c∇
˜ b Ua = U b ∇
˜ b∇
˜ c Ua + R d Ud U b − 2U b T c ∇
˜ d Uc
U b∇
cba
ab

(41)

and from Eq.(30)

we find the equation
1
hca Θ̃ + σ̃ca + ω̃ca − Uc ãa = ˜
∇c ãa
3
2
2
1
− hca Θ̃ + Θ̃σ̃ca + Θ̃ω̃ca + 2σ̃cb ω̃ba
9
3
3
1
σ̃cb σ̃ba + ω̃cb ω̃ba − Uc Θ̃ãa − Uc ãb σ̃ba − Uc ãb ω̃ba
3

d

d

b

− Rcba Ud U − 2U Tab

c



!

1
hdc Θ̃ + σ̃dc + ω̃dc − Ud ãc .
3


(42)

Contracting the indices in Eq.(42), one obtains a general expression for the Raychaudhuri
equation for the expansion, in the presence of torsion as,
˙ =∇
˜ c ãc − 1 Θ2 − σ̃ ab σ̃ab + ω̃ ab ω̃ab − Rab U a U b − 2U b T d 1 ha Θ̃
Θ̃
ab
3
3 d
+ σ̃da + ω̃da − Ud ãa )


21

(43)

This is the most general form of Raychaudhuri equation in presence of torsion. Simpler
versions of this equation have been discussed in [61], [66], [62],[67]. It is obvious that there
would be corresponding equations for shear and rotation too, which we do not mention here.
Interestingly, it can be shown that if we have torsion as a phantom field (a scalar field with
a negative kinetic energy term) through the dual of the third rank tensor field strength of a
string inspired Kalb–Ramond field, one can get a positive contribution in the R.H.S. of the
above equation, which, in turn, may be useful in eliminating singularities.

IV.
A.

THE EQUATIONS IN DIVERSE CONTEXTS
General Relativity and Relativistic Astrophysics

We have already discussed one of the main uses of the Raychaudhuri equations–the
geodesic focusing theorem. Though it is an entirely geometric result, its use is mostly
confined to the domain of GR. It is also quite obvious that the null version of these equations are useful in the study of gravitational lensing. The focal point in this case is nothing
but the intersection of trajectories representing light rays and is known as the caustic of
the bundle of trajectories. The optical scalars (Sachs scalars) are the quantitites of interest
and their evaluation enables us to understand the nature of the null geodesic flow (light ray
bundles). Is there anything else one can say apart from focusing, which will be relevant
for lensing. Some of these issues have been addressed in [68]. For example, it is possible
to rewrite the Raychaudhuri equation for null geodesics in a form involving the angular
diameter distance dA :
d′′A
1
1
= − R00 − σ 2
dA
2
2

(44)

d
ln dA = 21 Θ. Thus, for the case of zero shear one can determine dA entirely in
where dλ

terms of geometry. In [68] the authors have asked the question ‘how do voids affect light
propagation?’ and made use of the above relation to provide an answer.
A second example within relativistic astrophysics, is a study of crack formation [69, 70]
using this equation. This is an interesting application, quite unique– but not pursued much
later. The basic question here is – when will a spherical object develop cracks? Appearance
of total radial forces of different signs in different regions in a perturbed configuration leads
22

to the occurrence of such cracking, which, in turn leads to local anisotropy of fluid/emission
of incoherent radiation. Using the Einstein and Raychaudhuri equations it is possible to
express the net radial force R (after perturbation) in terms of dΘ
, pi , ρ, gij . In this way a
dλ
criterion for cracking can be obtained.
In 1995, Jacobson [71] in a rather unique paper demonstrated how one might view the
Einstein field equation as a thermodynamic equation of state. In this calculation, Jacobson
starts out by arguing that energy flux across a causal horizon is some kind of heat flow
and the entropy of the system beyond is proportional to the area of the horizon. The heat
flux δQ is related to the stress–energy tensor whereas the area variation is related to the
expansion of a bundle of null geodesics. He then makes use of the Raychaudhuri equation
in its linearised form (ignoring the Θ2 term) to write down the expansion as an integral
over the Rij k i k j . Thereafter, with the input of the entropy–area relation he arrives at the
Einstein equation as an equation of state. It is important to note here that Jacobson uses
the geometric content of the Raychaudhuri equation and views it as more fundamental than
the Einstein equation, which, in his approach is a derived relation. Extensions of Jacobson’s
work in the setting of non–equilibrium thermodynamics have appeared recently [72].
Scattered around the literature, are innumerable instances where the equations have
been used in the context of GR and astrophysics. Prominent among them is its use in
black hole physics–in studying the properties of black holes and in deriving the laws of
black hole mechanics (see [18] and references therein). Apart from black holes, we mention,
en passant, a few other situations which we thought were interesting: (i) use in a fluid–
flow description of density irregularities in cosmology [73], (ii) quantum gravitational optics
and an effective Raychaudhuri equation [74], (iii) magnetic tension and gravitational collapse
[75], (iv) the effective Einstein and Raychaudhuri equations derived from higher dimensional
warped braneworld models [76].

B.

The Capovilla–Guven equations for relativistic membranes

An obvious question, which was never asked till the work of Capovilla and Guven [77]
appeared in the scene is: what happens if we consider a congruence of extremal surfaces
instead of geodesics (extremal curves)? Are there similar Raychaudhuri equations?
To address this issue, we must first find out how to generalise the notions of expan23

sion, rotation and shear for the case of a family of surfaces. Unlike a curve, a surface is
parametrised by more than one parameter. Thus, it is natural to imagine an expansion, a
rotation and a shear along each of these independent directions. Introducing a separate label
for the surface coordinates, we find that we now have Θa , Σaij and Ωaij (here i, j... denotes
the indices representing the normals to the surface). The relation between the i, j indices
and the spacetime indices (say µ, ν) is given through the embedding of the surface. Let us
now make things more concrete and explicit.
Define a D–dimensional surface in a N dimensional background through an embedding
xµ = xµ (ξ a ). Eaµ constitute the tangent vector basis chosen such that gµν E µa E νb = ηab (a,b
run from 1 to D). nµi are the normals, with gµν nµi nνj = δ ij (i,j run from 1 to N − D). Also

gµν nµi E νa = 0. K abi are the N − D extrinsic curvatures (one along each normal direction)

The embedded surface is minimal provided T r(Ki ) = 0.
With the above definitions, one can follow the derivation for the case of geodesic curves
and obtain the equation for the generalised expansion (assuming zero values for the Σij and
Ωij :
i

1
Θa Θa + M 2 = 0
i
N −D

(45)

= K abi Kabi + Rµνρα E µa Eaρ nνi nαi

(46)

∇a Θ a +
where


M2

i
i

Note that the above equation is a partial differential equation–the reason being that we
require more than one parameter to describe a surface. Structurally, the equation is similar to
the original Raychaudhuri equation for the expansion – one can easily note this by comparing
the two. However, there are crucial differences – one of which involves the appearance of
extrinsic curvature terms. It is possible to rewrite this equation in a second order form by
choosing Θa = ∇a F . We obtain:


∇a ∇a F + M 2

i
i

F =0

(47)

which, resembles a variable–mass wave equation on a D–dimensional surface with a non–
trivial induced line element. For special cases, one can work out focusing criteria, although
the notion of focusing will be largely different for surface congruences. For the case of string
24

world–sheets, it is possible to make use of the conformal character of any two–dimensional
line element and rewrite the equation as:


∂2F
∂2F
2
2 i
F =0
−
+
Ω
(τ,
σ)
M
i
∂σ 2
∂τ 2

(48)

where τ, σ are the coordinates on the string world sheet and the induced metric is ds2 =
Ω2 (−dτ 2 + dσ 2 ).
It can be shown [78] that the criterion for focusing is given as (where 2 R is the Ricci
scalar of the worldsheet) :
− 2 R + Rµν E µa Eaν > 0

(49)

which is a requirement for the function F to have zeros. However, there are many questions
related to focusing of surfaces which remain un–answered. Some of these have been recently
addressed in [79]. Earlier references on examples of solutions of the Raychaudhuri equations
for surface congruences and related issues are available in [23, 24, 80].
It must be mentioned here that the above generalised equation for the expansion vector
field is a subset of a full set of equations which include those for the generalised shear and
rotation too. Moreover, the analysis is entirely for extremal membranes of Nambu–Goto
type. Here too, if the action changes, we find that the equations change–an example is
available in [81].

C.

Quantum field theory

In recent times, the kinematic quantitites (expansion, shear and rotation), as well as the
Raychaudhuri equations, have appeared, quite unexpectedly, in the context of quantum field
theory. We outline below, some of these scenarios briefly.

1.

The Langevin–Raychaudhuri equation

A couple of years ago, Borgman and Ford investigated gravitational effects of quantum
stress tensor fluctuations [82], [83]. They showed that these fluctuations produce fluctuations in the focusing of a bundle of geodesics. An explicit calculation using the Raychaudhuri
equation, treated as a Langevin equation (ignoring the Θ2 term by a smallness assumption
25

= f (λ), a Langevin–type equation) was
converts the Raychaudhuri equation to the form dΘ
dλ
performed to estimate angular blurring and luminosity fluctuations of the images of distant
sources. The stress–tensor fluctutations were obtained assuming the case of a massless,
minimally coupled scalar field in a flat background in a thermal state. Scalar field fluctuations drove the Ricci tensor fluctuations (via the semiclassical Einstein equations), which,
in turn led to fluctuations in the expansion Θ. These authors also made some numerical
(the fractional luminosity fluctuation) and pointed out posestimates for the quantity ∆L
L
sible astrophysical situations (gamma–ray bursts, for example), where an observable value
of this quantity might exist. However, it is true that their work has many assumptions
(ignoring shear, rotation as well as the Θ2 term etc.) and much further analysis is required
to have a clearer picture of the possibility iof actually seeing such effects in the real universe.
Nevertheless, the idea, on the whole, is novel and interesting in its own right and provides
us with another application of the Raychaudhuri equation in a very different scenario.

2.

RG flows in theory (coupling) space

Till now we have been looking at geodesic flows in spacetime. However, one might also
contemplate geodesic flows in fictitious spaces where a metric is defined. Such spaces may
correspond to certain physical scenarios. We highlight one example here in order to show
how ubiquitous the notions of expansion, rotation, shear and the Raychaudhuri equation
are.
For a given Lagrangian field theory, the set of couplings can form a space which is known
as theory/coupling space. A curve in such a space will therefore represent a flow of couplings.
In such a space, we can define a distance function using two–point functions integrated over
physical spacetime. Such a definition of metric goes back to the well-known Cramer–Rao
metric in probability theory and has also been highlighted in the context of field theory by
Zamolodchikov as well as O’Connor–Stephens (see [84] and references therein).
Once we have a metric, we can use it to define derivatives of a vector field. The vector
field of interest here is the so–called β − f unction vector field, which generates the RG flow.
The covariant derivative of this vector field when split into the usual trace, anti–symmetric
and symmetric traceless parts define the usual expansion, rotation and shear. However, we
also know that the β–function vector field must satisfy the conformal Killing condition (this
26

is the geoemtric form of the RG equation). These facts together imply the result that the
focal point of the congruence generated by the β-function vector field must necessarily be a
fixed point (i.e. all βa (‘a’ labels the coupling space coordinates) vanish there) [84]
This line of thought is useful in obtaining generic results in field theory –the understanding of shear and rotation in the context of RG flows might provide a better geometric
understanding of RG flows.

3.

Holography, c–function and the Raychaudhuri equation for the expansion

The holographic principle has recently played a crucial role in our understanding of
quantum aspects of gravity. The principle states that the information of gravity degrees
of freedom in a D dimensional volume is encoded in a quantum field theory defined on the
(D−1) dimensional boundary of this volume. As an immediate realization of this, it is shown
that the Renormalization Group flow equation for the β–function of a four dimensional
quantum gauge field theory defined on the boundary of a five dimensional volume can
be described by geodesic congruences in a scalar–coupled five dimensional gravitational
theory. Such a gauge-gravity duality was proposed in a more general framework through the
Maldacena conjecture and can be elegantly described through the Renormalization Group
equation with the bulk coordinate (or the holographic coordinate) as the Renormalization
Group parameter. It is shown that if the central charge or the c-function in a quantum
field theory evolves monotonically under RG then the holographic principle indicates that
in the corresponding dual gravity in five dimensions, the picture is realized through the
Raychaudhuri equation governing the monotonic flow of the expansion parameter Θ for
the geodesic congruences in the gravity sector [85], [86][87]. The central charge of the
boundary theory, or the c-function, is a measure of the degrees of freedom of the theory.
As a consequence it is also a measure of the entropy of the black hole in the dual gravity
sector which is related to the area of the horizon through the Bekenstein-Hawking formula.
The effective central charge is a function of the couplings of the theory, which monotonically
decreases as one flows to lower energies through the RG equation. The fixed point described
by the boundary conformal field theory corresponds to the extrema of this function. It turns
out that the null geodesic congruences can be used as a probe to decode the holographically
encoded informations.
27

Consider a D-dimensional spacetime with a negative cosmological constant where the
metric gab is foliated by appropriate choices of constant time surfaces. If we now focus on a
(D − 2) dimensional spacetime surface M at a fixed time t, then one may construct a null

vector field ma on the light sheets (consisting of spacetime points scanned by null geodesic

congruences) which is orthogonal to M such that ma na = −1, where na are tangents to the
geodesic. The metric on M is given by
hab = gab + n(a mb)

(50)

Bab = Db na

(51)

Defining,

such that Bab = Bba (Frobenius theorem ensures the symmetry property) and
Θ = T rB

(52)

it can be shown from the Raychaudhuri equation for the expansion that the geodesics converge since,
Θ≤0

(53)

The question that arises now is – how is the information on the light sheet encoded in M?
Assuming that the spacetime admits a timelike Killing vector field, we may visualize the time
flow of M to constitute the (D−2) + 1 = (D−1) dimensional boundary of the D dimensional
bulk. The c–function of the corresponding dual gauge theory sits on the boundary. The RG
flow to lower energy scales is then associated to the motion along the converging congruences
of null geodesics described by Raychaudhuri equation. In this sense, the null geodesics act
as a probe for the dual theory at a lower energy scale. Pictorially, it may be described
as follows. The lower the energy scale, the RG takes us into the gauge theory, deeper
inside the bulk we move along null geodesic congruences following Raychaudhuri equation.
The caustic point where the geodesics meet correspond to the fixed point of the RG flow.
This establishes a remarkable significance of the Raychaudhuri equation in describing the
holographic principle.
As described previously the c-function tells us about the degree of freedom of the system,
which, in turn, is related to black hole entropy through the area law. Therefore, the cfunction is naturally related to the area function A(r) as,
c(r) = A(r)/4
28

(54)

In the context of the recently developed attractor mechanism [88]in describing black holes
in a scalar coupled gravitational theory, one uses this flow of the c-function to decode some
interesting properties of both supersymmetric and non-supersymmetric attractors. The
Raychaudhuri equation once again plays a crucial role.It is shown that in any spherically
symmetric scalar coupled static asymptotically flat solution, c(r) decreases monotonically
as one moves radially inward from infinity. It is further shown that the minimum value of
c(r) corresponds to the entropy of the horizon[89]. In order to establish the c-theorem in
this context once again the Raychaudhuri equation is used. Taking a congruence of null
geodesics, the expansion is given by,
Θ=

dlnA
dλ

(55)

(where λ is the affine parameter). Using the null energy condition,
Tab k a k b ≥ 0

(56)

dΘ
≤0
dλ

(57)

and the Raychaudhuri equation, we get

The c-theorem can thus be proved on very general grounds.
In summary, these rather novel applications of the equations in the context of quantum
field theory seems to assert once again the generality and the ubiquitous nature of the
equations.

V.

SUMMARY AND SCOPE

We have reviewed, in this article, the Raychaudhuri equations and its applications in
diverse contexts. It must be admitted that since its inception, the equations have used
extensively to enhance our understanding of various situations within, as well as outside the
scope of GR. The primary reason behind its wide–ranging applicability is (as emphasised
several times in this article) the fact that the equations encode geometric statements about
flows. Since flows appear in many different contexts in physics, it goes without saying, that
the equations will be useful in furthering our understanding in different ways.
Among the applications within classical GR, the utility of the equations in understanding
the singularity problem, is surely the most prominent one. In astrophysics, we have quoted
29

the use of the equations in the context of lensing, cracking of self–gravitating objects. At a
more fundamental level, Jacobson’s work exploits the equation and, in some sense, makes
use of its geometric nature to arrive at a new way of looking at the Einstein equations.
On the other hand, in a non–Riemannian spacetime, we have seen how the equations
change –in particular, in spacetimes with torsion. Torsion appears in disguise in string
theory and is therefore not totally irrelevant today, even though observations might have
ruled out the Einstein–Cartan–Sciama–Kibble theory long ago.
Furthermore, what has come as a pleasant surprise in recent times, is the utility of these
equations (and the quantities that appear in the equations: expansion, shear and rotation)
in the context of quantum field theory. In addition, the generalisation of these equations to
surface congruences is also an interesting development, despite the fact that not much has
been done on such generalised Raychaudhuri (Capovilla–Guven) equations.
Despite the large body of work on or based on the Raychaudhuri equations, there still
remain many un–answered questions. In conclusion, we list a few of them. The choice is
surely biased by our own perspective.
(a) Normally, in fluid mechanics, the independent variable is the velocity field. The
Raychaudhuri equations are for the gradient of the velocity field–they are one derivative
higher. We mentioned before that they are essentially identities and become equations
when we choose a geometric property (eg. vacuum, Einstein space etc.) or use Einstein’s
field equations of GR. Is it possible to set-up and solve the initial value problem for this
coupled system of equations such that we know the characteristics of a geodesic flow in a
given spacetime geometry once we specify the initial conditions on expansion, shear and
rotation? Similar analysis is done while deriving the focusing theorem but can we do it by
analysing the full system of equations analytically/numerically. Following this approach one
might be able to reconstruct the gradient of the velocity field and also obtain the velocity
field itself.
(b) In the context of RG flows, is it possible to understand the role of shear and rotation
and use it to improve our geometric analysis of such flows?
(c) For surface congruences, can we obtain equations for families of null surfaces? Or, for
surfaces defined by the extremality of actions other than Nambu–Goto (rigidity corrections,
Willmore functionals etc.)
(d) In quantum mechanics, we talk about the flow of probability. Imagining this as a fluid,
30

can we obtain expansion, rotation and shear of such flows and then write down conclusions
based on the corresponding Raychaudhuri equations?
(e) Electrodynamics, is, after all, the physics of the electric and magnetic vector fields.
Suppose we construct the gradient of the electric/magnetic fields, split it up into expansion,
rotation and shear and write down Raychaudhuri equations for the so–called Faraday lines
of force! What does such an analysis tell us?
To sum up, we would like to conjecture that wherever there are vector fields describing
a physical/geometrical quantity, there must be corresponding Raychaudhuri equations. We
believe, there are many avatars of the same equations, of which, till today, we are aware of
only a few.

Acknowledgements

The authors thank the editors (N. Dadhich, P. S. Joshi and Probir Roy) of this special volume, for giving them the opportunity to write this review. They also specially thank Probir
Roy and Anirvan Dasgupta for their comments and a careful reading of the manuscript.

[1] A. Raychaudhuri, Phys. Rev. 89, 417 (1953)
[2] A. Raychaudhuri, Phys. Rev. 86, 90 (1952)
[3] A. Raychaudhuri, Phys. Rev. 98, 1123 (1955)
[4] A. Raychaudhuri, Z. Astrophysik, 43, 161 (1957)
[5] O. Heckmann and E. Schucking, Z. Astrophysik 38, 95 (1955)
[6] A. Komar, Phys. Rev. 104, 544 (1956)
[7] A. Raychaudhuri, Phys. Rev. 106, 172 (1957)
[8] J. Ehlers, Contributions to the relativistic mechanics of continuous media, Gen. Rel. Grav.
25, 1225 (1993) , English translation of original German article by P. Jordan, J. Ehlers, W.
Kundt, R. K. Sachs, Proceedings of the Mathematical–Natural Sciences Section of the Mainz
Academy of Sciences and Literature, Nr. 11, 792 (1961)
[9] R. K. Sachs, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A 264, 309 (1961); ibid A 270, 103 (1962)
[10] L. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Classical theory of fields, (Pergamom Press, Oxford, UK, 1975)

31

[11] E. M. Lifshitz and I. M. Khalatnikov, Adv. Phys. 12, 185 (1963)
[12] R. Penrose, Phys. Rev. Lett. 14, 57 (1965)
[13] S. W. Hawking, Phys. Rev. Lett. 15, 689 (1965)
[14] S. W. Hawking, Phys. Rev. Lett. 17, 444 (1966)
[15] R. M. Wald, General Relativity, (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, USA, 1984)
[16] S. W. Hawking and G. F. R. Ellis, The large scale structure of spacetime, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1973)
[17] P. S. Joshi, Global aspects in gravitation and cosmology, (Oxford University Press, Oxford,
UK, 1997)
[18] E. Poisson, A relativist’s toolkit: the mathematics of black hole mechanics, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2004)
[19] G. F. R. Ellis in General Relativity and Cosmology, International School of Physics, Enrico
Fermi–Course XLVII, (Academic Press, New York, 1971)
[20] I. Ciufolini and J. A. Wheeler, Gravitation and Inertia, (Princeton University Press, Princeton,
USA, 1995)
[21] M. Visser, Lorentzian wormholes from Einstein to Hawking, (AIP Press, USA, 1995)
[22] T. Frankel, Gravitational curvature, (W. H. Freeman, USA, 1979)
[23] E. Zafiris, J.Geom.Phys. 28, 271 (1998)
[24] B. Carter, Contemp.Math. 203, 207 (1997)
[25] F. J. Tipler, Phys. Rev. D17, 2521 (1978)
[26] F. J. Tipler, J. Diff. Equ. 30, 165 (1978)
[27] J. D. Bekenstein, Phys. Rev. D 11, 2072 (1975)
[28] G. L. Murphy, Phys. Rev. D 8, 4231 (1973)
[29] H. Epstein, V. Glaser and A. Jaffe, Nuovo Cimento 36, 1016 (1965)
[30] R. R. Caldwell, M. Kamionkowski and N. N. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 071301 (2003);
S. M. Carroll, M Hoffman and M. Trodden, Phys. Rev. D68, 023509 (2003); P. Frampton,
Phys. Lett. B555, 139 (2003); V. Sahni and Y. Shtanov, JCAP 0311, 014 (2003)
[31] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4690 (1999); C. Csaki, TASI Lectures on
Extra Dimensions and Branes hep-ph/0404096
[32] N. D. Birrell and P. C. W. Davies, Quantum fields in curved space, (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK, 1982)

32

[33] H. B. G. Casimir, On the attraction between two perfectly conducting plates, Proc. Kon. Nederl.
Akad. Wetenschap, 51, 793 (1948)
[34] A. Borde, Class. Qtm. Grav. 4, 343 (1987)
[35] T. Roman, Phys. Rev. D 37, 546 (1988)
[36] F. J. Tipler, Ann. Phys. 108, 1 (1977); ibid. Phys. Rev. Lett. 37, 879 (1976)
[37] C. Chicone and P. Ehrlich, Manuscripta Math. 31, 297 (1980)
[38] T. Roman and P. G. Bergmann, Phys. Rev. D28, 1265 (1983)
[39] T. Roman, Phys. Rev. D 33, 3526 (1986)
[40] M. Visser, Phys. Rev. D47, 2395 (1993)
[41] A. K. Raychaudhuri, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 654 (1998); A. Saa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5031
(1998); J. M. M. Senovilla, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5032 (1998); A. K. Raychaudhuri, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 81, 5033 (1998)
[42] A.K. Raychaudhuri, Mod. Phys. Lett. A15, 391 (2000)
[43] J. M. M. Senovilla, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2219 (1990); E. Ruiz and J. M. M. Senovilla, Phys.
Rev. D45, 1995 (1992)
[44] J. M. M. Senovilla, article in this volume.
[45] A. K. Raychaudhuri and S. Banerji, Zeit. fur. Astrophysik 58, 187 (1964)
[46] S. Banerji, Phys. Rev. D 9, 877 (1974)
[47] A. K. Raychaudhuri, Prog. Theor. Phys. 53, 1360 (1975)
[48] J. H. Kung, Phys. Rev.D 52, 6922 (1995)
[49] V. Muller and H. J. Schmidt, Gen. Rel. Grav. 17, 769 (1985); D. Page, Phys. Rev. D 36,
1607 (1987); J. D. Barrow and A. Ottewill, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 16, 2757 (1983)
[50] J. H. Kung, Phys.Rev. D 53, 3017 (1996)
[51] B. Whitt, Phys. Lett. 145B, 176 (1984); J. C. Alonso, F. Barbero, J. Julve, and A. Tiemblo,
Class. Qtm. Grav. 11, 865 (1994); M. Mijic et al., Phys. Rev. D 34, 2934 (1986).
[52] J.A. Schouten Ricci Calculus (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1954)
[53] F.W. Hehl, P. von der Heyde, G.D. Kerlick and J.M. Nester, Rev. Mod. Phys. 48, 393 (1976).
[54] M.B. Green, J.H. Schwarz, E. Witten, Superstring Theory, (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK, 1987); R. Hammond, Il Nuovo Cimento 109B, 319 (1994); Gen. Rel. Grav.
28, 419 (1986); V. De Sabbata, Ann. der Physik 7, 419 (1991); V. de Sabbata, Torsion,
string tension and quantum gravity, in “Erice 1992”, Proceedings, String Quantum Gravity

33

and Physics at the Planck Energy Scale, p. 528; Y. Murase, Prog. Theor. Phys. 89, 1331
(1993)
[55] P.S. Howe,

A. Opfermann, G. Papadopoulos,

Twistor spaces for QKT manifold,

hep-th/9710072; P.S. Howe, G. Papadopoulos, Phys. Lett. 379B, 80 (1996); V. de Sabbata,
C. Sivaram, Il Nuovo Cimento 109A, 377 (1996)
[56] G. Papadopoulos, P.K. Townsend, Nucl. Phys. B444, 245 (1995); C.M. Hull, G. Papadopoulos,
P.K. Townsend, Phys. Lett. 316B 291 (1993); B.D.B. Figueiredo, I. Damiao Soares and J.
Tiomno, Class. Qtm. Grav. 9, 1593 (1992); L.C. Garcia de Andrade, Mod. Phys. Lett. 12A
2005 (1997); O. Chandia, Phys. Rev. D55, 7580 (1997); P.S. Letelier, Class. Quant. Grav.
12, 471 (1995); P. S. Letelier, Class. Qtm. Grav. 12, 2221 (1995); R. W. Kühne, Mod. Phys.
Lett. A12, 2473 (1997); D. K. Ross, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 28, (1989) 1333.
[57] S. Kar, S. SenGupta, S. Sur, Phys. Rev. D67, 044005 (2003); S. Kar , P. Majumdar, S.
SenGupta, S. Sur, Class. Qtm. Grav. 19, 677 (2002); S. SenGupta, S. Sur, Phys. Lett. B521,
350 (2001); S. Kar , P. Majumdar, S. SenGupta , A. Sinha, Eur. Phys. Jr. C23, 357 (2002); P.
Majumdar, S. SenGupta, Class. Qtm. Grav.16, L89 (1999); S. SenGupta , S. Sur, Europhys.
Lett. 65, 601 (2004)
[58] S. Capozziello, G. Lambiase , C. Stornaiolo, Ann. der Phys. 10, 713 (2001), gr-qc/0101038
[59] R. de Ritis, M. Lavorgna, C. Stornaiolo, Phys.Lett. 95A, 425 (1983)
[60] A. Trautman, Nature (Phys. Sci.) 242, 7 (1973)
[61] J. Stewart and P. Hajicek, Nature (Phys. Sci.) 244, 96 (1973)
[62] G. Esposito, Fortschritte der Physik 40, 1 (1992)
[63] M. Demianski, R. de Ritis, G. Platania, P. Scudellaro and C. Stornaiolo, Phys. Rev. D35
1181 (1987)
[64] G. F. R. Ellis and M. Bruni, Phys. Rev. D40, 1804 (1989); G. F. R. Ellis, J. Hwang and M.
Bruni, Phys. Rev. D40, 1819 (1989); G. F. R. Ellis, M. Bruni and J. Hwang, Phys. Rev. D42,
1035 (1990)
[65] D. Palle, Nuovo Cim. B114, 853 (1999)
[66] J. Tafel, Phys. Lett. A45, 341 (1973)
[67] A.K. Raychaudhuri, Theoretical Cosmology, (Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK, 1979)
[68] N. Sugiura, K. Nakao, D. Ida, N. Sakai, H. Ishihara, Prog. Theor. Phys. 103, 73 (2000)
[69] L. Herrera, Phys. Letts. A165, 206 (1992)

34

[70] A. di Prisco, E. Fuenmayor, L Herrera, V Varela, Phys. Lett. A 195, 23 (1994)
[71] T. Jacobson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1260 (1995)
[72] C. Eling, R. Guedens, and T. Jacobson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 121301 (2006)
[73] D. Lyth, M. Mukherjee, Phys. Rev. D38, 485 (1988)
[74] N. Ahmadi, M. Nouri-Zonoz, Quantum gravitational optics: Effective Raychaudhuri equation,
gr-qc/0605009
[75] C. Tsagas, Magnetic tension and gravitational collapse, gr-qc/0311085
[76] R. Maartens, Phys. Rev. D 62, 084023 (2000)
[77] R. Capovilla and J. Guven, Phys. Rev. D52, 1072 (1995); S. Kar, Phys. Rev. D52, 2036
(1995); S. Kar, Phys. Rev. D53, 2071 (1996)
[78] S. Kar, Phys. Rev. D55, 7921 (1997)
[79] S. Kar, Focusing of branes in warped backgrounds, Ind. J. Phys. (to appear in the special issue
commemorating A. K. Raychaudhuri) (2006)
[80] S. Kar, Phys.Rev. D54, 6408 (1996)
[81] S. Kar, Generalised Raychaudhuri Equations for Strings and Membranes Proceedings of
IAGRG–XVIII (Matscience, Madras, India (Feb. 15-17, 1996), Matscience Report no. 117)
[82] J. Borgman and L. H. Ford, Phys.Rev. D70, 064032 (2004)
[83] J. Borgman, Fluctuations of the expansion: The Langevin-Raychaudhuri equation, Ph.d. thesis, Tufts University, USA (2004)
[84] S. Kar, Phys. Rev. D64, 105017 (2001)
[85] V. Balasubramanian, E. Gimon, D. Minic, JHEP 05, 014 (2000)
[86] V. Sahakian, Phys.Rev. D62, (2000) 126011
[87] E. Alvarez, C. Gomez, Nucl.Phys. B541, 441 (1999) ibid. Holography and the c-theorem
hep-th/0009203
[88] M. Cvetic and A. A. Tseytlin, Phys. Rev. D 53, 5619 (1996); A.Stromonger, Phys. Lett.
B 383, 1996; S. Ferrara and R. Kallosh, Phys. Rev. D 54, 1525 (1996) S. Ferrara, G. W.
Gibbons and R. Kallosh, Nucl. Phys. B 500, 75 (1997).
[89] K. Goldstein, R. P. Jena, G. Mandal and S. P. Trivedi, JHEP 02, 053 (2006)

35

