                                                                         An Introduction to Extra Dimensions ∗
                                                                                          Abdel Pérez-Lorenzana

                                                         Departamento de Fı́sica, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados del I.P.N.
                                                                       Apdo. Post. 14-740, 07000, México, D.F., México
                                                                                       (Dated: February, 2005)
                                                      Models that involve extra dimensions have introduced completely new ways of looking up on old
                                                   problems in theoretical physics. The aim of the present notes is to provide a brief introduction to the
                                                   many uses that extra dimensions have found over the last few years, mainly following an effective
                                                   field theory point of view. Most parts of the discussion are devoted to models with flat extra
                                                   dimensions, covering both theoretical and phenomenological aspects. We also discuss some of the
                                                   new ideas for model building where extra dimensions may play a role, including symmetry breaking




arXiv:hep-ph/0503177v2 30 May 2005
                                                   by diverse new and old mechanisms. Some interesting applications of these ideas are discussed over
                                                   the notes, including models for neutrino masses and proton stability. The last part of this review
                                                   addresses some aspects of warped extra dimensions, and graviton localization.


                                                           I.   INTRODUCTION: WHY CONSIDERING EXTRA DIMENSIONS?

                                        Possible existence of new spatial dimensions beyond the four we see have been under consideration for about eighty
                                     years already. The first ideas date back to the early works of Kaluza and Klein around the 1920’s [1], who tried to
                                     unify electromagnetism with Einstein gravity by proposing a theory with a compact fifth dimension, where the photon
                                     was originated from the extra components of the metric. In the course of the last few years there has been some
                                     considerable activity in the study of models that involve new extra spatial dimensions, mainly motivated from theories
                                     that try to incorporate gravity and gauge interactions in a unique scheme in a reliable manner. Extra dimensions
                                     are indeed a known fundamental ingredient for String Theory, since all versions of the theory are naturally and
                                     consistently formulated only in a space-time of more than four dimensions (actually 10, or 11 if there is M-theory).
                                     For some time, however, it was conventional to assume that such extra dimensions were compactified to manifolds of
                                     small radii, with sizes about the order of the Planck length, ℓP ∼ 10−33 cm, such that they would remain hidden
                                     to the experiment, thus explaining why we see only four dimensions. In this same pictures, it was believed that the
                                     relevant energy scale where quantum gravity (and stringy) effects would become important is given by the Planck
                                     mass, which is defined through the fundamental constants, including gravity Newton constant, as
                                                                                                      1/2
                                                                                               h̄c5
                                                                                          
                                                                               M P c2 =                      ∼ 2.4 × 1018 GeV ;                              (1)
                                                                                              8πGN

                                     from where one defines ℓP = h̄/MP c. It is common to work in natural units system which take c = 1 = h̄, such that
                                     distance and time are measured in inverse units of energy. We will do so hereafter, unless otherwise stated. Since MP
                                     is quite large, there was little hope for experimentally probing such a regime, at least in the near future.
                                        From the theoretical side, this point of view yet posses a fundamental puzzle, related to the quantum instability
                                     of the Higgs vacuum that fixes the electroweak scale around mEW ∼ 1 T eV . Problem is that from one loop order
                                     corrections, using a cut-off regularization, one gets bare mass independent quadratic divergences for the physical Higgs
                                     mass:
                                                                                   1
                                                                         δm2H =        λH − λ2F Λ2 + (log. div.) + finite terms.
                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                             (2)
                                                                                  8π 2
                                     where λH is the self-couplings of the Higgs field H, and λF is the Yukawa coupling to fermions. As the natural cut-off
                                     Λ of the theory is usually believed to be the Planck scale or the GUT scale, MGUT ∼ 1016 GeV , this means that in
                                     order to get m2H ∼ m2EW we require to adjust the counterterm to at least one part in 1015 . Moreover, this adjustment
                                     must be made at each order in perturbation theory. This large fine tuning is what is known as the hierarchy problem.
                                     Of course, the quadratic divergence can be renormalized away in exactly the same manner as it is done for logarithmic
                                     divergences, and in principle, there is nothing formally wrong with this fine tuning. In fact, if this calculation is
                                     performed in the dimensional regularization scheme, DR, one obtains only 1/ǫ singularities which are absorbed into



                                     ∗ Lectures given at the XI Mexican School of Particles and Fields. Xalapa, México, August 1-13, 2004.
                                                                                                                       2

the definitions of the counterterms, as usual. Hence, the problem of quadratic divergences does not become apparent
there. It arises only when one attempts to give a physical significance to the cut-off Λ. In other words, if the SM
were a fundamental theory then using DR would be justified. However, most theorists believe that the final theory
should also include gravity, then a cut-off must be introduced in the SM, regarding this fine tuning as unattractive.
Explaining the hierarchy problem has been a leading motivation to explore new physics during the last twenty years,
including Supersymmetry [2] and compositeness [3].
   Recent developments, based on the studies of the non-perturbative regime of the E8 × E8 theory by Witten and
Horava [4], have suggested that some, if not all, of the extra dimensions could rather be larger than ℓP . Perhaps
motivated by this, some authors started to ask the question of how large could these extra dimensions be without
getting into conflict with observations, and even more interesting, where and how would this extra dimensions manifest
themselves. The intriguing answer to the first question point towards the possibility that extra dimensions as large
as millimeters [5] could exist and yet remain hidden to the experiments [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. This would be possible
if our observable world is constrained to live on a four dimensional hypersurface (the brane) embedded in a higher
dimensional space (the bulk), such that the extra dimensions can only be tested by gravity, a picture that resembles
D-brane theory constructions. Although it is fair to say that similar ideas were already proposed on the 80’s by
several authors [12], they were missed by some time, until the recent developments on string theory provided an
independent realization of such models [4, 13, 14, 15, 16], given them certain credibility. Besides, it was also the
intriguing observation that such large extra dimensions would accept a scale of quantum gravity much smaller than
MP , even closer to mEW , thus offering an alternative solution to the hierarchy problem, which attracted the attention
of the community towards this ideas.
   To answer the second question many phenomenological studies have been done, often based on simplified field
theoretical models that are built up on a bottom-up approach, using an effective field theory point of view, with out
almost any real string theory calculations. In spite of being quite speculative, and although it is unclear whether any
of those models is realized in nature, they still might provide some insights to the low energy manifestations of the
fundamental theory, since it is still possible that the excited modes of the string could appear on the experiments way
before any quantum gravity effect, in which case the effective field theory approach would be acceptable.
   The goal for the present notes is to provide a general and brief introduction to the field for the beginner. Many
variants of the very first scenario proposed by Arkani-Hammed, Dimopoulos and D’vali (ADD) [5] have been considered
over the years, and there is no way we could comment all. Instead, we shall rather concentrate on some of the most
common aspects shared by those models. This, in turn, will provide us with the insight to extend our study to other
more elaborated ideas for the use of extra dimensions.
   The first part of these notes will cover the basics of the ADD model. We shall start discussing how the fundamental
gravity scale departs from MP once extra dimensions are introduced, and the determination of the effective gravity
coupling. Then, we will introduce the basic field theory prescriptions used to construct brane models and discuss the
concept of dimensional reduction on compact spaces and the resulting Kaluza-Klein (KK) mode expansion of bulk
fields, which provide the effective four dimensional theory on which most calculations are actually done. We use these
concepts to address some aspects of graviton phenomenology and briefly discuss some of the phenomenological bounds
for the size of the extra dimensions and the fundamental gravity scale.
   Third section is devoted to present some general aspects of the use of extra dimensions in model building. Here we
will review the KK decomposition for matter and gauge fields, and discuss the concept of universal extra dimensions.
We will also address the possible phenomenology that may come with KK matter and gauge fields, with particular
interest on the power law running effect on gauge couplings. Our fourth section intends to be complementary to
the third one. It provides a short review on many new ideas for the use of extra dimensions on the breaking of
symmetries. Here we include spontaneous breaking on the bulk; shinning mechanism; orbifold breaking; and Scherk-
Schwarz mechanisms.
   As it is clear, with a low fundamental scale, as pretended by the ADD model, all the particle physics phenomena that
usually invokes high energy scales does not work any more. Then, standard problems as gauge coupling unification,
the origin of neutrino masses and mixings and proton decay; should be reviewed. Whereas the first point is being
already addressed on the model building section, we dedicate our fifth section to discuss some interesting ideas to
control lepton and baryon number violation in the context of extra dimension models. Our discussion includes a series
of examples for generating neutrino masses in models with low fundamental scales which make use of bulk fields. We
also address proton decay in the context of six dimensional models where orbifold spatial symmetries provide the
required control of this process. The concept of fermion wave function localization on the brane is also discussed.
   Finally, in section six we focus our interest on Randall and Sundrum models [17, 18, 19, 20] for warped backgrounds,
for both compact and infinite extra dimensions. We will show in detail how these solutions arise, as well as how gravity
behaves in such theories. Some further ideas that include stabilization of the extra dimensions and graviton localization
at branes are also covered.
   Due to the nature of these notes, many other topics are not being covered, including brane intersecting models,
                                                                                                                        3

cosmology of models with extra dimensions both in flat and warped bulk backgrounds; KK dark matter; an extended
discussion on black hole physics; as well as many others. The interested reader that would like to go beyond the
present notes can consult any of the excellent reviews that are now in the literature for references, some of which are
given in references [21, 22]. Further references are also given at the conclusions.


                      II.   FLAT AND COMPACT EXTRA DIMENSIONS: ADD MODEL

                                         A.   Fundamental vs. Planck scales

  The existence of more than four dimensions in nature, even if they were small, may not be completely harmless.
They could have some visible manifestations in our (now effective) four dimensional world. To see this, one has first
to understand how the effective four dimensional theory arises from the higher dimensional one. Formally, this can
be achieve by dimensionally reducing the complete theory, a concept that we shall further discuss later on. For the
moment, we must remember that gravity is a geometric property of the space. Then, first thing to notice is that in a
higher dimensional world, where Einstein gravity is assumed to hold, the gravitational coupling does not necessarily
coincide with the well known Newton constant GN , which is, nevertheless, the gravity coupling we do observe. To
explain this more clearly, let us assume as in Ref. [5] that there are n extra space-like dimension which are compactified
into circles of the same radius R (so the space is factorized as a M4 × T n manifold). We will call the fundamental
gravity coupling G∗ , and then write down the higher dimensional gravity action:
                                                    1
                                                          Z        q
                                      Sgrav = −             d4+n x |g(4+n) | R(4+n) ;                                  (3)
                                                16πG∗
where g(4+n) stands for the metric in the whole (4 + n)D space, ds2 = gMN dxM dxN , for which we will always use
the (+, −, −, −, . . .) sign convention, and M, N = 0, 1, . . . , n + 3. The above action has to have proper dimensions,
meaning that the extra length dimensions that come from the extra volume integration have to be equilibrated by
the dimensions on the gravity coupling. Notice that in natural units S has no dimensions, whereas if we assume for
simplicity that the metric g(4+n) is being taken dimensionless, so [R(4+n) ] = [Length]−2 = [Energy]2 . Thus, the
fundamental gravity coupling has to have dimensions [G∗ ] = [Energy]−(n+2) . In contrast, for the Newton constant,
we have [GN ] = [Energy]−2 . In order to extract the four dimensional gravity action let us assume that the extra
dimensions are flat, thus, the metric has the form
                                           ds2 = gµν (x)dxµ dxν − δab dy a dy b ,                                     (4)
where gµν gives the four dimensional part of the metric which depends only in the four dimensional coordinates
xµ , for µ = 0, 1, 2, 3; and δab dy a dy b givespthe line element                                                    a
                                                             p on the bulk, whose coordinates are parameterized by y ,
a = 1, . . . , n. It is now easy to see that |g(4+n) | = |g(4) | and R(4+n) = R(4) , so one can integrate out the extra
dimensions in Eq. (3) to get the effective 4D action
                                                           Vn
                                                               Z      q
                                              Sgrav = −           d4 x |g(4) | R(4) ;                               (5)
                                                         16πG∗
where Vn stands for the volume of the extra space. For the torus we simply take Vn = Rn . Equation (5) is precisely
the standard gravity action in 4D if one makes the identification,
                                                     GN = G∗ /Vn .                                                    (6)
Newton constant is therefore given by a volumetric scaling of the truly fundamental gravity scale. Thus, GN is in fact
an effective quantity. Notice that even if G∗ were a large coupling (as an absolute number), one can still understand
the smallness of GN via the volumetric suppression.
   To get a more physical meaning of these observations, let us consider a simple experiment. Let us assume a couple
of particles of masses m1 and m2 , respectively, located on the hypersurface y a = 0, and separated from each other by
a distance r. The gravitational flux among both particles would spread all over the whole (4 + n) D space, however,
since the extra dimensions are compact, the effective strength of the gravity interaction would have two clear limits:
(i) If both test particles are separated from each other by a distance r ≫ R, the torus would effectively disappear for
the four dimensional observer, the gravitational flux then gets diluted by the extra volume and the observer would
see the usual (weak) 4D gravitational potential
                                                                  m1 m2
                                                 UN (r) = −GN           .                                             (7)
                                                                    r
                                                                                                                      4

(ii) However, if r ≪ R, the 4D observer would be able to feel the presence of the bulk through the flux that goes into
the extra space, and thus, the potential between each particle would appear to be stronger:
                                                                   m1 m2
                                                 U∗ (r) = −G∗            .                                          (8)
                                                                   rn+1
It is precisely the volumetric factor which does the matching of both regimes of the theory. The change in the short
distance behavior of the Newton’s gravity law should be observable in the experiments when measuring U (r) for
distances below R. Current search for such deviations has gone down to 160 microns, so far with no signals of extra
dimensions [6].
   We should now recall that the Planck scale, MP , is defined in terms of the Newton constant, via Eq. (1). In the
present picture, it is then clear that MP is not fundamental anymore. The true scale for quantum gravity should
rather be given in terms of G∗ instead. So, we define the fundamental (string) scale as
                                                                        1/(2+n)
                                                           h̄1+n c5+n
                                                       
                                            M ∗ c2 =                               ,                                (9)
                                                              8πG∗

where, for comparing to Eq. (1), we have inserted back the corresponding c and h̄ factors. Clearly, coming back to
natural units, both scales are then related to each other by [5]

                                                   MP2 = M∗n+2 Vn .                                                (10)

From particle physics we already know that there is no evidence of quantum gravity (neither supersymmetry, nor
string effects) well up to energies around few hundred GeV, which says that M∗ ≥ 1 TeV. If the volume were large
enough, then the fundamental scale could be as low as the electroweak scale, and there would be no hierarchy in
the fundamental scales of physics, which so far has been considered as a puzzle. Of course, the price of solving the
hierarchy problem this way would be now to explain why the extra dimensions are so large. Using V ∼ Rn one can
reverse above relation and get a feeling of the possible values of R for a given M∗ . This is done just for our desire
of having the quantum gravity scale as low as possible, perhaps to be accessible to future experiments, although, the
actual value is really unknown. As an example, if one takes M∗ to be 1 TeV; for n = 1, R turns out to be about the
size of the solar system (R ∼ 1011 m)!, whereas for n = 2 one gets R ∼ 0.2 mm, that is just at the current limit of
short distance gravity experiments [6]. Of course, one single large extra dimension is not totally ruled out. Indeed, if
one imposes the condition that R < 160µm for n = 1, we get M∗ > 108 GeV . More than two extra dimensions are in
fact expected (string theory predicts six more), but in the final theory those dimensions may turn out to have different
sizes, or even geometries. More complex scenarios with a hierarchical distributions of the sizes could be possible. For
getting an insight of the theory, however, one usually relies in toy models with a single compact extra dimension,
implicitly assuming that the effects of the other compact dimensions do decouple from the effective theory.
   It is worth mentioning that the actual relationship among fundamental, Planck, and compactification scales does
depend on the type of metric one assumes for the compact space (although this should be com-formally flat at least).
This has inspired some variants on the above simple picture. We will treat in some detail one specific example in the
last part of these notes, the Randall-Sundrum models. There is also another nice example I would like to mention
where M∗ R is rather of order one. This is possible if extra dimensions are compactified on a hyperbolic manifold, where
the volume is exponentially amplified from the curvature radius, which goes as Rea , with the constant a depending
on the pattern of compactification [23]. In these models it is possible to get large volumes with generic values of R
by properly choosing the parameter a. In what follows, however, we will address only ADD models for simplicity.


                            B.   Brane and Bulk Effective Field Theory prescriptions

   While submillimeter dimensions remain untested for gravity, the particle physics forces have certainly been accu-
rately measured up to weak scale distances (about 10−18 cm). Therefore, the Standard Model (SM) particles can not
freely propagate in those large extra dimensions, but must be constrained to live on a four dimensional submanifold.
Then the scenario we have in mind is one where we live in a four dimensional surface embedded in a higher dimensional
space. Such a surface shall be called a “brane” (a short name for membrane). This picture is similar to the D-brane
models [16], as in the Horava-Witten theory [4]. We may also imagine our world as a domain wall of size M∗−1 where
the particle fields are trapped by some dynamical mechanism [5]. Such hypersurface or brane would then be located
at an specific point on the extra space, usually, at the fixed points of the compact manifold. Clearly, such picture
breaks translational invariance, which may be reflected in two ways in the physics of the model, affecting the flatness
of the extra space (which compensates for the required flatness of the brane), and introducing a source of violation of
                                                                                                                        5

the extra linear momentum. First point would drive us to the Randall-Sundrum Models, that we shall discuss latter
on. Second point would be a constant issue along our discussions.
   What we have called a brane in our previous paragraph is actually an effective theory description. We have chosen
to think up on them as topological defects (domain walls) of almost zero width, which could have fields localized to
its surface. String theory D-branes (Dirichlet branes) are, however, surfaces where open string can end on. Open
strings give rise to all kinds of fields localized to the brane, including gauge fields. In the supergravity approximation
these D-branes will also appear as solitons of the supergravity equations of motion. In our approach we shall care
little about where these branes come from, and rather simply assume there is some consistent high-energy theory,
that would give rise to these objects, and which should appear at the fundamental scale M∗ . Thus, the natural UV
cutoff of our models would always be given by the quantum gravity scale.
   D-branes are usually characterized by the number of spatial dimensions on the surface. Hence, a p-brane is described
by a flat space time with p space-like and one time-like coordinates. The simplest model, we just mentioned above ,
would consist of SM particles living on a 3-brane. Thus, we need to describe theories that live either on the brane (as
the Standard Model) or in the bulk (like gravity and perhaps SM singlets), as well as the interactions among these
two theories. For doing so we use the following field theory prescriptions:
  (i) Bulk theories are described by the higher dimensional action, defined in terms of a Lagrangian density of bulk
      fields, φ(x, ~y ), valued on all the space-time coordinates of the bulk
                                                        Z         q
                                             Sbulk [φ] = d4 x dn y |g(4+n) |L(φ(x, ~y )) ,                      (11)

     where, as before, x stands for the (3+1) coordinates of the brane and y for the n extra dimensions.
 (ii) Brane theories are described by the (3+1)D action of the brane fields, ϕ(x), which is naturally promoted into a
      higher dimensional expression by the use of a delta density:
                                                Z          q
                                    Sbrane [ϕ] = d4 x dn y |g(4) |L(ϕ(x)) δ n (~y − ~y0 ) ,                      (12)

     where we have taken the brane to be located at the position y~ = ~y0 along the extra dimensions, and g(4) stands
     for the (3+1)D induced metric on the brane. Usually we will work on flat space-times, unless otherwise stated.
 (iii) Finally, the action may contain terms that couple bulk to brane fields. Last are localized on the space, thus, it
       is natural that a delta density would be involved in such terms, say for instance
                                        Z          q
                                          d4 x dn y |g(4) | φ(x, ~y ) ψ̄(x)ψ(x) δ n (~y − ~y0 )                    (13)


                                             C.   Dimensional Reduction

  The presence of delta functions in the previous action terms does not allow for a transparent interpretation, nor
for an easy reading out of the theory dynamics. When they are present it is more useful to work in the effective four
dimensional theory that is obtained after integrating over the extra dimensions. This procedure is generically called
dimensional reduction. It also helps to identify the low energy limit of the theory (where the extra dimensions are
not visible).
  A 5D toy model.- To get an insight of what the effective 4D theory looks like, let us consider a simplified five
dimensional toy model where the fifth dimension has been compactified on a circle of radius R. The generalization of
these results to more dimensions would be straightforward. Let φ be a bulk scalar field for which the action on flat
space-time has the form
                                              1
                                                Z
                                                   d4 x dy ∂ A φ∂A φ − m2 φ2 ;
                                                                            
                                       S[φ] =                                                                    (14)
                                              2
where now A = 1, . . . , 5, and y denotes the fifth dimension. The compactness of the internal manifold is reflected in
the periodicity of the field, φ(y) = φ(y + 2πR), which allows for a Fourier expansion as
                                                ∞
                                   1           X     1 h            ny                 ny i
                       φ(x, y) = √    φ0 (x) +     √    φn (x) cos        + φ̂n (x) sin         .                    (15)
                                  2πR          n=1  πR               R                    R
                                                                                                                       6

The very first term, φ0 , with no dependence on the fifth dimension is usually referred as the zero mode. Other Fourier
modes, φn and φ̂n ; are called the excited or Kaluza-Klein (KK) modes. Notice the different normalization on all the
excited modes, with respect to the zero mode. Some authors prefer to use a complex einy/R Fourier expansion instead,
but the equivalence of the procedure should be clear.
  By introducing last expansion into the action (14) and integrating over the extra dimension one gets
                             ∞                                        ∞
                               1                                         1
                                 Z                                           Z                                
                             X                                     X
                    S[φ] =             d4 x ∂ µ φn ∂µ φn − m2n φ2n +             d4 x ∂ µ φ̂n ∂µ φ̂n − m2n φ̂2n ,   (16)
                             n=0
                                   2                                 n=1
                                                                         2
                                                 2
                                           n
where the KK mass is given as m2n = m2 + R   2 . Therefore, in the effective theory, the higher dimensional field appears

as an infinite tower of fields with masses mn , with degenerated massive levels, but the zero mode, as depicted in
figure 1. Notice that all excited modes are fields with the same spin, and quantum numbers as φ. They differ only
in the KK number n, which is also associated with the fifth component of the momentum, which is discrete due to
compatification. This can be also understood in general from the higher dimensional invariant pA pA = m2 , which can
be rewritten as the effective four dimensional squared momentum invariant pµ pµ = m2 + p~⊥ 2 , where p~⊥ stands for
the extra momentum components.



         n=3
         n=2
                                                           1/R 2
         n=1
                                                                     FIG. 1: KK mass spectrum for a field on the
         n=0                                                         circle.

   Dimensionally reducing any higher dimensional field theory (on the torus) would give a similar spectrum for each
particle with larger level degeneracy (2n states per KK level). Different compactifications would lead to different mode
expansions. Eq. (15) would had to be chosen accordingly to the geometry of the extra space by typically using wave
functions for free particles on such a space as the basis for the expansion. Extra boundary conditions associated to
specific topological properties of the compact space may also help for a proper selection of the basis. A useful example
is the one dimensional orbifold, U (1)/Z2 , which is built out of the circle, by identifying the opposite points around
zero, so reducing the physical interval of the original circle to [0, π] only. Operatively, this is done by requiring the
theory to be invariant under the extra parity symmetry Z2 : y → −y. Under this symmetries all fields should pick up
a specific parity, such that φ(−y) = ±φ(y). Even (odd) fields would then be expanded only into cosine (sine) modes,
thus, the KK spectrum would have only half of the modes (either the left or the right tower in figure 1). Clearly, odd
fields do not have zero modes and thus do not appear at the low energy theory.
   For m = 0, it is clear that for energies below R1 only the massless zero mode will be kinematically accessible, making
the theory looking four dimensional. The appreciation of the impact of KK excitations thus depends on the relevant
                                                                1
energy of the experiment, and on the compactification scale R     :

  (i) For energies E ≪ R1 physics would behave purely as four dimensional.
                          1
 (ii) At larger energies, R < E < M∗ , or equivalently as we do measurements at shorter distances, a large number
      of KK excitations, ∼ (ER)n , becomes kinematically accessible, and their contributions relevant for the physics.
      Therefore, right above the threshold of the first excited level, the manifestation of the KK modes will start
      evidencing the higher dimensional nature of the theory.
 (iii) At energies above M∗ , however, our effective approach has to be replaced by the use of the fundamental theory
       that describes quantum gravity phenomena.
   Coupling suppressions.- Notice that the five dimensional scalar field φ we just considered has mass dimension 23 , in
natural units. This can be easily seeing from the kinetic part of the Lagrangian, which involves two partial derivatives
with mass dimension one each, and the fact that the action is dimensionless. In contrast, by similar arguments,
all excited modes have mass dimension one, which is consistent with the KK expansion (15). In general for n extra
dimensions we get the mass dimension for an arbitrary field to be [φ] = d4 + n2 , where d4 is the natural mass dimension
of φ in four dimensions.
   Because this change on the dimensionality of φ, most interaction terms on the Lagrangian (apart from the mass
term) would all have dimensionful couplings. To keep them dimensionless a mass parameter should be introduced to
correct the dimensions. It is common to use as the natural choice for this parameter the cut-off of the theory, M∗ .
                                                                                                                       7

For instance, let us consider the quartic couplings of φ in 5D. Since all potential terms should be of dimension five,
we should write down Mλ∗ φ4 , with λ dimensionless. After integrating the fifth dimension, this operator will generate
                                                                                    √
quartic couplings among all KK modes. Four normalization factors containing 1/ R appear in the expansion of φ4 .
Two of them will be removed by the integration, thus, we are left with the effective coupling λ/M R. By introducing
Eq. (10) we observe that the effective couplings have the form
                                                    2
                                                 M∗
                                             λ          φk φl φm φk+l+m ;                                         (17)
                                                 MP
where the indices are arranged to respect the conservation of the fifth momentum. From the last expression we
conclude that in the low energy theory (E < M∗ ), even at the zero mode level, the effective coupling appears
suppressed respect to the bulk theory. Therefore, the effective four dimensional theory would be weaker interacting
compared to the bulk theory. Let us recall that same happens to gravity on the bulk, where the coupling constant is
stronger than the effective 4D coupling, due to the volume suppression given in Eq. (6), or equivalently in Eq. (10).
   Similar arguments apply in general for brane-bulk couplings. Let us, for instance, consider the case of a brane
fermion, ψ(x), coupled to our bulk scalar φ field. For simplicity we assume that the brane is located at the position
y0 = 0, which in the case of orbifolds corresponds to a fixed point. Thus, as the part of the action that describes the
brane-bulk coupling we choose the term
                                                                                            ∞
                                                                                                  !
                   Z
                       4       h
                                                               Z
                                                                   4 M∗
                                                                                       √ X
                     d x dy √      ψ̄(x)ψ(x)φ(x, y = 0) δ(y) = d x       h · ψ̄ψ φ0 + 2        φn .                (18)
                               M∗                                     MP                   n=1
                                                                                        √
Here the Yukawa coupling constant h is dimensionless and the suppression factor 1/ M has been introduce to correct
the dimensions. On the right hand side we have used the expansion (15) and Eq. (10). From here, we notice that the
                                                                            M
coupling of brane to bulk fields is generically suppressed by the ratio M    P
                                                                               . Also, notice that the modes φ̂n decouple
from the brane. Through this coupling we could not distinguish the circle from the orbifold compactification.
   Let us stress that the couplings in Eq. (18) do not conserve the KK number. This reflects the fact that the
brane breaks the translational symmetry along the extra dimension. Nevertheless, it is worth noticing that the four
dimensional theory is still Lorentz invariant. Thus, if we reach enough energy on the brane, on a collision for instance,
as to produce real emission of KK modes, part of the energy of the brane would be released into the bulk. This would
be the case of gravity, since the graviton is naturally a field that lives in all dimensions.
   Next, let us consider the scattering process among brane fermions ψψ → ψψ mediated by all the KK excitations of
some field φ. A typical amplitude will receive the contribution
                                                                             !
                                                     1         X       1
                                      M = ĥ2             +2                   D(q 2 ),                              (19)
                                                 q 2 − m2      n=1
                                                                   q 2 − m2n

where ĥ = (M∗ /MP )h represents the effective coupling, and D(q 2 ) is an operator that only depends on the 4D
Feynman rules of the involved fields. The sum can easily be performed in this simple case, and one gets

                                           ĥ2 πR     h p         i
                                      M= p         cot πR q 2 − m2 D(q 2 ).                                         (20)
                                          q 2 − m2
In more than five dimensions the equivalent to the above sum usually diverges and has to be regularized by introducing
a cut-off at the fundamental scale.
   We can also consider some simple limits to get a better feeling on the KK contribution to the process. At low
energies, for instance, by assuming that q 2 ≪ m2 ≪ 1/R2 we may integrate out all the KK excitations, and at the
first order we get the amplitude

                                                 ĥ2      π2 2 2
                                                                 
                                          M≈ 2 1+            m R D(q 2 ).                                         (21)
                                                 m         3
Last term between parenthesis is a typical effective correction produced by the KK modes exchange to the pure four
dimensional result.
  On the other hand, at high energies, qR ≫ 1, the overall factor becomes ĥ2 N , where N = M R = MP2 /M∗2 is the
number of KK modes up to the cut-off. This large number of modes would overcome the suppression in the effective
coupling, such that one gets the amplitude M ≈ h2 D(q 2 )/q 2 , evidencing the 5D nature of the theory, where there is
actually just a single higher dimensional field being exchange but with a larger coupling.
                                                                                                                        8

                                   D.   Graviton Phenomenology and Some Bounds

                              1.   Graviton couplings and the effective gravity interaction law.

   One of the first physical examples of a brane-bulk interaction one may be interested in analyzing with some care
is the effective gravitational coupling of particles located at the brane, for which one needs to understand the way
gravitons couple to brane fields. The problem has been extendedly discussed by Giudice, Ratazzi and Wells [7] and
independently by Han, Lykken and Zhang [8] assuming a flat bulk. Here we summarize some of the main points. We
start from the action that describes a particle on the brane
                                             Z          p
                                         S = d4 xdn y |g(y a = 0)| L δ (n) (y) ,                                 (22)

where the induced metric g(y a = 0) now includes small metric fluctuations hMN over flat space, which are also called
the graviton, such that
                                                                    1
                                              gMN = ηMN +        n/2+1
                                                                          hMN .                                      (23)
                                                               2M∗
The source of those fluctuations are of course the energy on the brane, i.e., the matter energy momentum tensor
√
 g T µν = δS/δgµν that enters on the RHS of Einstein equations:

                                        1               1        µ ν (n)
                                   RMN − R(4+n) gMN = − 2+n Tµν ηM ηN δ (y) .
                                        2              M∗
The effective coupling, at first order in h, of matter to graviton field is then described by the action
                                                                hµν
                                                       Z
                                                Sint = d4 x n/2+1 T µν                                               (24)
                                                             M∗
   It is clear from the effective four dimensional point of view, that the fluctuations hMN would have different 4D
Lorentz components. (i) hµν clearly contains a 4D Lorentz tensor, the true four dimensional graviton. (ii) haµ
behaves as a vector, the graviphotons. (iii) Finally, hab behaves as a group of scalars (graviscalar fields), one of which
corresponds to the partial trace of h (ha a ) that we will call the radion field. To count the number of degrees of
freedom in hMN we should first note that h is a D × D symmetric tensor, for D = 4 + n. Next, general coordinate
invariance of general relativity can be translated into 2n independent gauge fixing conditions, half usually chosen as
                                  1     M
the harmonic gauge ∂M hM    N = 2 ∂N hM . In total there are n(n − 3)/2 independent degrees of freedom. Clearly, for
n = 4 one has the usual two helicity states of a massless spin two particle.
   All those effective fields would of course have a KK decomposition,

                                                           X h(~n) (x)
                                            hMN (x, y) =      MN
                                                               √       ei~n·~y/R ,                                   (25)
                                                           ~
                                                           n
                                                                  Vn


where we have assumed the compact space to be a torus of unique radius R, also here ~n = (n1 , . . . , nn ), with all na
integer numbers. Once we insert back the above expansion into Sint , it is not hard to see that the volume suppression
                      n/2+1
will exchange the M∗         by an MP suppression for the the effective interaction with a single KK mode. Therefore,
all modes couple with standard gravity strength. Briefly, only the 4D gravitons, Gµν , and the radion field, b(x), get
couple at first order level to the brane energy momentum tensor [7, 8]
                                                 "            s                  #
                                           1 X      (~
                                                     n)µν   1      2      (~
                                                                           n) µν
                                   L=−             G      −              b η       Tµν .                            (26)
                                         MP                 3 3(n + 2)
                                                ~
                                                n

Notice that G(0)µν is massless since the higher dimensional graviton hMN has no mass itself. That is the source of
long range four dimensional gravity interactions. It is worth saying that on the contrary b(0) should not be massless,
otherwise it should violate the equivalence principle, since it would mean a scalar (gravitational) interaction of long
range too. b(0) should get a mass from the stabilization mechanism that keeps the extra volume finite.
  Now that we know how gravitons couple to brane matter we can use this effective field theory point of view to
calculate what the effective gravitational interaction law should be on the brane. KK gravitons are massive, thus,
                                                                                                                       9

the interaction mediated by them on the brane is of short range. More precisely, each KK mode contribute to the
gravitational potential among two test particles of masses m1 and m2 located on the brane, separated by a distance
r, with a Yukawa potential
                                                       m1 m2 −m~n r
                                    ∆~n U (r) ≃ −GN         e       = UN (r)e−m~n r .                               (27)
                                                         r
Total contribution of all KK modes, the sum over all KK masses m~n2 = ~n2 /R, can be estimated in the continuum
limit, to get
                                                                   m1 m2
                                      UT (r) ≃ −GN Vn (n − 1)!           ≃ U∗ (r) ,                                 (28)
                                                                   rn+1
as mentioned in Eq. (8). Experimentally, however, for r just around the threshold R only the very first excited modes
would be relevant, and so, the potential one should see in short distance tests of Newton’s law should rather be of the
form [24]
                                                                       
                                            U (r) ≃ UN (r) 1 + αe−r/R .                                            (29)

where α = 8n/3 accounts for the multiplicity of the very first excited level. As already mentioned, recent measurements
have tested inverse squared law of gravity down to about 160 µm, and no signals of deviation have been found [6].


                                                  2.   Collider physics.

   As gravity may become comparable in strength to the gauge interactions at energies M ∗ ∼ TeV, the nature of the
quantum theory of gravity would become accessible to LHC and NLC. Indeed, the effect of the gravitational couplings
would be mostly of two types: (i) missing energy, that goes into the bulk; and (ii) corrections to the standard cross
sections from graviton exchange [9]. A long number of studies on this topics have appeared [7, 8, 9], and some nice
and short reviews of collider signatures were early given in [22]. Here we just briefly summarize some of the possible
signals. Some indicative bounds one can obtain from the experiments on the fundamental scale are also shown in
tables 1 and 2. Notice however that precise numbers do depend on the number of extra dimensions. At e+ e− colliders
(LEP,LEPII, L3), the best signals would be the production of gravitons with Z, γ or fermion pairs f¯f . In hadron
colliders (CDF, LHC) one could see graviton production in Drell-Yang processes, and there is also the interesting
monojet production [7, 8] which is yet untested. LHC could actually impose bounds up to 4 TeV for M∗ for 10 f b−1
luminosity.
   Graviton exchange either leads to modifications of the SM cross sections and asymmetries, or to new processes not
allowed in the SM at tree level. The amplitude for exchange of the entire tower naively diverges when n > 1 and has
to be regularized, as already mentioned. An interesting channel is γγ scattering, which appears at tree level, and may
surpasses the SM background at s = 0.5 TeV for M∗ = 4 TeV. Bi-boson productions of γγ, W W and ZZ may also
give some competitive bounds [7, 8, 9]. Some experimental limits, most of them based on existing data, are given in
Table 2. The upcoming experiments will easily overpass those limits.


                      TABLE I: Collider limits for the fundamental scale M∗ . Graviton Production.

                                     Process   Background M∗ limit            Collider
                                     e e → γG e+ e− → γ ν̄ν 1
                                      + −
                                                            TeV              L3
                                      + −       + −            515 GeV        LEPII
                                     e e → ZG e e → Z ν̄ν
                                                               600 GeV        L3
                                     Z → f¯f G Z → f¯f ν̄ν  0.4 TeV           LEP



  Another intriguing phenomena in colliders, associated to a low gravity scale, is the possible production of microscopic
Black Holes [25]. Given that the (4 + n)D Schwarzschild radius
                                                                   1
                                                                  1+n
                                                           MBH           1
                                                rS ∼                                                                (30)
                                                           M∗            M∗
                                                                                                                  10


                   TABLE II: Collider limits for the fundamental scale M∗ . Virtual Graviton exchange

                              Process             M∗ limit         Collider
                              e+ e− → f f¯        0.94
                                                      TeV         Tevatron & HERA
                                                     0.7 − −1 T eV LEP
                              e+ e− → γγ, W W, ZZ
                                                     0.8 T eV      L3
                              All above           1 TeV            L3
                              Bhabha scattering
                                                 1.4 TeV          LEP
                               q q̄ → γγ
                                                  0.9 TeV          CDF
                               gg → γγ




may be larger than the impact parameter in a√collision at energies larger than M∗ , it has been conjecture that
a Black Hole may form with a mass MBH = s. Since the geometrical cross section of the Black Hole goes as
σ ∼ πrS2 ∼ T eV −2 ≈ 400 pb, it has been pointed out that LHC running at maximal energy could even be producing
about 107 of those Black Holes per year, if M∗ ∼ T eV . However, such tiny objects are quite unstable. Indeed they
thermally evaporate in a life time
                                                                  (3n+1)/(n+1)
                                                    1        MBH
                                             τ≈                                                                 (31)
                                                    M∗       M∗
by releasing all its energy into Hawking radiation containing predominantly brane modes. For above parameters one
gets τ < 10−25 sec. This efficient conversion of collider energy into thermal radiation would be a clear signature of
having reached the quantum gravity regime.


                                             3.    Cosmology and Astrophysics.

  Graviton production may also posses strong constraints on the theory when considering that the early Universe was
an important resource of energy. How much of this energy could had gone into the bulk without affecting cosmological
evolution? For large extra dimensions, the splitting among two excited modes is pretty small, 1/R. For n = 2 and
M∗ at TeV scale this means a mass gap of just about 10−3 eV. For a process where the center mass energy is E, up
to N = (ER)n KK modes would be kinematically accessible. During Big Bang Nucleosynthesis (BBN), for instance,
where E was about few MeV, this already means more than 1018 modes for n = 2. So many modes may be troublesome
for a hot Universe that may release too much energy into gravitons. One can immediately notice that the graviton
creation rate, per unit time and volume, from brane thermal processes at temperature T goes as
                                                             (T R)n    Tn
                                                  σtotal =          =       .
                                                              MP2     M∗n+2
The standard Universe evolution would be conserved as far as the total number density of produced KK gravitons,
ng , remains small when compared to photon number density, nγ . This is a sufficient condition that can be translated
into a bound for the reheating energy, since as hotter the media as more gravitons can be excited. It is not hard to
see that this condition implies [5]

                                                    ng   T n+1 MP
                                                       ≈          <1.                                           (32)
                                                    nγ    M∗n+2
Equivalently, the maximal temperature our Universe could reach with out producing to many gravitons must satisfy

                                                                 M∗n+2
                                                      Trn+1 <          .                                        (33)
                                                                  MP
To give numbers consider for instance M∗ = 10 TeV and n = 2, which means Tr < 100 M eV , just about to what is
needed to have BBN working [26] (see also [27]). The brane Universe with large extra dimensions is then rather cold.
This would be reflected in some difficulties for those models trying to implement baryogenesis or leptogenesis based
in electroweak energy physics.
                                                                                                                     11

  Thermal graviton emission is not restricted to early Universe. One can expect this to happen in many other
environments. We have already mention colliders as an example. But even the hot astrophysical objects can be
graviton sources. Gravitons emitted by stellar objects take away energy, this contributes to cool down the star. Data
                                                   15−4.5n
obtained from the supernova 1987a gives M∗ >  ∼ 10
                                                     n+2   , which for n = 2 means M∗ > 30 TeV [10].
  Moreover, the Universe have been emitting gravitons all along its life. Those massive gravitons are actually unstable.
They decay back into the brane re-injecting energy in the form of relativistic particles, through channels like GKK →
γγ; e+ e− ; . . ., within a life time
                                                                          3
                                                                  30M eV
                                            τg ≈ 1011 yrs ×                     .                                  (34)
                                                                    mg

Thus, gravitons with a mass about 30 MeV would be decaying at the present time, contributing to the diffuse gamma
ray background. EGRET and COMPTEL observations on this window of cosmic radiation do not see an important
contribution, thus, there could not be so many of such gravitons decaying out there. Quantitatively it means that
M∗ > 500 TeV [27, 28].
   Stringent limits come from the observation of neutron stars. Massive KK gravitons have small kinetic energy, so
that a large fraction of those produced in the inner supernovae core remain gravitationally trapped. Thus, neutron
stars would have a halo of KK gravitons, which is dark except for the few MeV e+ e− pairs and γ rays produced by
their decay. Neutron stars are observed very close (as close as 60 pc), and so one could observe this flux coming from
the stars. GLAST, for instance, could be in position of finding the KK signature, well up to a fundamental scale as
large as 1300 TeV for n = 2 [30]. Constraints from gamma ray emission from the whole population of neutron stars
in the galactic bulge against EGRET observations gives limits on about M∗ > 450 T eV for n = 2 [29].
   KK decay may also heat the neutron star up to levels above the temperature expected from standard cooling
models. Direct observation of neutron star luminosity provides the most restrictive lower bound on M∗ at about
1700 TeV for n = 2 [30]. Larger number of dimensions results in softer lower bounds since the mass gap among KK
modes increases. These bounds, however, depend on the graviton decaying mainly into the visible Standard Model
particles. Nevertheless, if heavy KK gravitons decay into more stable lighter KK modes, with large kinetic energies,
such bounds can be avoided, since these last KK modes would fly away from the star leaving no detectable signal
behind. This indeed may happen if, for instance, translational invariance is broken in the bulk, such that inter KK
mode decay is not forbidden [31]. Supernova cooling and BBN bounds are, on the hand, more robust.
   Microscopic Black Holes may also be produced by ultra high energy cosmic rays hitting the atmosphere, since
these events may reach center mass energies well above 105 GeV. Black Hole production, due to graviton mediated
interactions of ultra high energy neutrinos in the atmosphere, would be manifested by deeply penetrating horizontal air
showers [32]. Provided, of course, the fundamental scale turns out to be at the TeV range. Auger, for instance, could
be able to observe more than one of such events per year. Contrary to earlier expectations, some recent numerical
simulations have shown that black-hole induced air-showers do not seem, however, to possess a characteristic profile,
and the rate of horizontal showers may not be higher than in standard interactions [33].


                                             III.    MODEL BUILDING

  So far we have been discussing the simple ADD model where all matter fields are assumed to live on the brane.
However, there has been also quite a large interest on the community in studying more complicated constructions
where other fields, besides gravity, live on more than four dimensions. The first simple extension one can think is to
assume than some other singlet fields may also propagate in the bulk. These fields can either be scalars or fermions,
and can be useful for a diversity of new mechanisms. One more step on this line of thought is to also promote SM fields
to propagate in the extra dimensions. Although, this is indeed possible, some modifications have to be introduced
on the profile of compact space in order to control the spectrum and masses of KK excitations of SM fields. These
constructions contain a series of interesting properties that may be of some use for model building, and it is worth
paying some attention to them.


                                                    A.   Bulk Fermions

   We have already discussed dimensional reduction with bulk scalar fields. Let us now turn our attention towards
fermions. We start considering a massless fermion, Ψ, in (4+n)D. Naively we will take it as the solution to the Dirac
equation i∂M ΓM Ψ(x, y) = 0 where ΓM satisfies the Clifford algebra ΓM , ΓN = 2η MN . The algebra now involves
                                                                    
                                                                                                                         12

more gamma matrices than in four dimensions, and this have important implications on degrees of freedom of the
spinors. Consider for instance the 5D case, where we use the representation
                                          !                                           !
                       µ    µ       0 σµ                    4           0 1 2 3 1 0
                     Γ =γ =                 ;     and      Γ = iγ5 = γ γ γ γ =          ,                 (35)
                                   σ̄ µ 0                                       0 −1

where as usual σ µ = (1, ~σ ) and σ̄ µ = (1, −~σ ), with σi the three Pauli matrices. With γ 5 included among Dirac
matrices and because there is no any other matrix with the same properties of γ5 , that is to say which anticommutes
with all γ M and satisfies (γ)2 = 1, there is not explicit chirality in the theory. In this basis, Ψ is conveniently written
as
                                                                   !
                                                              ψR
                                                      Ψ=              ,                                                 (36)
                                                              ψL

and thus a 5D bulk fermion is necessarily a four component spinor. This may be troublesome given that known four
dimensional fermions are chiral (weak interactions are different for left and right components), but there are ways to
fix this, as we will comment below.
   Increasing even more the number of dimensions does not change this feature. For 6D there are not enough four by
four anticommuting gamma matrices to satisfy the algebra, and one needs to go to larger matrices which can always
be built out of the same gamma matrices used for 5D. The simplest representation is made of eight by eight matrices
that be can be chosen as
                                     !                                   !                             !
              µ     µ          0 γµ          4                   0 iγ5           5                0 1
             Γ = γ ⊗ σ1 =               ; Γ = iγ5 ⊗ σ1 =                    ; Γ = 1 ⊗ iσ2 =               .       (37)
                              γµ 0                              iγ5 0                            −1 0

6D spinor would in general have eight components, but there is now a Γ7 = Γ0 Γ1 · · · Γ5 = diag(1, −1) which anti-
commutes with all other gammas and satisfy (Γ7 )2 = 1, thus one can define a 6D chirality in terms of the eigenstates
of Γ7 , however, the corresponding chiral states Ψ± are not equivalent to the 4D ones, they still are four component
spinors, with both left and right components as given in Eq. (36).
   In general, for 4 + 2k dimensions gamma matrices can be constructed in terms of those used for (4 + 2k − 1)D,
following a similar prescription as the one used above. In the simplest representation, for both 4 + 2k and 4 + 2k + 1
dimensions they are squared matrices of dimension 2k+2 . In even dimensions (4+2k) we always have a Γ̄ ∝ Γ0 · · · Γ3+2k
that anticommutes with all Dirac matrices in the algebra, and it is such that (Γ̄)2 = 1. Thus one can always introduce
the concept of chirality associated to the eigenstates of Γ̄, but it does not correspond to the known 4D chirality [34].
In odd dimensions (4 + 2k + 1) one may always choose Γ4+2k = iΓ̄, and so, there is no chirality.
   For simplicity let us now concentrate in the 5D case. The procedure for higher dimensions should then be straight-
forward. To dimensionally reduce the theory we start with the action for a massless fermion,
                                   Z                     Z
                              S = d4 xdy iΨ̄ΓA ∂A Ψ = d4 xdy iΨ̄γ µ ∂µ Ψ + Ψ̄γ 5 ∂y Ψ ,
                                                                                       
                                                                                                                   (38)

where we have explicitely used that Γ4 = iγ 5 . Clearly, if one uses Eq. (36), the last term on the RHS simply reads
ψ̄L ∂y ψR − (L ↔ R). Now we use the Fourier expansion for compactification on the circle
                                                ∞
                                   1           X     1 h            ny                 ny i
                       ψ(x, y) = √    ψ0 (x) +     √    ψn (x) cos        + ψ̂n (x) sin         ,
                                  2πR          n=1
                                                    πR               R                    R

where L, R indices on the spinors should be understood. By setting this expansion into the action it is easy to see
that after integrating out the extra dimension, the first term on the RHS of Eq. (38) precisely gives the kinetic terms
of all KK components, whereas the last terms become the KK Dirac-like mass terms:
                                        ∞ Z
                                        X             nh                     i
                                               d4 x       ψ̄n,L ψ̂n,R − (L ↔ R) .                                      (39)
                                        n=1
                                                       R

Notice that each of these terms couples even (ψn ) to odd modes (ψ̂n ), and the two zero modes remain massless.
Regarding mass terms, two different Lorentz invariant fermion bilinears are possible in five dimensions: Dirac mass
                                                                                                                    13

terms Ψ̄Ψ and Majorana masses ΨT C5 Ψ, where C5 = γ 0 γ 2 γ 5 . These terms do not give rise to mixing among even
and odd KK modes, rather for a 5D Dirac mass term for instance, one gets
                                  Z             ∞                 ∞
                                                                       ˆ Ψ̂ .
                                                X                X
                                     dy mΨ̄Ψ =     mΨ̄n Ψn +         mΨ̄ n n                                 (40)
                                                    n=0            n=1

5D Dirac mass, however, is an odd function under the orbifold symmetry y → −y, under which Ψ → ±γ 5 Ψ, where
the overall sign remains as a free choice for each field. So, if we use the orbifold U (1)/Z2 instead of the circle for
compactifying the fifth dimension, this term should be zero. The orbifolding also takes care of the duplication of
degrees of freedom. Due to the way ψL,R transform, one of this components becomes and odd field under Z2 and
therefore at zero mode level the theory appears as if fermions were chiral.


                                                 B.   Bulk Vectors

  Lets now consider a gauge field sited on five dimensions. For simplicity we will consider only the case of a free
gauge abelian theory. The Lagrangian, as usual, is given as
                                         1            1          1
                                  L5D = − FMN F MN = − Fµν F µν + Fµ5 F µ5 ,                                       (41)
                                         4            4          2
where FMN = ∂M AN − ∂N AM ; and AM is the vector field which now has an extra degree of freedom, A5 , that behaves
as an scalar field in 4D. Now we proceed as usual with the compactification of the theory, starting with the mode
expansion
                                  1           X 1 h (n)             ny                 ny i
                                      (0)                                     (n)
                    AM (x, y) = √    AM (x) +     √     AM (x) cos        + ÂM (x) sin         .             (42)
                                 2πR          n=1  πR                R                    R

Upon integration over the extra dimension one gets the effective Lagrangian [35]
                                X 1                1h     (n)
                                                                 n        i2 
                                          (n) µν                        (n)
                        Lef f =     − Fµν F(n) +      ∂µ A5 −         Âµ        + (A ↔ Â) .                      (43)
                                n=0
                                      4             2              R

Notice that the terms within squared brackets mix even and odd modes. Moreover, the Lagrangian contains a quadratic
term in Aµ , which then looks as a mass term. Indeed, since gauge invariance of the theory, AM → AM + ∂M Λ(x, y),
can also be expressed in terms of the (expanded) gauge transformation of the KK modes
                                                                          n
                                                             (n)    (n)
                            A(n)      (n)
                              µ → Aµ + ∂µ Λ
                                               (n)
                                                   (x) ;   A5 → A5 +           Λ̂(n) (x) ;                     (44)
                                                                           R
with similar expressions for odd modes. We can use this freedom to diagonalize the mixed terms in the affective
                                                               (n)                       (n)
Lagrangian by fixing the gauge. We simply take Λ̂(n) = −(R/n)A5 [and Λ(n) = −(R/n)Â5 ] to get
                           X 1               1  n 2 (n) µ     1         2 
                                     (n) µν                             (0)
                   Lef f =      − Fµν F(n) +           Aµ A(n) +    ∂µ A5        + (odd modes)             (45)
                           n=0
                                  4           2 R                2

                                                                                                             (n)
Hence, the only massless vector is the zero mode, all KK modes acquire a mass by absorbing the scalars A5 . This
                                         (n)
resembles the Higgs mechanism with A5 playing the role of the Goldston bosons associated to the spontaneous
isometry breaking [36]. Nevertheless, there remain a massless U(1) gauge field and a massless scalar at the zero mode
level, thus the gauge symmetry at this level of the effective theory remains untouched. Once more, if one uses an
                                        (0)
orbifold, the extra degree of freedom, A5 , that appears at zero level can be projected out. This is because under Z2 ,
A5 can be chosen to be an odd function.
   Gauge couplings.- We have already mention that, for bulk theories, the coupling constants usually get a volume
suppression that makes the theory looking weaker in 4D. With the gauge fields on the bulk one has the same effect
for gauge couplings. Consider for instance the covariant derivative of a U (1), which is given by DM = ∂M − igAM .
Since mass dimension of our gauge field is [AM ] = 1 + n2 , thus gauge coupling has to have mass dimension [g] = − n2 .
We can explicitely write down the mass scale and introduce a new dimensionless coupling, g∗ , as
                                                            g∗
                                                      g=     n/2
                                                                                                                   (46)
                                                           M∗
                                                                                                                      14

To identify the effective coupling we just have to look at the zero mode level. Consider for instance the gauge couplings
of some fermion Ψ for which the effective Lagrangian comes as
                                                                g∗
                                  Z
                                    dn y i Ψ̄ΓM DM Ψ = −i p          A(0)    µ
                                                                      µ Ψ̄0 Γ Ψ0 + · · · ,                           (47)
                                                              M∗n Vn

where on√the RHS we have used the generic property that thep      zero mode always comes with a volume suppression,
Ψ = Ψ0 / Vn + · · ·. Thus, if the effective coupling gef f = g∗ / M∗n Vn is of order one, we are led to the conclusion
                                       p
that g∗ must be at least as large as M∗n Vn .
  We must stress that this effective theories are essentially non renormalizable for the infinite number of fields that
they involve. However, the truncated theory that only considers a finite number of KK modes is renormalizable. The
cut-off for the inclusion of the excited modes will be again the scale M∗ .
  Non abelian bulk gauge theories follow similar lines, although they involve the extra well known ingredient of having
interaction among gauge fields, which now will have a KK equivalent, where vector lines can either be zero or excited
modes, only restricted by conservation of the extra momentum (when it is required) at each vertex.


                                       C.   Short and large extra dimensions

   SM fields may also reside on the extra dimensions, however, there is no experimental evidence on the colliders of
any KK excitation of any known particle, that is well up to some hundred GeV. If SM particles are zero modes of
a higher dimensional theory, as it would be the case in string theory, the mass of the very first excited states has
to be larger than the current collider energies. According to our above discussion, this would mean that the size of
the compact dimensions where SM particle propagate has to be rather small. This does not mean, however, that the
fundamental scale has to be large. A low M∗ is possible if there are at least two different classes of compact extra
dimensions: (i) short, where SM matter fields can propagate, of size r; and (ii) large of size R, tested by gravity and
perhaps SM singlets. One can imagine the scenario as one where SM fields live in a (3 + δ)D brane, with δ compact
dimensions, embedded in a larger bulk of 4 + δ + n dimensions. In such a scenario, the volume of the compact space
is given by Vn = rδ Rn , and thus, one can write the effective Planck scale as

                                                 MP2 = M∗2+δ+n rδ Rn .                                              (48)

Keeping M∗ around few tenths of TeV, only requires that the larger compactification scale Mc = 1/r be also about
TeV, provided R is large enough, say in the submillimeter range. This way, short distance gravity experiments and
collider physics could be complementary to test the profile and topology of the compact space.
   A priori, due to the way the models had been constructed, there is no reason to belive that all SM particles could
propagate in the whole 4 + δ dimensions, and there are many different scenarios considering a diversity of possibilities.
When only some fields do propagate in the compact space one is force to first promote the gauge fields to the bulk,
since otherwise gauge conservation would be compromised. When all SM fields do feel such dimensions, the scenario
is usually referred as having Universal Extra Dimensions (UED).
   Phenomenology would of course be model dependent, and rather than making an exhaustive review, we will just
mention some general ideas. Once more, the effects of an extra dimensional nature of the fields can be studied either on
the direct production of KK excitations, or through the exchange of these modes in collider processes [11, 22, 37, 38].
In non universal extra dimension models KK number is not conserved, thus single KK modes can be produced
directly in high energy particle collisions. Future colliders may be able to observe resonances
                                                                                             √ due to KK modes if the
compactification scale 1/r turns out to be on the TeV range. This needs a collider energy s ∼   > Mc = 1/r. In hadron
colliders (TEVATRON, LHC) the KK excitations might be directly produced in Drell-Yang processes pp(pp̄) → ℓ− ℓ+ X
where the lepton pairs (ℓ = e, µ, τ ) are produced via the subprocess q q̄ → ℓ+ ℓ+ X. This is the more useful mode to
search for Z (n) /γ (n) even W (n) . Current search for Z ′ on this channels (CDF) impose Mc > 510 GeV . Future bounds
could be raised up to 650 GeV in TEVATRON and 4.5 T eV in LHC, which with 100 f b−1 of luminosity can discover
modes up to Mc ≈ 6 T eV .
   In UED models, due to KK number conservation, things may be more subtle since pair production of KK excitations
would require more energy to reach the threshold. On the other hand, the lighter KK modes would be stable and
thus of easy identification, either as large missing energy, when neutral, or as a heavy stable particles if charged. It
can also be a candidate for dark matter [39]
   Precision test may be the very first place to look for constraints to the compactification scale Mc [11, 22, 37]. For
instance, in non UED models, KK exchange contributions to muon decay gives the correction to Fermi constant (see
                                                                                                                           15

first reference in [11])

                                             Gef f
                                                   GSM      π2 2 2
                                                                  
                                              √F = √F    1+   mW r   ;                                                   (49)
                                                2    2      3
which implies that Mc >  ∼ 1.6 T eV . Deviations on the cross sections due to virtual exchange of KK modes may be
observed in both, hadron and lepton colliders. With a 20 f b−1 of luminosity, TEVATRONII may observe signals up
to Mc ≈ 1.3 T eV . LEPII with a maximal luminosity of 200 f b−1 could impose the bound at 1.9 T eV , while NLC
may go up to 13 T eV , which slightly improves the bounds coming from precision test.
  SUSY.- Another ingredient that may be reinstalled on the theory is supersymmetry. Although it is not necessary to
be considered for low scale gravity models, it is an interesting extension. After all, it seems plausible to exist if the high
energy theory would be string theory. If the theory is supersymmetric, the effective number of 4D supersymmetries
increases due to the increment in the number of fermionic degrees of freedom [34]. For instance, in 5D bulk fields
come in N = 2 supermultiplets [38, 40]. The on-shell field content of the a gauge supermultiplet is V = (Vµ , V5 , λi , Σ)
where λi (i = 1, 2) is a symplectic Majorana spinor and Σ a real scalar in the adjoint representation; (Vµ , λ1 ) is even
under Z2 and (V5 , Σ, λ2 ) is odd. Matter fields, on the other hand, are arranged in N = 2 hypermultiplets that consist
of chiral and antichiral N = 1 supermultiplets. The chiral N = 1 supermultiplets are even under Z2 and contain
massless states. These will correspond to the SM fermions and Higgses.
  Supersymmetry must be broken by some mechanisms that gives masses to all superpartners which we may assume
are of order Mc [38]. For some possible mechanism see Ref. [40]. In contrast with the case of four dimensional susy,
where no extra effects appear at tree level after integrating out the superpartners, in the present case integrating out
the scalar field Σ may induces a tree-level contribution to MW [37], that could in principle be constraint by precision
tests.


                                    D.    Power Law Running of Gauge Couplings

  Once we have assumed a low fundamental scale for quantum gravity, the natural question is whether the former
picture of a Grand Unified Theory [41] should be abandoned and with it a possible gauge theory understanding of
the quark lepton symmetry and gauge hierarchy. On the other hand, if string theory were the right theory above M∗
an unique fundamental coupling constant would be expect, while the SM contains three gauge coupling constants.
Then, it seems clear that, in any case, a sort of low energy gauge coupling unification is required. As pointed out in
Ref. [35] and later explored in [42, 43, 44, 45, 46], if the SM particles live in higher dimensions such a low GUT scale
could be realized.
  For comparison let us mention how one leads to gauge unification in four dimensions. Key ingredient in our
discussion are the renormalization group equations (RGE) for the gauge coupling parameters that at one loop, in the
M S scheme, read
                                                       dαi    1
                                                           =    bi α2i                                                   (50)
                                                        dt   2π
where t = lnµ. αi = gi2 /4π; i = 1, 2, 3, are the coupling constants of the SM factor groups U (1)Y , SU (2)L and
SU (3)c respectively. The coefficient bi receives contributions from the gauge part and the matter including Higgs
                                                                    2                 1
field and its completely determined by 4πbi = 11  3 Ci (vectors) − 3 Ci (f ermions) − 3 Ci (scalars), where Ci (· · ·) is the
index of the representation to which the (· · ·) particles are assigned, and where we are considering Weyl fermion and
complex scalar fields. Fixing the normalization of the U (1) generator as in the SU (5) model, we get for the SM
(b1 , b2 , b3 ) = (41/10, −19/6, −7) and for the Minimal Supersymmetric SM (MSSM) (33/5, 1, −3). Using Eq. (50)
to extrapolate the values measured at the MZ scale [47]: α−1                                 −1
                                                                  1 (MZ ) = 58.97 ± .05; α2 (MZ ) = 29.61 ± .05; and
  −1
α3 (MZ ) = 8.47 ± .22, (where we have taken for the strong coupling constant the global average), one finds that only
in the MSSM the three couplings merge together at the scale MGUT ∼ 1016 GeV. This high scale naturally explains
the long live of the proton and in the minimal SO(10) framework one gets very compelling scenarios.
   A different possibility for unification that does not involve supersymmetry is the existence of an intermediate
left-right model [41] that breaks down to the SM symmetry at 1011−13 GeV . It is worth mentioning that a non
canonical normalization of the gauge coupling may, however, substantially change above pictures, predicting a different
unification scale. Such a different normalization may arise either in some no minimal (semi simple) unified models,
or in string theories where the SM group factors are realized on non trivial Kac-Moody levels [48, 49]. Such scenarios
are in general more complicated than the minimal SU (5) or SO(10) models since they introduce new exotic particles.
   It is clear that the presence of KK excitations will affect the evolution of couplings in gauge theories and may
alter the whole picture of unification of couplings. This question was first studied by Dienes, Dudas and Gherghetta
                                                                                                                                 16

(DDG)[35] on the base of the effective theory approach at one loop level. They found that above the compactification
scale Mc one gets
                                                                                    Z wMc−2              δ
                                                 bi − b̃i          Λ            b̃i             dt        it
                        α−1         −1
                         i (Mc ) = αi (Λ) +               ln                +                         ϑ3         ,             (51)
                                                   2π              Mc           4π     wΛ−2      t       πR2
                                                                                                         P∞        2
with Λ as the ultraviolet cut-off and δ the number of extra dimensions. The Jacobi theta function ϑ(τ ) = −∞ eiπτ n
reflects the sum over the complete tower. Here bi are the beta functions of the theory below Mc , and b̃i are the
contribution to the beta functions of the KK states at each excitation level. The numerical factor w depends on the
renormalization scheme. For practical purposes, we may approximate the above result by decoupling all the excited
states with masses above Λ, and assuming that the number of KK states below certain energy µ between Mc and
                                                                                                          δ
Λ is well approximated by the volume of a δ-dimensional sphere of radius Mµc given by N (µ, Mc ) = Xδ Mµc ; with
Xδ = π δ/2 /Γ(1 + δ/2). The result is a power law behavior of the gauge coupling constants [50]:
                                                                          "    δ    #
                          −1          −1        bi − b̃i      µ      b̃i Xδ    µ
                         αi (µ) = αi (Mc ) −             ln        −    ·            −1 ,                                      (52)
                                                  2π          Mc     2π δ      Mc

which accelerates the meeting of the αi ’s. In the MSSM the energy range between Mc and Λ –identified as the
unification (string) scale M∗ – is relatively small due to the steep behavior in the evolution of the couplings [35, 43].
For instance, for a single extra dimension the ratio Λ/Mc has an upper limit of the order of 30, and it substantially
decreases for larger δ. This would, on the other hand, requires the short extra dimension where SM propagates to be
rather closer to the fundamental length.
   This same relation can be understood on the basis of a step by step approximation [44] as follows. We take the
SM gauge couplings and extrapolate their values up to Mc , then, we add to the beta functions the contribution of
the first KK levels and run the couplings upwards up to just below the next consecutive level where we stop and add
the next KK contributions, and so on, until the energy µ. Despite the complexity of the spectra, the degeneracy of
each level is always computable and performing a level by level approach of the gauge coupling running is possible.
Above the N -th level the running receives contributions from bi and of all the KK excited states in the levels below,
                   PN
in total fδ (N ) = n=1 gδ (n), where gδ (n) represent the total degeneracy of the level n. Running for all the first N
levels leads to
                                                                                        N
                                                              "                                   #
                      −1         −1          bi      µ      b̃i               µ      1X
                    αi (µ) = αi (Mc ) −         ln        −      fδ (N ) ln        −       gδ (n) ln n .            (53)
                                            2π       Mc     2π                Mc     2 n=1

A numerical comparison of this expression with the power law running shows the accuracy of that approximation.
Indeed, in the continuous limit the last relation reduces into Eq. (52). Thus, gauge coupling unification may now
happen at TeV scales [35].
  Next, we will discuss how accurate this unification is. Many features of unification can be studied without bothering
about the detailed subtleties of the running. Consider the generic form for the evolution equation
                                                                                
                                    −1           −1    bi      M∗      b̃i      M∗
                                  αi (MZ ) = α +          ln        +      Fδ        ,                             (54)
                                                       2π      MZ     2π        Mc

where we have changed Λ to M∗ to keep our former notation. Above, α is the unified coupling and Fδ is given by
the expression between parenthesis in Eq. (53) or its correspondent limit in Eq. (52). Note that the information that
comes from the bulk is being separated into two independent parts: all the structure of the KK spectra Mc and M∗ are
completely embedded into the Fδ function, and their contribution is actually model independent. The only (gauge)
model dependence comes in the beta functions, b̃i . Indeed, Eq. (54) is similar to that of the two step unification model
where a new gauge symmetry appears at an intermediate energy scale. Such models are very constrained by the one
step unification in the MSSM. The argument goes as follows: let us define the vectors: b = (b1 , b2 , b3 ); b̃ = (b̃1 , b̃2 , b̃3 );
a = (α−1          −1         −1
       1 (MZ ), α2 (MZ ), α3 (MZ )) and u = (1, 1, 1), and construct the unification barometer [44] ∆α ≡ (u × b) · a.
For single step unification models the unification condition amounts to have ∆α = 0. As a matter of fact, for the SM
∆α = 41.13 ± 0.655, while for the MSSM ∆α = 0.928 ± 0.517, leading to unification within two standard deviations.
In this notation Eq. (54) leads to
                                                                                  1
                                                   ∆α = [(u × b) · b̃]              Fδ .                                       (55)
                                                                                 2π
                                                                                                                        17

Therefore, for the MSSM, we get the constrain [51]

                                                (7b̃3 − 12b̃2 + 5b̃1 )Fδ = 0.                                         (56)
There are two solutions to the this equation: (a) Fδ (M∗ /Mc ) = 0, which means M∗ = Mc , bringing us back to the
MSSM by pushing up the compactification scale to the unification scale. (b) Assume that the beta coefficients b̃
conspire to eliminate the term between brackets: (7b̃3 − 12b̃2 + 5b̃1 ) = 0, or equivalently [35]

                                     B12   B13                                  b̃i − b̃j
                                         =     = 1;         where       Bij =             .                           (57)
                                     B13   B23                                  bi − bj
The immediate consequence of last possibility is the indeterminacy of Fδ , which means that we may put Mc as a free
parameter in the theory. For instance we could choose Mc ∼ 10 TeV to maximize the phenomenological impact of
such models. It is compelling to stress that this conclusion is independent of the explicit form of Fδ . Nevertheless,
the minimal model where all the MSSM particles propagate on the bulk does not satisfy that constrain [35, 43].
Indeed, in this case we have (7b̃3 − 12b̃2 + 5b̃1 ) = −3, which implies a higher prediction for αs at low Mc . As
lower the compactification scale, as higher the prediction for αs . However, as discussed in Ref. [43] there are some
scenarios where the MSSM fields are distributed in a nontrivial way among the bulk and the boundaries which lead
to unification. There is also the obvious possibility of adding matter to the MSSM to correct the accuracy on αs .
  The SM case has similar complications. Now Eq. (54) turns out to be a system of three equation with three
variables, then, within the experimental accuracy on αi , specific predictions for M∗ , Mc and α will arise. As ∆α 6= 0,
the above constrain does not apply, instead the matter content should satisfy the consistency conditions [44]

                                    Sign(∆α) = Sign[(u × b) · b̃] = −Sign( ˜
                                                                          ∆α) ;                                       (58)

where ˜∆α ≡ (u × b̃) · a. However, in the minimal model where all SM fields are assumed to have KK excitations one
gets ˜∆α = 38.973 ± 0.625; and (u × b) · b̃SM = 1/15. Hence, the constraint (58) is not fulfilled and unification does
not occur. Extra matter could of course improve this situation [35, 43, 44]. Models with non canonical normalization
may also modify this conclusion [44]. A particularly interesting outcome in this case is that there are some cases
where, without introducing extra matter at the SM level, the unification scale comes out to be around 1011 GeV (for
instance SU (5) × SU (5), [SU (3)]4 and [SU (6)]4 ). These models fit nicely into the intermediate string scale models
proposed in [52], and also with the expected scale in models with local B − L symmetry. High order corrections has
been considered in Ref. [45]. It is still possible that this joint to threshold corrections might correct the situation and
improve unification, so one can not rule it out on the simple basis of one-loop running. Examples of he analysis for
the running of other coupling constants could be found in [35, 46]. Two step models were also studied in [44].
   It has been argue recently by some authors that precision power-law unification can not be claimed in this context
because of the strong UV sensitivity of the 5D F 2 terms of the three SM factor groups (see for example Refs. [53] and
references therein). As a result no precise calculation of the ratio of low energy gauge couplings could be made without
a UV completition of the higher dimensional theory (see also Refs [54]). Some details and more references on this are
also found in Refs. [55], where it has also been pointed out a class of models where power-law unification can work
in a quantitatively controlled way (the main idea being soft GUT breaking in 5D field theory). Extra information
beyond the 4D low-energy particle spectrum has, in any case, to be supplied. The issue of power law running was
also discussed in connection with deconstructed theories and warped 5D models in Refs. [56, 57]


                         IV.   SYMMETRY BREAKING WITH EXTRA DIMENSIONS

  Old and new ideas on symmetry breaking have been revisited and further developed in the context of extra dimension
models by many authors in the last few years. Here we provide a short overview of this topic. Special attention is
payed to spontaneous symmetry breaking, and the possible role compactification may play to induce the breaking of
some continuous symmetries. An extended review can be found in the lectures by M. Quiros in reference [21].


                                              A.   Spontaneous Breaking

   The simplest place to start is reviewing the spontaneous symmetry breaking mechanism as implemented with bulk
fields, as it would be the case in a higher dimensional SM. Let us consider the usual potential for a bulk scalar field
                                                      1         λ∗ 4
                                             V (φ) = − m2 φ2 +       φ .                                              (59)
                                                      2        4M∗ n
                                                                                                                          18

First thing to notice is the suppression on the quartic coupling. Minimization of the potential gives the condition
                                                                m2 M ∗ n
                                                     hφi2 =              .                                              (60)
                                                                   λ
RHS of this equation is clearly a constant, which means that in the absolute minimum only the zero mode is picking
up a vacuum expectation value (vev). As the mass parameter m is naturally smaller than the fundamental scale M∗ ,
this naively implies that the√minimum has an enhancement respect to the standard 4D result. Indeed, if one considers
the KK expansion φ = φ0 / Vn + · · ·; is easy to see that the effective vacuum as seen in four dimensions is
                                                          m2 Vn M∗ n    m2
                                               hφ0 i2 =              =       .                                          (61)
                                                              λ        λef f
The enhancement can also be seen as due to the suppression of the effective λef f coupling. The result can of course
be verified if calculated directly in the effective theory (at zero mode level) obtained after integrating out the extra
dimensions. Higgs mechanism, on the other hand, happens as usual. Consider for instance a bulk U (1) gauge, broken
by the same scalar field we have just discussed above. The relevant terms contained in the kinetic terms, (DM φ)2 ,
are as usual g2 φ2 AM (x, y)AM (x, y). Setting in the vev and Eq. (46) one gets the global mass term
                               g∗2
                                    hφ0 i2 AM (x, y)AM (x, y) = gef
                                                                 2         2          M
                                                                    f hφ0 i AM (x, y)A (x, y) .                         (62)
                             Vn M∗n
Thus, all KK modes of the gauge field acquire a universal mass contribution from the bulk vacuum.


                                                    B.    Shinning vevs

   Symmetries can also be broken at distant branes, and the breaking be communicated by the mediation of bulk
fields to some other brane [58]. Consider for instance the following toy model. We take a brane located somewhere
in the bulk, let say at the position ~y = ~y0 , where there is a localized scalar field, ϕ, which couples to a bulk scalar χ,
such that the Lagrangian in the complete theory is written as
                                                         1           1
                                 L4D (ϕ)δ n (~y − y~0 ) + ∂M χ∂ M χ − m2χ χ2 − V (φ, χ) .                               (63)
                                                         2           2
For the brane field we will assume the usual Higgs potential V (ϕ) = − 21 m2ϕ ϕ2 + λ4 ϕ4 , such that ϕ gets a non zero
vev. For the interaction potential we take
                                                           µ2
                                             V (ϕ, χ) =     n/2
                                                                  ϕ χ δ n (~y − y~0 ) ;                                 (64)
                                                          M∗
with µ a mass parameter. Thus, hϕi acts as a point-like source for hχi(~y ),
                                                              µ2
                                       ∇2⊥ + m2χ hχi(~y ) = − n/2 hϕi δ n (~y − ~y0 ) .
                                                
                                                                                                                        (65)
                                                             M∗
The equation has the solution
                                               hχi(~y ) = ∆(mχ ; ~y0 − ~y )hϕi ,                                        (66)
with ∆(mχ ; ~y0 − y~) the physical propagator of the field. Next we would be interested in what a second brane localized
in ~y = 0 would see, for which we introduce the coupling of the bulk field to some fermion on the second brane,
√h n ψ̄ c ψ χ δ n (~y ). If we assume that all those fields carry a global U (1) charge, this last coupling will induce the
  M∗
breaking of such a global symmetry on the second brane, by generating a mass term
                                             "              #
                                               ∆(mχ ; ~y0 )
                                                p             h hϕiψ̄ c ψ                                               (67)
                                                   M∗n

Since this requires the physical propagation of the information through the distance, the second brane sees a suppressed
effect, which results in a small breaking of the U (1) symmetry. This way, we get a suppressed effect with out the use
of large energy scales. This idea has been used where small vevs are needed, as for instance to produce small neutrino
masses [59, 60]. It may also be used to induce small SUSY breaking terms on our brane [61].
                                                                                                                      19

                                       C.   Orbifold Breaking of Symmetries

   We have mentioned in previous sections that by orbifolding the extra dimensions one can get chiral theories. In fact,
orbifolding can actually do more than that. It certainly projects out part of the degrees of freedom of the bulk fields
via the imposition of the extra discrete symmetries that are used in the construction of the orbifold out of the compact
space. However it gives enough freedom as to choose which components of the bulk fields are to remain at zero mode
level. In the case of fermions on 5D, for instance, we have already commented that under Z2 the fermion generically
transform as Ψ → ±γ5 ψ, where the ± sign can be freely chosen. The complete 5D theory is indeed vector-like since
chirality can not be defined, which means the theory is explicitely left-right symmetric. Nevertheless, when we look
up on the zero mode level, the theory would have less symmetry than the whole higher dimensional theory, since only
a left (or right) fermion do appears. This can naturally be used to break both global and local symmetries [62, 63]
and so, it has been extendedly exploited in model building. Breaking of parity due to the projection of part of the
fermion components with well defined 4D chirality is just one of many examples. A nice model where parity is broken
using bulk scalars was presented in Ref [62], for instance. In what follows we will consider the case of breaking non
abelian symmetries through a simple example.
   Toy Model: Breaking SU (2) on U (1)/Z2 .- Consider the following simple 5D model. We take a bulk scalar doublet
                                                               !
                                                             φ
                                                     Φ=           ,                                                 (68)
                                                             χ

and assume for the moment that the SU (2) symmetry associated to it is global. Next, we assume the fifth dimension
is compactified on the orbifold U (1)/Z2 , where, as usual, Z2 means the identification of points y → −y. For simplicity
we use y in the unitary circle defined by the interval [−π, π] before orbifolding. Z2 has to be a symmetry of the
Lagrangian, and that is the only constrain in the way Φ should transforms under Z2 . As the scalar part of the
Lagrangian goes as L = 21 (∂M Φ)2 , the most general transformation rule would be

                                                      Φ → Pg Φ ;                                                    (69)

where Pg satisfies Pg† = Pg−1 , thus, the simplest choices are Pg = ±1; ± σ3 up to a global phase, that we will neglect
for the moment. Clearly the first option only means taking both fields on the doublet to be simultaneously even or
odd, with no further implication for the theory. However, the second choice is some what more interesting. Taking
for instance Pg = σ3 , this selection explicitely means that under Z2
                                                        !           !
                                                      φ          φ
                                                           →          .                                            (70)
                                                      χ         −χ

That is, χ is force to be an odd field . Therefore, at the zero mode level, one would only see the φ field, and thus, the
original SU (2) symmetry would not be evident. In fact, the lack of the whole symmetry would be clear by looking
at the whole KK spectrum, where at each level there is not appropriate pairing of fields that may form a doublet.
Either φn or χn is missing.
  The effect of this non trivial Z2 transformation can also be understood via the boundary conditions. Whereas φ
has been chosen to be an even field, whose KK expansion only contains cosine functions which are non zero at both
ends of the space, located at y = 0 and y = π; χ vanishes at those points, χ(0) = χ(π) = 0. Hence the boundaries are
forced to have less symmetry than the bulk, in fact only a residual U (1) symmetry, which is reflected in the effective
theory. Thus, the selection of the orbifold condition (70) results in the effective breaking of SU (2) down to U (1).
We should notice that the transformation (69) is an inner automorphism which triggers a breaking that preserves the
range of the original group. If fact all inner automorphism do. To reduce the rank of the group one can use outer
automorphism (see for instance Hebecker and March-Russell in Ref. [63] and Quirós in Ref. [21]).
  Let us now see what happens if SU (2) is assumed to be a local symmetry. In this case we should ask the covariant
derivative DM Φ to have proper Z2 transformation rules:

                                  Dµ Φa → Pg Dµ Φa     and     D5 Φa → −Pg D5 Φa .                                  (71)
                                                   √
This fixes the way the gauge fields, AM = AaM σ a / 2, should transform:

                                    Aµ → Pg Aµ Pg−1      and       A5 → −Pg A5 Pg−1                                 (72)

Now, for Pg = σ3 we get the following assignment of parities: Wµ3 (+); Wµ± (−); W53 (−) and W5± (+). Clearly, as only
even modes are non zero at the boundaries, only the U (1) associated to Wµ3 remains intact, as expected.
                                                                                                                        20

   Notice that we are projecting out the zero mode of the charged vector bosons to the price of leaving instead two
massless charged scalars W5± in the effective theory. These extra fields can be removed by a further orbifolding of
the compact space. Indeed if one uses instead the orbifold U (1)/Z2 × Z2′ , where the second identification of points is
defined by the transformation Z2′ : y ′ → −y ′ , where y ′ = y + π2 , one can freely choose another set of parities for the
field components in the doublet, corresponding to the transformation properties of the doublet under Z2′ : Φ → Pg′ Φ.
Therefore, the KK wave functions along the fifth dimensions will be now classified under both these parities. We will
then have,

                                 ξ (+,+) ∼ cos(2n y/R)        ξ (+,−) ∼ cos[(2n − 1) y/R]
                                                                                                                      (73)
                                 ξ (−,+) ∼ sin(2n y/R)        ξ (−,−) ∼ sin[(2n − 1) y/R]

up to a normalization factor. Clearly, only the completely even function, ξ (+,+) , do contain a zero mode. If we now
take the transformations to be given by Pg = 1 and Pg′ = σ3 for Z2 and Z2′ respectively, then, we then get the parity
assignments Wµ3 (+, +); Wµ± (−, +); but W53 (−, −) and W5± (+, −). Therefore, at zero mode level, only Wµ3 would
appear.


                                           D.   Scherk-Schwarz mechanism

   When compactifying, one assumes that the extra dimensions form a quoting space C = M/G, which is constructed
out of a non compact manifold M and a discrete group G acting on M , with the identification of points y ≡ τg (y)
for τg a representation of G, which means that τg1 τg2 = τg1 · τg2 . G should be acting freely, meaning that only τe has
fixed points in M , where e is the identity in G. M becomes the covering space of C. After the identification physics
should not depend on individual points in M but only on on points in C (the orbits), such that L[φ(y)] = L[φ(τg (y))].
To satisfy this, in ordinary compactification one uses the sufficient condition φ(y) = φ(τg (y)). For instance, if we use
τn (y) = y + 2nπ for y ∈ R and n an integer number, the identification leads to the fundamental interval (y, y + 2π]
that is equivalent to the unitary circle. The open interval only states that both the ends describe the same point. One
usually writes a close interval with the implicit equivalence of ends. Any choice of y leads to a equivalent fundamental
domain in the covering space R. One can take for example y = −π so that the intervale becomes (−π, π].
   There is, however, a more general necessary and sufficient condition for the invariance of the Lagrangian under the
action of G, which is given by the so called Scherk-Schwarz compactification [64]

                                                   φ(τg (y)) = Tg φ(y) ,                                              (74)

where Tg is a representation of G acting on field space, usually called the twist. Unlike ordinary compactification,
given for a trivial twist, for Scherk-Schwarz compactification twisted fields are not single value functions on C. T
must be an operator corresponding to a symmetry of the Lagrangian. A simple example is the use the Z2 symmetry
for which the twisted condition would be φ(−π) ≡ T φ(π) = −φ(π).
  Notice that the orbifold is somewhat a step beyond compactification. For orbifolding we take a compact manifold C
and a discrete group H represented by some operator ζh acting non freely on C. Thus, we mode out C by identifying
points on C such that y ≡ ζh (y), for some h on H, and require that fields defined at these two points differ by some
transformation Zh , φ(x, ζh (y)) = Zh φ(x, y), which is a symmetry of the theory. The resulting space C/H is not a
smooth manifold but it has singularities at the fixed points.
  Scherk-Schwarz boundary conditions can change the properties of the effective 4D theory and can also be used to
break some symmetries of the Lagrangian. Consider the simple toy model where we take M = R, and the group
G = Z, as for the circle. Thus we use the identification on R, τn (y) = y + 2nπR, with R the radius of the circle as
before. The group Z has an infinite number of elements, but all of them can be obtained from just one generator,
the simple translation by 2π. Thus, there is only one independent twist, φ(y + 2πR) = T φ(y) and other elements of
Z are just given by Tn = T n . We can then choose the transformation to be

                                                φ(y + 2πR) = e2π i β φ(y)                                             (75)

where β is called the Scherk-Schwarz charge. Thus, with this transformation rule instead of the usual Fourier expansion
for the fields we get
                                                             ∞
                                                             X
                                         φ(x, y) = ei βy/R          φn (x) ei n y/R .                                 (76)
                                                             n=−∞
                                                                                                                        21

  At the level of the KK excitations we see that fifth momentum is less trivial than usual, indeed, acting p5 = −i∂y
on the field one sees that the KK mass is now given as
                                                             n+β
                                                      mn =       .                                                    (77)
                                                              R
Therefore, in this model all modes are massive, including the zero mode. This particular property can be used to
break global symmetries. For instance, if we assume a Global SU (2), and consider a doublet representation of fields
                                                            !
                                                          φ
                                                   Φ=          ;                                                (78)
                                                          χ

one can always choose the non trivial twist
                                                                        !
                                                            ei βy/R φ
                                                  Φ −→                      ;                                         (79)
                                                                χ

which explicitely breaks the global symmetry. Whereas the zero mode of χ appears massless, this does not happen
for φ. Moreover, the effective theory does not present the SU (2) symmetry at any level.
  Similar Scherk-Schwarz mechanism can be used to break local gauge symmetries. The result is actually equivalent
to the so called Wilson/Hosotani mechanism [65, 66] where the A35 component of the gauge vector, A3M , may by
some dynamics acquire a non zero vev, and induce a mass term for the 4D gauge fields, Aaµ , through the term
hA35 i2 (Aµ 1 A1µ + Aµ 2 A2µ ), which is contained in T r FMN F MN . Thus SU (2) would be broken down to U (1). Another
interesting use of this mechanism could be the breaking of supersymmetry [67]. For more discussions see M. Quirós
in Ref. [21] and references therein.


                              V.    6 L AND 6 B IN LOW GRAVITY SCALE MODELS

  Baryon number (B) and Lepton number (L) are conserved quantities in the SM. However, it is believe that such
global symmetries may not be respected by the physics that lays beyond electroweak scale. Well known examples
are GUT theories, which contain new quark-lepton interactions that violate baryon number. R parity breaking terms
in supersymmetric theories usually include lepton and baryon number violation too. It is also believe that quantum
gravity would not conserve any global symmetry.
  Regarding lepton number, several experiments have provided conclusive evidence for the oscillation of neutrinos,
and this only takes place if neutrinos are massive [68]. The most appealing four dimensional mechanisms which
generates masses for the SM left handed neutrino is see-saw, which also introduce right handed Majorana masses that
violate lepton number. The generated mass appears effectively through the non renormalizable operators

                                                         (LH)2
                                                               ,                                                      (80)
                                                           Λ
where L is the lepton doublet and H the Higgs field. In order to get the right order for the mass one has to invoke
high energy physics with scales about Λ ∼ 1013 GeV or so. That should be the mass scale for right handed neutrinos.
  Possible evidence of the violation of baryon number can be found in the baryon domination in the universe. The
simplest effective operator that would produce proton decay, for instance, has the form

                                                        Q̄c QQ̄c L
                                                                   ,                                                  (81)
                                                            Λ2
where Q stands for the quark representations and color index sum is implicit. Since the proton has a life time larger
than 1033 yrs., (for the decay into a pion and a positron), this implies that the suppression on this operator has to be
                             16
large enough, in fact Λ <∼ 10 GeV.
   Obviously, with a fundamental scale at the TeV range, understanding the small neutrino masses and controlling
proton decay poses a theoretical challenge to the new theories. The problem seems worsen because, given that the SM
has to be treated only as an effective theory, one is in principle entitled to write all operators that are consistent with
the known symmetries of the theory. However, because now the non renormalizable operators can only be suppressed
by powers of 1/M∗ , the effects of this operators may be greatly enhanced. Particularly, neutrino mass would be large,
of order hHi2 /M , whereas proton decay may be too fast.
                                                                                                                        22

  To exclude or properly suppress these operators one has to make additional assumptions, or work out explicit
models. Unfortunately, it is not possible to elaborate here on all ideas in the literature. Thus, we will rather just
comment some interesting possibilities, given particular examples in the case of neutrino masses. For proton decay,
on the other hand, we shall discuss the two ideas we believe are the most promising: 6D orbifolded theories [69] and
wave function localization [70].


                                                A.   Neutrino Mass Models

  Regarding neutrino mass, the simplest way to control the unwanted operators is by adding lepton number as a real
symmetry, whose eventual breaking should generate only small masses. We can classify the models into two classes
depending on whether lepton number, or equivalently B − L, is a global or local symmetry.


                                           1.    Models with global L symmetry.

   In the context of models that have a global U (1)L symmetry, one can get small neutrino masses by introducing
isosinglet neutrinos in the bulk [71] which carry lepton number. As this is a sterile neutrino, it comes natural to
assume that it may propagate into the bulk as well as gravity, while the SM particles remain attached to the brane.
These models are interesting since they lead to small neutrino masses without any extra assumptions.
   Let νB (xµ , y) be a bulk neutrino, living on the U (1)/Z2 orbifold, which we take to be massless since the Majorana
mass violates conservation of Lepton number and the five dimensional Dirac mass is forbidden by the orbifold sym-
metry. This neutrino couples to the standard lepton doublet and to the Higgs field via √hM L̄HνBR δ(y). Once the
Higgs develops its vacuum, this coupling generates the four dimensional Dirac mass terms

                                                             √ ∞
                                                                         !
                                                                X
                                                mν̄L ν0R + 2         νnR ,                                         (82)
                                                                    n=1

where the mass m is given by [72]

                                                     M∗               hM∗
                                          m = hv        ∼ 10−2 eV ×          .                                        (83)
                                                     MP             100 T eV
Therefore, if M∗ ∼ 100 T eV we get just the right order of magnitude on the mass as required by the experiments.
Moreover, even if the KK decouple for a small R, we will still get the same Dirac mass for νL and ν0R , as far as M∗
remains in the T eV range. The general result is actually R independent, provided the bulk neutrino propagates in
the whole bulk. After including the KK masses, we may write down all mass terms in the compact form [73]
                                                        √      !         !
                                                ′    m 2m           ν0B
                                        (ν̄eL ν̄BL )                 ′
                                                                           ,                                     (84)
                                                     0 ∂5           νBR

                                   ′
                                                                                            √
where the notation is as√follows: νB represents the KK excitations. The off diagonal term 2m is actually an infinite
row vector of the form 2m(1, 1, · · ·) and the operator ∂5 stands for the diagonal and infinite KK mass matrix whose
n-th entrance is given by n/R. Using this short hand notation it is straightforward to calculate the exact eigensystem
                                                                                         2
for this
     √ mass matrix [74]. Simple algebra yields the characteristic equation 2λn = πξ cot(πλn ), with λn = mn R,
ξ = 2mR, and where mn is the mass eigenvalue [71, 72]. The weak eigenstate is given in terms of the mass
eigenstates, ν̃nL , as
                                                              ∞
                                                             X    1
                                                      νL =           ν̃nL ,                                           (85)
                                                             n=0
                                                                 N n


where the mixing Nn is given by Nn2 = λ2n + f (ξ) /ξ 2 , with f (ξ) = ξ 2 /2 + π 2 ξ 4 /4 [74]. Therefore, νL is actually a
                                                    
coherent superposition of an infinite number of massive modes. As they evolve differently on time, the above equation
will give rise to neutrino oscillations, ν → νB , even though there is only one single flavor. This is a totally new
effect that was thought it may be an alternative to explain neutrino anomalies, unfortunately it does not seem to
be detectable in current neutrino experiments. An analysis of the implications of the mixing profile in these models
for solar neutrino deficit was presented in [72]. Implications for atmospheric neutrinos were discussed in [75], and
                                                                                                                     23

some early phenomenological bounds were given in [75, 76]. A comprehensive analysis for three flavors is given
in [77]. Overall, the non observation of any effects attainable to extra dimensional oscillations means that the first
excited level (so the tower) is basically decoupled from the zero mode, which means that 1/R > ∼ 10eV , or equivalently
        −2
R< ∼ 10    µm.
  The extension of this model to three brane generations, νe,µ,τ , is straightforward. However, to give masses to the
three standard generations three bulk neutrinos are needed [74]. This comes out from the fact that with a single bulk
neutrino only one massless right handed neutrino is present (the zero mode), then, the coupling to brane fields will
generate only one new massive Dirac neutrino. After introducing a rotation by an unitary matrix U on the weak
sector, the most general Dirac mass terms with three flavors and arbitrary Yukawa couplings may be written down as
                                  3 
                                  X                       Z                     
                                              α                 α      α
                              −L=    mα ν̄αL νBR (y = 0) + dy ν̄BL ∂5 νBR + h.c. ,                                 (86)
                                     α=1

where νaL = Uaα ναL , with a = e, µ, τ and α = 1, 2, 3. The mass parameters mα are the eigenvalues of the Yukawa
couplings matrix multiplied by the vacuum v, and as stated before are naturally of the order of eV or less. This
reduces the analysis to considering three sets of mixings
                                                       √ given as in the previous case. Each set (tower) of mass
eigenstates is characterized by its own parameter ξα ≡ 2mα R. When this is small only the mass terms that involve
zero mode would be relevant, and one indeed gets three Dirac massive neutrinos, να , with the mixing angles given by
Uaα .


                                                2.   Models for Majorana masses.

   Some extended scenarios that consider the generation of Majorana masses from the spontaneous breaking of lepton
number either on the bulk or on a distant brane have been considered in Refs. [60, 78]. Shinning vevs have been
already mentioned above. With spontaneous breaking by a bulk scalar field one can introduce a χ field that carries
lepton number 2. It develops a small vacuum and gives mass to the neutrinos which are generically of the form
                                                              hHi2 hχiB
                                                       mν ∼              ;                                         (87)
                                                               M∗2 M∗n/2

then, for n=2 and M∗ of the order of 100 TeV, we need hχiB ∼ (10 GeV )2 to get mν ∼ 10 eV . Such small vacuums
are possible in both this models, though it is usually needed a small mass for χ. Obviously, with Majorana masses,
a bulk neutrino is not needed but new physics must be invoked. We should notice the there is also a Majoron field
associated to the spontaneous breaking of the lepton number symmetry. Its phenomenology depends on the details
of the specific model. In the simplest scenario, the coupling (LH)2 χ is the one responsible for generating Majorana
masses. It also gives an important contribution for neutrinoless double beta decay which is just right at the current
experimental limits [78].


                                           3.    Models with local B − L symmetry.

  Here we give an example of a simple model that uses the spontaneous breaking of a local B − L symmetry to
generate neutrino masses [79]. Consider a 5D model based in the gauge group SU (2) × U (1)I × U (1)B−L , built, as
usual, on the orbifold U (1)/Z2 , with the matter content
                                                          !
                                                        ν
                                         L(2, 0, −1) =      ; E(1, −1/2, −1) .                               (88)
                                                        e

The scalar sector is chosen to contain a doublet, H(2, −1/2, 0), and a singlet χ(1, 1/2, 1), which are used to break the
symmetry down to the electromagnetic U (1)em . Particularly hχi produce the breaking of U (1)I × U (1)B−L down to
the hypercharge group U (1)Y . Also, electric charge is given by the linear combination
                                                                 1
                                                     Q = T3 + I + (B − L) .                                        (89)
                                                                 2
As for the Z2 parities of the fermion sector, we take the following fields L = LL , and eR = ER , to be even, and thus
LR , and EL should be odd fields. Thus, at zero mode level we get usual SM lepton content. With this parities, since
there is no right handed zero mode neutrino, the theory has not Dirac mass terms L̄HνR .
                                                                                                                            24

  Next we look for the simplest non-renormalizable operator that can generate neutrino masses. It is the dimension
10 operator in 5D [79, 80] (LH)2 χ2 ; which in the effective theory, after setting in the scalar vevs, generates the
Majorana mass term

                                                        h     (LHχ)2
                                                            2
                                                                     .                                                    (90)
                                                      (M∗ r)    M∗3
If one takes hχi ∼ 800 GeV , assuming that M∗ r ∼ 100 as suggested from the running of gauge couplings, and
M∗ ∼ 100 T eV one easily gets a neutrino mass in the desired range, mν ∼ h · eV .


                                           B.    Proton Stability in 6D models

   Keeping under control proton stability is more subtle. One might of course invoke global symmetries again, but
this is less natural since baryogenesis seems to require some degree of violation of the baryon number, thus, without
the knowledge of the theory above M∗ it is difficult just to assume that such operators are not being induced.
   In a recent paper [69] a solution to the proton decay problem was proposed in the context of the so called universal
extra dimension models (UED) [81] where the number of space-time dimensions where all standard model (SM)
fields reside is six and the fundamental scale of nature is in the TeV range. The main observation of [69] is that in
six dimensional UED models, the extra space-time dimensions (the fifth and sixth dimensions) provide a new U (1)
symmetry under which the SM fermions are charged and enough of this symmetry survives the process of orbifold
compactification that it suppresses proton decay to a very high degree. Besides, 6D SM have the remarkable property
of being and anomaly free theory only if the model contains a minimum of three generations [82].


                                                    1.   Aspects of 6D SM.

  Let us consider a six dimensional model [82] based on the standard gauge group SU (3)c × SU (2)L × U (1)Y , with
the following fermion content

               Q− (3, 2, 1/3) ; L− (1, 2, −1) ; U+ (3, 1, 4/3) ; D+ (3, 1, −2/3) ; E+ (1, 1, −2) ; N+ (1, 1, 0) ;         (91)

where the numbers within parentheses are the gauge quantum numbers. Here the subscripts ± denote the six
dimensional chirality. The corresponding six dimensional chirality projection operator is defined as P± = 12 (1 ± Γ7 ),
where Γ7 is itself given by the product of the six Dirac matrices already presented in Eq. (37). As shown, these are are
eight by eight matrices built out of the well known γ µ of the four dimensional representation. In that representation
one gets Γ7 = diag(14×4 , −14×4 )
   With the above assignments the model describes chiral interactions that should be made anomaly free to be con-
sistent. There are two classes of anomalies: local and global anomalies (for a discussion see [82, 83]). Local anomalies
are related to infinitesimal gauge and/or coordinate transformations, whereas global anomalies are essentially non-
perturbative.
   Each of above fermion fields is a four component field with two 4-dimensional 2 component spinors with opposite 4D
chirality e.g. Q− has a left chiral Q−,L and a right chiral field Q−,R . As such the effective 4D theory is vector like at
this stage and we will need orbifold projections to obtain a chiral theory. This is reflected in the fact that the theory
contains no triangular anomalies. In six dimensions, local anomalies arise from box one-loop diagrams where the
external legs are either gauge bosons or gravitons. Diagrams with only gauge bosons in the external legs correspond
to the pure gauge anomaly, whereas those with only gravitons give the pure gravitational anomaly. Diagrams with
both gauge bosons and gravitons correspond to mixed anomalies.
   Cancellation of local anomalies.- In the present model SU (3) is vector-like due to the replication of representations
with opposite chiralities. U (1) and SU (3)c × U (1)B−L anomalies do cancel within each generation. Same holds for the
subgroup U (1)Q . In fact, the model has no irreducible local gauge anomalies. The only possible anomalies of this kind,
which are [U (1)]4 and [SU (3)]3 U (1) vanish identically. All other anomalies associated to: [SU (2)]4 ; [SU (3)]2 [SU (2)]2 ;
and [SU (2)]2 [U (1)]2 ; are reducible. They are not a matter of concern, because they can be canceled through the
Green-Schwarz mechanism [84] by the introduction of an appropriate set of two index antisymmetric tensors. The
presence of reducible anomalies is rather generic in six dimensional chiral theories, thus, antisymmetric tensor are
likely to be an ingredient of any six dimensional model (see for instance the models in Refs. [81, 83, 85]). Notice that
in fact all local gauge anomalies completely cancel.
   As the total number of fermions with chirality + is equal to the number of fermions with chirality −, there is no
pure gravitational anomaly. Regarding mixed anomalies, only those associated to diagrams with two gravitons in the
                                                                                                                         25

external legs can be non zero [86]. Again, such anomalies do vanish for U (1) and SU (3). Mixed anomalies that involve
SU (2) are all reducible, and canceled by the same tensors that take care of the reducible pure gauge anomalies.
   Global anomalies and the number of generations.- Global anomalies are, on the other hand, more restrictive for the
fermion content of the model. These anomalies are related to local symmetries that can not be deduced continuously
from the identity. Cancellation of the of global gravitational anomalies in six dimensions, however, is automatically
insured by the cancellation of the local gravitational anomaly. Therefore, only global gauge anomalies are possible.
In general, they are associated to a non trivial topology of the gauge group. Particularly, they arise in six dimensional
theories when the sixth homotopy group, π6 , of the gauge groups is non trivial. Cancellation of such an anomaly needs
an appropriate matter content. As a matter of fact, they may occur for SU (3) as well as SU (2) gauge theories [87, 88].
Given that π6 [SU (3)] = Z6 and π6 [SU (2)] = Z12 , the cancellation of the global gauge anomalies constrains the number
of chiral triplet color representations in the model, Nc (3± ), to satisfy:

                                              Nc (3+ ) − Nc (3− ) = 0 mod 6                                            (92)

As SU (3) is vector like this condition is naturally fulfilled. For the number of SU (2) chiral doublets, N (2± ), it also
requires that

                                              N (2+ ) − N (2− ) = 0 mod 6 .                                            (93)

Last condition indicates that the global anomaly does not cancel within a single family, because all doublets are all of
the same chirality. One easily sees that the above constraint can be written in a unique way in terms of the number
of generations, ng , which is the number of exact replications of our matter content, as follows [82]

                                                          ng = 0 mod 3 .                                               (94)

Hence, 3 is the minimum number of generations for which the theory is mathematically consistent. This is a remarkable
result that survives even in some extensions, as in some left-right models [89], which also account for the generation
of neutrino mass with the same fermion content.


                                   2.   Lorentz invariance and Baryon non conservation.

  As in the standard 4D theory, to consider which processes are possible we will require all renormalizable and non
renormalizable operators to obey all symmetries of the theory. Apart from SM gauge transformations, the theory
now has to be invariant under a larger Lorentz group given by SO(1, 5). Of course usual 4D Lorentz transformations
are included in this extended Lorentz group as the SO(1, 3) subgroup. If we denote the six space-time coordinates
by (x0 , x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 , x5 ), we can identify the transformation group associated to pure rotations in the plane formed
by the fifth and sixth extra dimensions by U (1)45 , which is contained in SO(1, 5). The generator of this group in
the representation given above [see Eq. (37)] is Σ45 = 2i [Γ4 , Γ5 ] ≡ γ5 ⊗ σ3 . Since Σ45 is diagonal it is a well defined
quantum number for the left and right components of the fermions. In general, one can easily see that

                                                      Σ45 Ψ± = ±γ5 Ψ± .                                                (95)

Hence 4D chiral parts have indeed an explicit Σ45 charge. Particularly we get that Ψ+R and Ψ−L have both Σ45 = 1.
Looking at the fermion sector given in Eq. (91), we straightforwardly identify this components as those containing
the zero mode part of the theory such that the matter content at low energy would be precisely that of the SM. Thus,
Σ45 = −1 fields should only appear at the excited level.
  That all SM fields are equally charged under Σ45 has important consequences for the non renormalizable operators
responsible of proton decay. Consider for instance Q̄c QQ̄c L, where 6D charge conjugation is defined by Ψc = C Ψ̄T ,
where C = Γ0 Γ2 Γ4 . One immediately notice that this operator has ∆Σ45 = 4, thus it is non Lorentz invariant in 6D,
and so it is forbidden. Clearly, all operators of this sort have same fate. The first non renormalizable
                                                                                                       operators that
may account for baryon number violation one can write are dimension 16 operators [69], as L̄D (Q̄c N )(D̄c 6 DN ).
Notice the operator involve only bilinears that are Lorentz invariant already, and since for proton decay one needs to
involve at least three quarks, six different fermions are needed to built up the operator. Therefore the simplest proton
decay processes should involve three leptons in the final states (see references [69, 89] for some explicit examples).
For instance, for the new nucleon decay mode N → πνe νs νs one estimates the life time to be
                                                                             10             12
                                                          10−4
                                                                
                                                                      πrM∗             M∗
                                 τp ≈ 6 × 1030 yr ·                                                 ,                  (96)
                                                           Φn          10            10 TeV
                                                                                                                        26

which is large enough as to be consistent with the experiment even with a fundamental scale as low as 10 TeV [47].
Above, νs stands for the sterile neutrino contained in N+ ; and we have explicitly introduced the contribution of the
kinematical phase space factor, Φn , which depends in the specific process with n final states. Also a possible order
one form factor which enters in the case of two pion production has not been written. As usual, r represents the size
of the compact space. Among other baryon number violating processes, there is also an intriguing invisible decay for
the neutron n → νe νs νs [69, 89], that is still above current experimental limits for which a life time τn > 2 · 1029 yrs.
applies [90]. Other interesting modes would be p → e− π + π + νs νs ; and n → e− π + νs νs . For comparison, searches
for the decays p → e− π + π − ; and n → e− π + set limits in about τp > 3 · 1031 yrs. [91] and τn > 6.5 · 1031 yrs. [92]
respectively.

                                x5




                                          x4
                                                    FIG. 2: Fixed points of the Z2 orbifolding of the torus,
                                                    here represented by the whole squared (of size r) in the
                       2                            x4 -x5 plane. The shadowed region corresponds to the
                     T / Z2                         actual fundamental space.

  It is certainly impressive that the extra symmetries of the space are just enough as to provide us with an under-
standing of proton stability. However, the argument has a weakness. It relies on a symmetry which is usually broken
by compactification. It is then important to know up to what extent the argument holds on compact space. It actually
does, provided the rotational symmetry U (1)45 is not completely broken. Consider for instance the orbifold T 2 /Z2 ,
where T 2 is the torus and Z2 the identification y~ → −~y , where ~y = (x4 , x5 ). As it can be seen from Fig. 2, where
we have represented the physical compact space on the covering space R2 , the compactification breaks the SO(1, 5)
group down to SO(1, 3) × Z4 , where Z4 is the group of discrete rotations in the x4 − x5 plane around the origin by
π/2, a subgroup of U (1)45 . Clearly, this rotation maps fixed points into themselves. For fermions Z4 rotations become
Z8 rotations. Any operator in the effective theory should be invariant under these transformations generated by the
same Σ45 matrix. Therefore, any fermionic operator should satisfy the selection rule

                                                   ∆Σ45 = 0 mod 8 .                                                   (97)

Usual dimension 10 operators LQQQ (dimension 6 in 4D), do not fulfill this rule, and thus, they remain forbidden.
The dimension 16 operators mentioned above do remain, and so does a suppressed proton decay.
   It is worth noticing that because charge conjugation operator, C, is such that it commutes with 6D chiral operator,
Γ7 , which implies that (Ψ± )C = (ΨC )± , and also because C anticommutes with Σ45 , there are not Majorana mass
terms for neutrinos in these theories. The neutrino should rather be a Dirac field. In the SM presented above, if NR
is the even part of the field, then Dirac mass terms, L̄HNR , are indeed possible. Smallness is, however, unnatural.
One should relay in very small Yukawa couplings. On the other hand, if one rather choose NR to be and odd field,
so that NL is even, and extend the gauge sector to contain B − L, a solution may be at hand [89]. In such a case
L̄HNR does not give neutrino masses (NR has only KK modes), but these may be introduced via non renormalizable
operators.


                               C.    Split Fermions. Hierarchies without Symmetries

   Another interesting mechanism that explain how proton decay could get suppressed at the proper level appeared
in [70]. It relays on the idea that the branes are being formed from an effective mechanism that traps the SM particles
in it, resulting in a wall with thickness L ∼ M∗−1 , where the fermions are stuck at different points. Then, fermion-
fermion couplings get suppressed due to the exponentially small overlaps of their wave functions. This provides a
framework for understanding both the fermion mass hierarchy and proton stability without imposing extra symmetries,
but rather in terms of a higher dimensional geography [93]. Note that the dimension where the gauge fields propagate
does not need to be orthogonal to the millimetric dimensions, but gauge fields may be restricted to live in a smaller
part of that extra dimensions. Here we briefly summarize those ideas.
                                                                                                                       27

                                          1.   Localizing wave functions on the brane.

   Let us start by assuming that translational invariance along the fifth dimension is being broken by a bulk scalar
field Φ which develops a spatially varying expectation value hΦi(y). We assume that this expectation value have the
shape of a domain wall transverse to the extra dimension and is centered at y = 0. With this background a bulk
fermion will have a zero mode that is stuck at the zero of hΦ(y)i. To see this let us consider the action
                                            Z
                                        S = d4 x dy Ψ i ΓM∂M + hΦi(y) Ψ,
                                                                         
                                                                                                                (98)

in the chiral basis given by Eqs. (35) and (36) . By introducing the expansions
                                    X                                         X
                        ψL (x, y) =    fn (y)ψnL (x);     and     ψR (x, y) =   gn (y)ψnR (x);                       (99)
                                    n                                                n

where ψn are four dimensional spinors, we get for the y-dependent functions fn and gn the equations
                        (∂5 + hΦi) fn + mn gn = 0;            and       (−∂5 + hΦi) gn + mn fn = 0;                 (100)
where now m2n = pµ pµ stands for the 4D mass parameter. Therefore, the zero modes have the profiles [70]
                                   Z y                                    Z y         
                      f0 (y) ∼ exp −    dshΦi(s)      and      g0 (y) ∼ exp      dshΦi(s) ;                         (101)
                                           0                                             0

up to normalization factors. Notice that when the extra space is supposed to be finite, both modes are normalizable.
For the special choice hΦi(y) = 2µ20 y, we get f0 centered at y = 0 with the gaussian form
                                                             1/2
                                                            µ0
                                                                   exp −µ20 y 2 .
                                                                              
                                               f0 (y) =        1/4
                                                                                                                    (102)
                                                          (π/2)
The other mode has been projected out from our brane by being pushed away to the end of the space. Thus, our
theory in the wall is a chiral theory. Notice that a negative coupling among Ψ and φ will instead project out the left
handed part.
   The generalization of this technique to the case of several fermions is straightforward. The action (98) is generalized
to
                                          Z      X
                                      S = d5 x       Ψ̄i [i ΓM ∂M + λhΦi − m]ij Ψj ,                                (103)
                                                    i,j

where general Yukawa couplings λ and other possible five dimensional masses mij have been considered. For simplicity
we will assume both terms diagonal. The effect of these new parameters is a shifting of the wave functions, which now
are centered around the zeros of λi hΦi − mi . Taking λi = 1 with the same profile for the vacuum leads to gaussian
distributions centered at yi = mi /2µ20 . Thus, at low energies, the above action will describe a set of non interacting
four dimensional chiral fermions localized at different positions in the fifth dimension.
   Localization of gauge and Higgs bosons needs extra assumptions. The explanation of this phenomena is close related
with the actual way the brane was formed. A field-theoretic mechanism for localizing gauge fields was proposed by
Dvali and Shifman [94] and was later extended and applied in [5]. There, the idea is to arrange for the gauge group
to confine outside the wall; the flux lines of any electric sources turned on inside the wall will then be repelled by the
confining regions outside and forced them to propagate only inside the wall. This traps a massless gauge field on the
wall. Since the gauge field is prevented to enter the confined region, the thickness L of the wall acts effectively as the
size of the extra dimension in which the gauge fields can propagate. In this picture, the gauge couplings will exhibit
power law running above the scale L−1 .


                                     2.    Fermion mass hierarchies and proton decay.

   Let us consider the Yukawa coupling among the Higgs field and the leptons: κHLT E c ; where the massless zero
mode l from L is localized at y = 0 while e from E c is localized at y = r. Let us also assume that the Higgs zero mode
is delocalized inside the wall. Then the zero modes term of this coupling will generate the effective Yukawa action
                                           Z                       Z
                                               4              c
                                   SY uk = d x κ h(x)l(x)e (x)        dy φl (y) φec (y) ,                          (104)
                                                                                                                   28

where φl and φec represent the gaussian profile of the fermionic modes. Last integral gives the overlap of the wave
functions, which is exponentially suppressed [70] as
                                           Z
                                                                     2 2
                                              dy φl (y) φec (y) = e−µ0 r /2 .                                  (105)

This is a generic feature of this models. The effective coupling of any two fermion fields is exponentially suppressed
in terms of their separation in the extra space. Thus, the explanation for the mass hierarchies becomes a problem of
the cartography on the extra dimension. A more detailed analysis was presented in [93].
  Let us now show how a fast proton decay is evaded in these models. Assume, for instance, that all quark fields are
localized at y = 0 whereas the leptons are at y = r. Then, let us consider the following baryon and lepton number
violating operator

                                                      (QT C5 L)† (U cT C5 Dc )
                                               Z
                                           S ∼ d5 x                            .                                 (106)
                                                               M3
In the four dimensional effective theory, once we have introduced the zero mode wave functions, we get the suppressed
action [70]

                                                                    (ql)† (uc dc )
                                                     Z
                                                S∼       d4 x λ ×                                               (107)
                                                                        M2
                      2 2 3
                 h       i     2      2        2 2
where λ ∼ dy e−µ0 y         e−µ0 (y−r) ∼ e−3/4µ0 r . Then, for a separation of µ0 r = 10 we obtain λ ∼ 10−33 which
           R

renders these operators completely safe even for M∗ ∼ 1 TeV. Therefore, we may imagine a picture where quarks
and leptons are localized near opposite ends of the wall so that r ∼ L. This mechanism, however, does not work for
suppressing the another dangerous operator (LH)2 /M responsible of a large neutrino mass.


                                     VI.   WARPED EXTRA DIMENSIONS

  So far we have been working in the simplest picture where the energy density on the brane does not affect the
space time curvature, but rather it has been taken as a perturbation on the flat extra space. However, for large
brane densities this may not be the case. The first approximation to the problem can be done by considering a five
dimensional model where branes are located at the two ends of a closed fifth dimension. Clearly, with a single extra
dimension, the gravity flux produced by a single brane at y = 0 can not softly close into itself at the other end the
space, making the model unstable, just as a charged particle living in a closed one-dimensional world does not define
a stable configuration. Stability can only be insured by the introduction of a second charge (brane). Furthermore,
to balance branes energy and still get flat (stable) brane metrics, one has to compensate the effect on the space by
the introduction of a negative cosmological constant on the bulk. Hence, the fifth dimension would be a slice of an
Anti de-Siter space with flat branes at its edges. Thus, one can keep the branes flat paying the price of curving
the extra dimension. Such curved extra dimensions are usually referred as warped extra dimensions. Historically,
the possibility was first mentioned by Rubakov and Shaposhnikov in Ref. [12], who suggested that the cosmological
constant problem could be understood under this light: the matter fields vacuum energy on the brane could be
canceled by the bulk vacuum, leaving a zero (or almost zero) cosmological constant for the brane observer. No specific
model was given there, though. It was actually Gogberashvili [17] who provided the first exact solution for a warped
metric, nevertheless, this models are best known after Randall and Sundrum (RS) who linked the solution to the the
hierarchy problem [18]. Later developments suggested that the warped metrics could even provide an alternative to
compactification for the extra dimensions [19, 20]. In what follows we shall discuss a concrete example as presented
by Randall and Sundrum.


                        A.   Randall-Sundrum Background and the Hierarchy Problem

                                           1.   Randall-Sundrum background.

  Lets consider the following setup. A five dimensional space with an orbifolded fifth dimension of radius r and
coordinate y which takes values in the interval [0, πr]. Consider two branes at the fixed (end) points y = 0, πr; with
tensions τ and −τ respectively. For reasons that should become clear later on, the brane at y = 0 (y = πr) is usually
                                                                                                                        29

called the hidden (visible) or Planck (SM) brane. We will also assign to the bulk a negative cosmological constant
−Λ. Contrary to our previous philosophy, here we shall assume that all parameters are of the order of the Planck
scale. Next, we ask for the solution that gives a flat induced metric on the branes such that 4D Lorentz invariance is
respected. To get a consistent answer, one has to require that at every point along the fifth dimension the induced
metric should be the ordinary flat 4D Minkowski metric. Therefore, the components of the 5D metric only depend
on the fifth coordinate. Hence, one gets the ansatz

                                     ds2 = gAB dxA dxB = ω 2 (y)ηµν dxµ dxν − dy 2 ,                                 (108)

where we parameterize ω(y) = e−β(y) . The metric, of course, can always be written in different coordinate systems.
Particularly, notice that one can easily go to the conformally flat metric, where there is an overall factor in front of
all coordinates, ds2 = ω 2 (z)[ηµν dxµ dxν − dz 2 ], where the new coordinate z is a function of the old coordinate y only.
   Classical action contains S = Sgrav + Sh + Sv ; where
                                                                              
                                                                     1
                                                     Z
                                                        4    √
                                          Sgrav = d x dy g(5)            R5 + Λ ,                                    (109)
                                                                    2k∗2

gives the bulk contribution, whereas the visible and hidden brane parts are given by
                                                         Z
                                                           d4 x −gv,h ,
                                                               p
                                             Sv,h = ± τ                                                              (110)

where gv,h stands for the induced metric at the visible and hidden branes, respectively. Here κ2∗ = 8πG∗ = M∗−3 .
  Five dimensional Einstein equations for the given action become
                                             s                          s
                               2          2     −gh µ ν              2    −gv µ ν
                   GMN = −k∗ Λ gMN + k∗ τ           δ δ gµν δ(y) − k∗ τ        δ δ gµν δ(y − πr)              (111)
                                                g(5) M N                   g(5) M N

where the Einstein tensor GMN = RMN − 21 gMN R(5) as usual. They are easily reduced into two simple independent
equations. First, we can expand the GMN tensor components using the metric ansatz (108) to show that

                      Gµν = −3 gµν −β ′′ + 2(β ′ )2 ; Gµ5 = 0 ; and G55 = −6 g55 (β ′ )2 .
                                                   
                                                                                                          (112)

Next, using the RHS of Eq. (111), one gets that 6(β ′ )2 = k∗2 Λ, and

                                             3β ′′ = k∗2 τ [δ(y) − δ(y − πr)] .                                      (113)

Last equation, clearly, defines the boundary conditions for the function β ′ (y) at the two branes (Israel conditions).
Clearly, the solution is β(y) = µ|y|, where

                                                         k∗2 Λ    Λ
                                                  µ2 =         =      ,                                              (114)
                                                           6     6M∗3

with the subsidiary fine tuning condition

                                                              τ2
                                                        Λ=        ,                                                  (115)
                                                             6M∗3

obtained from the boundary conditions, that is equivalent to the exact cancellation of the effective four dimensional
cosmological constant. The background metric is therefore

                                            ds2 = e−2µ|y| ηµν dxµ dxν − dy 2 .                                       (116)

The effective Planck scale in the theory is then given by

                                                        M∗3
                                                MP2 =       1 − e−2µrπ .
                                                                      
                                                                                                                     (117)
                                                        µ
Notice that for large r, the exponential piece becomes negligible, and above expression has the familiar form given in
Eq. (10) for one extra dimension of (effective) size 1/µ.
                                                                                                                       30

                                       2.   Visible versus Hidden Scales Hierarchy.

  The RS metric has a peculiar feature. Consider a given distance, ds20 , defined by fixed intervals dxµ dxµ from
brane coordinates. If one maps the interval from hidden to visible brane, it would appear here exponentially smaller
than what is measured at the hidden brane, i.e., ds20 |v = ω 2 (πr)ds20 |h . This scaling property would have interesting
consequences when introducing fields to live on any of the branes. Particularly, let us discuss what happens for a
theory defined on the visible brane.
  The effect of RS background on visible brane field parameters is non trivial. Consider for instance the scalar field
action for the visible brane at the end of the space given by
                                      Z            h                                    2 i
                                SH = d4 x ω 4 (πr) ω −2 (πr)∂ µ H∂µ H − λ H 2 − v̂02         .

As a rule, we choose all dimensionful parameters on the theory to be naturally given in terms of M∗ , and this to be
close to MP . So we take v̂0 ∼ M∗ . After introducing the normalization H → ω −1 (πr)H = eµrπ H to recover the
canonical kinetic term, the above action becomes
                                            Z     h                      2 i
                                      SH = d4 x ∂ µ H∂µ H − λ H 2 − v 2       ,                                (118)

where the actual vacuum v = e−µrπ v̂0 . Therefore, by choosing µr ∼ 12, the physical mass of the scalar field, and
its vacuum, would naturally appear at the TeV scale rather than at the Planck scale, without the need of any large
hierarchy on the radius [18]. Notice that, on the contrary, any field located on the other brane will get a mass of
the order of M∗ . Moreover, it also implies that no particles exist in the visible brane with masses larger than TeV.
This observation has been consider a nice possible way of solving the scales hierarchy problem. For this reason, the
original model proposed that our observable Universe resides on the brane located at the end of the space, the visible
brane. So the other brane really becomes hidden. This two brane model is sometimes called RSI model.


                                            B.   KK Decomposition on RS

  As a further note, notice that since there is everywhere 4D Poincaré invariance,
                                                                        µ
                                                                                    every bulk field on the RS background
can be expanded into four dimensional plane waves φ(x, y) ∝ eipµ x ϕ(y). This would be the basis for the Kaluza
Klein decomposition, that we shall now discuss. Note also that the physical four momentum of the particle at any
position of the brane goes as pµphys (y) = ω −1 (y)pµ . Therefore, modes which are soft on the hidden brane, become
harder at any other point of the bulk.
  Lets consider again a bulk scalar field, now on the RS background metric. The action is then
                                           1
                                              Z
                                                        √
                                                 d4 x dy g(5) g MN ∂M φ∂N φ − m2 φ2 .
                                                                                     
                                    S[φ] =                                                                           (119)
                                           2
                                                 µ
By introducing the factorization φ(x, y) = eipµ x ϕ(y) into the equation of motion, one gets that the KK modes satisfy
                                   2
                                   −∂y + 4µ sgn(y)∂y + m2 + ω −2 (y) p2 ϕ(y) = 0 ,
                                                                          
                                                                                                                (120)

where p2 = pµ pµ can also be interpreted as the effective four dimensional invariant mass, m2n . It is possible, through
a functional re-parameterization
                              p and a change of variable, to show that the solution for ϕ can be written in terms of
Bessel functions of index ν = 4 + m2 /µ2 [95, 96], as follows
                                                                               
                                            1              mn                 mn
                               ϕn (y) =             Jν            + bnν Yν            ,                             (121)
                                        Nn ω 2 (y)       µω(y)               µω(y)
where Nn is a normalization factor, n labels the KK index, and the constant coefficient bnν has to be fixed by the
continuity conditions at one of the boundaries. The other boundary condition would serve to quantize the spectrum.
For more details the reader can see Ref. [95]. Here we will just make some few comments about. First, for ω(πr) ≪ 1,
the discretization condition that one gets for xnµ = mn /µω(y) looks as

                                              2Jν (xnµ ) + xnν Jν′ (xnµ ) = 0 .                                     (122)

Therefore, the lowest mode satisfies x1µ ∼ O(1), which means that m1 ≃ µe−µrπ . For the same range of parameters
we considered before to solve the hierarchy problem, one gets that lightest KK mode would have a mass of order TeV
                                                                                                                      31

or so. Next, for the special case of a originally massless field (m = 0), one has ν = 2, and thus the first solution to
Eq. (122) is just x12 = 0, which indicates the existence of a massless mode in the spectrum. The next zero of the
equation would be of order one again, thus the KK tower would start at µe−µrπ . The spacing among two consecutive
KK levels would also be of about same order. There is no need to stress that this would actually be the case of the
graviton spectrum. This makes the whole spectrum completely distinct from the former ADD model. With such
heavy graviton modes one would not expect to have visible deviations on the short distance gravity experiments, nor
constrains from BBN, star cooling or astrophysics in general. Even colliders may not be able to test direct production
or exchange of such heavy gravitons.


                                              C.     Radius Stabilization

  The way RSI model solves the hierarchy problem between mEW and MP depends on the interbrane spacing πr.
Stabilizing the bulk becomes in this case an important issue if one is willing to keep this solution. The dynamics of
the extra dimension would give rise to a running away radion field, similarly as it does for the ADD case. A simple
exploration of the metric (116), by naively setting a slowly time dependent bulk radius r(t), shows that

                                       ds2 → e−2µr(t)|φ| ηµν dxµ dxν − r2 (t)dθ2 ;                                 (123)

with θ the angular coordinate on the half circle [0, π]. This suggest that if the interbrane distance changes the
visible brane expands (or contracts) exponentially. The radion field associated to the fluctuations of the radius,
b(t) = r(t) − r, is again massless and thus it violates the equivalence principle. Moreover, without a stabilization
mechanism for the radius, our brane could expand forever. Some early discussions on this and other issues can be
found in Refs. [97, 98, 99].
   A simple and elegant solution for stabilization in RSI was proposed by Goldberger and Wise [97]. The central idea
is as follows: if there is a vacuum energy on the bulk, whose configuration breaks translational invariance along fifth
dimension, say hEi(y), then, the effective four dimensional theory would contain a radius dependent potential energy
                                                       Z
                                               V (r) = dy ω 4 (y) hEi(y) .

Clearly, if such a potential has a non trivial minimum, stabilization would be insured. The radion would feel a force
that tends to keep it at the minimum. The vacuum energy hEi(y) may come from many sources. The simplest
possibility one could think up on is a vacuum induced by a bulk scalar field, with non trivial boundary conditions,

                                       hφi(0) = vh       and      hφi(πr) = vv .                                   (124)

The boundary conditions would amount for a non trivial profile of hφi(y) along the bulk. Such boundary conditions
may arise, for instance, if φ has localized interaction terms on the branes, as λh,v (φ2 − vh,v
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                )2 , which by themselves
develop non zero vacuum expectation values for φ located on the branes. The vacuum is then the x independent
solution to the equation of motion (120), which can be written as hφi(y) = ω −1 (y) [Aω −ν (y) + Bω ν (y)], where A and
B are constants to be fixed by the boundary conditions. One then obtains the effective 4D vacuum energy

                            Vφ (r) = µ(ν + 2)A2 ω −2ν (πr) − 1 + µ(ν − 2)B 2 1 − ω 2ν (πr)
                                                                                          
                                                                                                                   (125)

After a lengthly calculation, in the limit where m ≪ µ one finds that above potential has a non trivial minimum for
                                                      2  
                                                     4 µ         vh
                                               µr =          ln       .                                       (126)
                                                     π m2        vv

Hence, for ln(vh /vv ) of order one, the stable value for the radius goes proportional to the curvature parameter, µ, and
inversely to the squared mass of the scalar field. Thus, one only needs that m2 /µ2 ∼ 10 to get µr ∼ 10, as needed for
the RSI model.
  One can get a bit suspicious about whether the vacuum energy hφi(y) may disturb the background metric. It
actually does, although the correction is negligible as the calculations for the Einstein-scalar field coupled equations
may show [97, 99].
                                                                                                                           32

                                     D.   RSII: A Non Compact Extra Dimension

   The background metric solution (116) does not actually need the presence of the negative tension brane to hold as
an exact solution to Einstein equations. Indeed the warp factor ω(y) = e−µ|y| has been determined only by the Israel
conditions at the y = 0 boundary. That is, by using ω ′′ = µ2 ω − µωδ(y) in Einstein equations, which implies equations
(114) and (115). It is then tempting to ‘move’ the negative tension brane to infinity, which renders a non compact
fifth dimension. The picture becomes esthetically more appealing, it has no need for compactification. Nevertheless,
one has to ask now the question of whether such a possibility is at all consistent with observations. It is clear that
the Newton’s constant is now simply

                                                               GN = µG∗                                                 (127)

–just take the limit r → ∞ in Eq. (117)–, this reflects the fact that although the extra dimension is infinite, gravity
remains four dimensional at large distances (for µr ≫ 1). This is, in other words, only a consequence of the flatness
of the brane. We shall expand our discussion on this point in following sections. Obviously, with this setup, usually
called the RSII model [19], we are giving up the possibility of explaining the hierarchy between Planck and electroweak
scales. The interest on this model remains, however, due to potentially interesting physics at low energy, and also due
to its connection to the AdS/CFT correspondence [100].
   Although the fifth dimension is infinite, the point y = ∞ is in fact a particle horizon. Indeed, the first indication
comes from the metric, since ω(y → ∞) = 0. The confirmation would come from considering a particle moving away
                                          1
from the brane on the geodesics yg (t) = 2µ  ln(1 + µ2 t2 ) [101]. The particle accelerates towards infinity, and its velocity
tends to speed of light. The proper time interval is then
                                                                                   2
                                                                              dyg
                                                 2        2
                                            dτ = ω (yg (t))dt −       2
                                                                                         dt2 .                          (128)
                                                                               dt

Thus, the particle reaches infinity at infinite time t, but in a finite proper time τ = π/2µ.


                                                     E.   Graviton Localization

  In order to understand why gravity on the brane remains four dimensional at large distances, even though the fifth
dimension is non compact, one has to consider again the KK decomposition for the graviton modes, with particular
interest on the shape for the zero mode wave function [19]. Consider first the generic form of the perturbed background
metric

                                       ds2 = ω 2 (y)gµν dxµ dxν + Aµ dxµ dy − b2 dy 2 .

Due to the orbifold projection y → −y, the vector component Aµ has to be odd, and thus it does not contain a zero
mode. Therefore at the zero mode level only the true four dimensional graviton and the scalar (radion) should survive.
Let us concentrate on the 4D graviton perturbations only. Introducing the small field expansion as gµν = ηµν +ω −2 hµν ,
and using the gauge fixing conditions ∂µ hµν = 0 = hµµ , one obtains the wave equation

                                                                 m2
                                                                               
                                               ∂y2 − 4µ2 −              − 4µδ(y)  h=0;                                  (129)
                                                                ω 2 (y)

where the Lorentz indices should be understood. In the above equation the mass m2 stands for the effective four
dimensional mass pµ pµ = m2 . It should be noticed that the mass spectrum   would now be continuous and starts at
m = 0. In this situation the KK are normalized to a delta function, dy ω −2     hm (y) hm′ = δ(m − m′ ).
                                                                    R
                                                                            (y)
  Introducing the functional re-parameterization z = sgn(y) ω (y) − 1 /µ and Ψ(z) = ω −1/2 (y) h(y); one can
                                                                 −1
                                                                         
write the equation of motion for the KK modes as the Scrhödinger equation [19]
                                                       
                                            1 2
                                           − ∂z + V (z) Ψ(z) = m2 Ψ(z)                                     (130)
                                            2

with a ‘volcano potential’

                                                                 15µ2        3µ
                                                V (z) =                    −    δ(z) ,                                  (131)
                                                              8(µ|z| + 1)2    2
                                                                                                                        33

which peaks as |z| → 0 but has a negative singularity right at the origin. It is well known from the quantum mechanics
analog that such delta potential has a bound state, whose wave function is peaked at z = 0, which also means at
y = 0. In other words, there is a mode that appears as to be localized at the brane. Such a state is identified as our
four dimensional graviton. Its localization is the physical reason why gravity still behaves as four dimensional at the
brane.
  Indeed, the wave function for the localized state goes as
                                                                  1
                                                Ψo (z) =                                                             (132)
                                                           µ(|z| + 1/µ)3/2
whereas KK mode wave functions in the continuum are written in terms of Bessel functions, in close analogy to
Eq. (121), as
                                                         4µ2
                                                                      
                                                   1                    1
                            Ψm ∼ s(z) Y2    m|z| +     +     J2 m|z| +
                                                   µ     πm2            µ
where s(z) = (|z|+1/µ)1/2 . By properly normalizing these wave functions using the asymptotic for of Bessel functions,
it is possible to show that for m < µ the wave function at brane has the value
                                                              m
                                                            r
                                                   hm (0) ≈      .                                              (133)
                                                               µ
The coupling of gravitons to the brane is therefore weak for the lightest KK graviton states. The volcano potential
acts as a barrier for those modes. The production of gravitons at low energies would then be negligible.
  The immediate application of our last calculations is on the estimation of the effective gravitational interaction
law at the brane. The reader should remember that the effective interaction of brane matter to gravitons goes as
hµν (0)T µν . So, it does involve the evaluation of the graviton wave function at the brane position. Graviton exchange
between two test particles on the brane separated by a distance r then gives the effective potential [102]
                                                     Z ∞                                
                                                           dm m −mr                     1
                             URSII (r) ≈ UN (r) 1 +              e      = UN (r) 1 + 2 2 .                        (134)
                                                       0    µ µ                       µ r
Notice that the correction looks exactly as in the two extra dimensional ADD case, with 1/µ as the effective size of
the extra dimensions. Thus, to the brane the bulk should appear as compact, at least from the gravitational point of
view. The conclusion is striking. There could be non compact extra dimensions and yet scape to our observations!.


                                F.   Beyond RSII: More Infinite Extra Dimensions

   The RSII model, which provides a serious alternative to compactification, can immediately be extended to have a
larger number of dimensions. First, notice that the metric (116) came out of the peculiar properties of co-dimension
one objects in gravity. Thus, it is obvious that the straightforward generalization should also contain some co-
dimension one branes in the configuration. Our brane, however should have a larger co-dimension. Lets consider a
system of n mutually intersecting (2 + n) branes in a (4 + n) dimensional AdS space, of cosmological constant −Λ. All
branes should have a positive tension τ . Clearly, the branes intersection is a 4 dimensional brane, where we assume
our Universe lives. Intuitively, each of the (2 + n) branes would try to localize the graviton to itself, just as the RSII
brane does. As a consequence, the zero mode graviton would be localized at the intersection of all branes. This naive
observation can indeed be confirmed by solving the Einstein equations for the action [20]
                                                             
                                                 1
                       Z           q                                  X        Z            q
                           4    n
                   S = d x d y |g(4+n) |            R(4+n) + Λ −             τ d4 x dn−1 y |g(3+n) |                 (135)
                                                2k∗
                                                                  all branes
If the branes are all orthogonal to each other, it is straightforward to see that the space consist of 2n equivalent slices
of AdS space, glued together along the flat branes. The metric, therefore, would be conformally flat. Thus, one can
write it down using appropriate bulk coordinates as
                                       ds2(4+n) = Ω(z) ηµν dxµ dxν − δkl dz k dz l
                                                                                   
                                                                                                                     (136)

with the warp factor Ω(z) = (µ j |z | + 1)−1 ; where the µ curvature parameter is now
                                 P i

                                                             2k∗2 Λ
                                                 µ2 =                   ;                                            (137)
                                                        n(n + 2)(n + 3)
                                                                                                                      34

which is a generalization of the relation given in Eq. (114). Similarly, the fine tuning condition (115), now looks as
                                                           n(n + 3) 2 2
                                                    Λ=              τ k∗ .                                         (138)
                                                           8(n + 2)
Effective Planck scale is now calculated to be
                                                                       2n nn/2 (n+2) n
                                                    Z
                                            (n+2)
                                  MP2 = M∗              dn zΩ(2+n) =            M∗  L ,                            (139)
                                                                       (n + 1)!
            √
for L = 1/ nµ. Notice this expression resembles the ADD relationship given in Eq. (10), with the effective size of
the extra dimensions proportional to L.
  Graviton localization can be now seen by perturbing the metric with ηµν → ηµν +hµν in Eq. (136), and writing down
the equation of motion for hµν in the gauge hµ µ = 0 = ∂µ hµν , and in conformal coordinates, to get for Ψ = Ω(n+2)/2 h
the linearized equation
                                                                  
                                           1          1
                                          − m2 + − ∇2z + V (z) Ψ̂ = 0 ,                                          (140)
                                           2          2
which is again nothing but a Schrödinger equation with the effective potential
                                         n(n + 2)(n + 4)µ2      (n + 2)µ X
                                V (z) =                    Ω−            Ω      δ(z j )                            (141)
                                                 8                  2        j

Indeed, the spectrum has a massless bound state localized around the intersection of all delta function potentials
(z = 0), which goes as Ψbound ∼ Ω(n+2)/2 (z). Since the potential falls off to zero at large z, there would also be a
continuum of modes. Since the height of the potential near the origin goes as µ2 , all modes with small masses, m < µ
will have suppressed wave functions, whereas those with large masses will be un-suppressed at the origin. Therefore,
the contribution of the lightest modes to gravitational potential for two test particles at the brane would again come
suppressed as in the RSII case. The correction to Newton’s law goes as [20]
                                                                n
                                                                  L
                                              ∆U (r) ∼ UN (r)           ,                                         (142)
                                                                  r
which again behaves as in the ADD case, mimicking the case of compact dimensions, thought there are not so.


                                         VII.    CONCLUDING REMARKS

   Along the present notes we have introduced the reader to some aspects of models with extra dimensions where
our Universe is constrained to live on a four dimensional hypersurface. The study of models with extra dimensions
has become a fruitful industry that has involved several areas of theoretical physics in matter of few years. It is fair
to say, however, that many of the current leading directions of research obey more to speculative ideas that to well
established facts. Nevertheless, the studies on the brane world are guided by the principle of physical and mathematical
consistency, and inspired on the possibility of connecting, at some point, the models with a more fundamental theory,
perhaps String theory from where the idea of extra dimensions and branes had been borrowed. Further motivation
also comes from the possibility of experimentally testing these ideas within the near future, something that was just
unthinkable in many old models where the fundamental gravity scale was the Planck scale.
   It is hard to address the too many interesting topics of the area in detail, as we would have liked, without facing
trouble with the limiting space of this short notes. In exchange, we have concentrated the discussion to the construction
of the main frameworks (ADD, and RS models), paying special attention to dimensional reduction and some of the
interesting phenomenology of quantum gravity in colliders as well as in BBN and astrophysics. We have also discussed
at some extend the calculation of the effective gravity interactions on the brane. Some applications and uses in model
building for the extra dimensions have also been addressed, including the promotion of SM fields to the bulk and
the consequent power law running of couplings as well as some ideas on symmetry breaking with extra dimensions.
We have also commented some ideas to get a small neutrino mass and a very stable proton despite the possibility of
having a low fundamental scale. The basis of RS models have also been discussed in some detail.
   I hope these notes could serve the propose of been a brief introduction to this area of research. The list of topics
we have been unable to cover is extensive, it includes many issues on cosmology of models with flat and warped
extra dimensions [103, 104]; the discussions on the cosmological constant problem [105], higher dimensional warped
spaces [106]; dark matter from KK modes [107], many ideas on Black Holes in both ADD and RS models [25, 108],
deconstruction of extra dimensions [109], and the list go on. I hope the interested readers could consult other
reviews [21] and search for further references.
                                                                                                                      35

                                                 Acknowledgments

 The author’s work is supported in part by CONACyT Mexico, under grant J44596-F.




 [1] Th. Kaluza, Sitzungober. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Berlin (1921) 966;
     O. Klein, Z. Phys. 37 (1926) 895.
 [2] For a review see S.P. Martin, Preprint hep-ph/9709356;
     J. D. Lykken, Preprint hep-th/9612114.
 [3] For reviews see: K. Lane, Preprint hep-ph/0006143;
     M.S. Chanowitz, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 38 (1988) 323.
 [4] E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B471 (1996) 135;
     P. Horava and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B460 (1996) 506;
     idem, B475 (1996) 94.
 [5] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos and G. Dvali, Phys. Lett. B429 (1998) 263;
     I. Antoniadis, et al., Phys. Lett. B436 (1998) 257;
     I. Antoniadis, S. Dimopoulos, G. Dvali, Nucl. Phys. B516 (1998) 70.
 [6] J.C. Long, H.W. Chan and J.C. Price, Nucl. Phys. B539 (1999) 23;
     E.G. Adelberger, et al., Preprint hep-ex/0202008;
     Hoyle, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett 86 (2001) 1418;
     J.C. Long et al., Nature 421 (2003) 27;
     Hoyle, et al., Phys. Rev. D70 (2004) 042004.
 [7] G. Giudice, R. Rattazzi and J. Wells, Nucl. Phys. B544 (1999) 3.
 [8] T. Han, J. Lykken and R. J. Zhang, Phys. Rev. D 59 (1999) 105006.
 [9] See for instance: E. Mirabelli, M. Perelstein and M. Peskin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (1999) 2236;
     S. Nussinov, R. Shrock, Phys. Rev. D59 (1999) 105002;
     C. Balasz et. al, Phys. Rev. Lett 83 (1999) 2112;
     J. L. Hewett, Phys. Rev. Lett 82 (1999) 4765;
     P. Mathew, K. Sridhar and S. Raichoudhuri, Phys. Lett. B450S (1999) 343;
     T. G. Rizzo, Phys. Rev. D 59 (1999) 115010;
     K. Aghase and N. G. Deshpande, Phys. Lett. B456 (1999) 60;
     K. Cheung and W. Y. Keung, Phys. Rev. D60 (1999) 112003;
     L3 Coll. Phys. Lett. B464 (1999) 135;
     G.F. Giudice, R. Rattazzi and J.D. Wells, Nucl. Phys. B595 (2001) 250;
     G.F. Giudice, A. Strumia, Nucl. Phys. B663 (2003) 377.
[10] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos and G. Dvali, Phys. Rev. D59 (1999) 086004;
     V. Barger, et al., Phys. Lett. B461 (1999) 34;
     L.J. Hall and D. Smith. Phys. Rev. D60 (1999) 085008;
     S. Cullen, M. Perelstein, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999) 268;
     C. Hanhart, et al., Nucl. Phys. B595 (2001) 335.
[11] See for instance: P. Nath and M. Yamaguchi, Phys. Rev. D60 (1999) 116004;
     idem, Phys. Rev. D60 (1999) 116006;
     P. Nath, Y. Yamada and M. Yamaguchi, Phys. Lett. B466 (1999) 100;
     R. Casalbuoni, et al., Phys. Lett. B462 (1999) 48;
     M. Masip and A. Pomarol, Phys. Rev. D60 (1999) 096005;
     W. J. Marciano, Phys. Rev. D60 (1999) 093006;
     I. Antoniadis, K. Benakli, M. Quiros, Phys. Lett. B460 (1999) 176;
     M. L. Graesser, Phys. Rev. D61 (2000) 074019;
     T. G. Rizzo, J. D. Wells, Phys. Rev. D61 (2000) 016007.
[12] V. A. Rubakov and M. E. Shaposhnikov, Phys. Lett. B152 (1983) 136;
     K. Akama, in Lecture Notes in Physics, 176, Gauge Theory and Gravitation, Proceedings of the International Symposium
     on Gauge Theory and Gravitation, Nara, Japan, August 20-24, 1982, edited by K. Kikkawa, N. Nakanishi and H. Nariai,
     (Springer-Verlag, 1983), 267;
     M. Visser, Phys. Lett B159 (1985) 22;
     E.J. Squires, Phys. Lett B167 (1986) 286;
     G.W. Gibbons and D.L. Wiltshire, Nucl. Phys. B287 (1987) 717.
[13] I. Antoniadis, Phys. Lett. B246 (1990) 377;
     I. Antoniadis, K. Benakli and M. Quirós, Phys. Lett. B331 (1994) 313.
[14] D. Cremades, L.E.Ibanez and F.Marchesano, Nucl. Phys. B643 (2002) 93;;
     C. Kokorelis, Nucl. Phys. B677 (2004) 115.
[15] J. Lykken, Phys. Rev. D54 (1996) 3693.
                                                                                                                     36

[16] For a review see J. Polchinski, Preprint hep-th/9611050.
[17] G. Gogberashvili, Int. J. of Mod. Phys. D11 (2002) 1635 (Preprint hep-ph/9812296).
[18] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, Phys. Rev. Lett 83 (1999) 3370.
[19] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, Phys. Rev. Lett 83 (1999) 4690.
[20] N. Arkani-Hamed, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 (2000) 586.
[21] A. Pérez-Lorenzana, 9th Mexican School on Particles and Fields, Metepec, Puebla, Mexico, 2000; AIP Conf. Proc. 562
     (2001) 53 (Preprint hep-ph/0008333);
     V.A. Rubakov, Phys. Usp. 44 (2001) 871 (Preprint hep-ph/0104152);
     M. Quirós, Preprint hep-ph/0302189;
     C. Csáki, Preprint hep-ph/0404096;
     P. Brax and C. van de Bruck, Class. Quant. Grav. 20 (2003) R201 (Preprint hep-th/0303095);
     A. Pérez-Lorenzana, Preprint hep-ph/040627.
[22] T.G. Rizzo, Preprint hep-ph/9910255;
     K. Cheung, Preprint hep-ph/0003306;
     I. Antoniadis and K. Benakli, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A15 (2000) 4237 (Preprint hep-ph/0007226); and references therein.
[23] G.D. Starkman, D. Stojkovic, M. Trodden, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (2001) 231303;
     Dejan Stojkovic (Michigan U., MCTP),. Sep 2004. 5pp. Published in Phys.Rev.Lett.94:011603,2005
[24] A. Kehagias and K. Sfetsos, Phys. Lett. B472 (2000) 39.
[25] S.B. Giddings, E. Katz and L. Randall, J. High Energy Phys. 03 (2000) 023;
     S.B. Giddings and S. Thomas, Phys. Rev. D 65 (2000) 056010.
[26] S. Hannestad, Phys. Rev. D70 (2004) 043506.
[27] S. Hannestad, Phys. Rev. D64 (2001) 023515.
[28] S. Hannestad and G. Raffelt Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (2001) 051301;
     idem, Phys. Rev. D67 (2003) 125008;
     idem, Erratum, Phys. Rev. D69 (2004) 0229901;
[29] M. Casse, J. Paul, G. Bertone, G. Sigl, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 (20040) 111102.
[30] S. Hannestad and G. Raffelt Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 (2002) 171301.
[31] R.N. Mohapatra, S. Nussinov and A. Pérez-Lorenzana, Phys. Rev. D68 (2003) 116001.
[32] R. Emparan, M. Masip and R. Rattazzi, Phys. rev. D65 (2002) 064023;
     L. Anchordoqui and H. Goldberg, Phys. Rev. D65 (2002) 047502;
     L. Anchordoqui, J.L. Feng, H. Goldberg and A.D. Shapere, Phys. Rev. D65 (2002) 124027.
[33] M. Ave, E.-J. Ahn, M. Cavaglia, and A.V. Olinto, Phys. Rev. D68 (2003) 043004.
[34] M. F. Sohnius, Phys. Rep. 128 (1985) 39;
[35] K.R. Dienes, E. Dudas and T. Gherghetta, Phys. Lett. B436 (1998) 55;
     idem, Nucl. Phys. B537 (1999) 47.
[36] For a discussion see for instance A. Dobado, A.L. Maroto, Nucl. Phys. B592 (2001) 203.
[37] A. Delgado, A. Pomarol and M. Quirós, JHEP 0001 (2000) 030.
[38] A. Pomarol and M. Quirós, Phys. Lett. B438 (1998) 255;
     I. Antoniadis, et al., Nucl. Phys B544 (1999) 503;
     A. Delgado, A. Pomarol and M. Quirós, Phys. Rev. D60 (1999) 095002;
     M. Masip and A. Pomarol, Phys. Rev. D60 (1999) 096005;
     C. D. Carone, Phys.Rev. D61 (2000) 015008.
[39] H.C. Cheng, J.L. Feng and K.T. Matchev, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002) 211301.
[40] E. A. Mirabelli and M. E. Peskin, Phys. Rev. D58 (1998) 065002.
[41] For a recent review see: R. N. Mohapatra, Preprint hep-ph/9911272.
[42] Z. Kakushadze, Nucl. Phys. B548 (1999) 205;
[43] D. Ghilencea and G.G. Ross, Phys. Lett. B442 (1998) 165;
     C.D. Carone, Phys. Lett. B454 (1999) 70;
     P. H. Frampton and A. Rǎsin, Phys. Lett. B460 (1999) 313;
     A. Delgado and M. Quirós, Nucl. Phys. B559 (1999) 235;
     D. Dumitru, S. Nandi, Phys.Rev. D62 (2000) 046006.
[44] A. Pérez-Lorenzana and R.N. Mohapatra, Nucl. Phys. B559 (1999) 255.
[45] H.-C. Cheng, B.A. Dobrescu and C.T. Hill, Nucl. Phys. B573 (2000) 597;
     Z. Kakushadze and T.R. Taylor, Nucl. Phys. B562 (1999) 78;
     K. Huitu and T. Kobayashi, Phys. Lett. B470 (1999) 90.
[46] S.A. Abel, S.F. King Phys. Rev. D59 (1999) 095010;
     T. Kobayashi, et al., Nucl.Phys. B550 (1999) 99.
[47] S. Eidelman et al., Phys. Lett. B592 (2004) 1.
[48] See for instance: A. Pérez-Lorenzana, W.A. Ponce and A. Zepeda, Europhys. Lett. 39 (1997) 141;
     idem , Mod. Phys. Lett. A 13 (1998) 2153;
     idem, Phys.Rev. D59 (1999) 116004;
     A. Pérez-Lorenzana and W.A. Ponce, Europhys. Lett. 49 (2000) 296.
[49] K.R. Dienes, Nucl. Phys. B488 (1997) 141;
     K.R. Dienes, A.E. Faraggi and J. March-Russell, Nucl. Phys. B467 (1996) 44.
                                                                                                                             37

[50] This power law running was early noted by T. Taylor and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B212 (1988) 147.
[51] B. Brahmachari and R.N. Mohapatra, Int. J. of Mod. Phys. A. 10 (1996) 1699.
[52] K. Benakli,Phys. Lett. B447 (1999) 51;
     C. Burgess, L. Ibañez and F. Quevedo, Phys. Lett. B447 (1999) 257.
[53] R. Contino, L. Pilo, R. Rattazzi and E. Trincherini, Nucl. Phys. B622 (2002) 227;
     K. Choi, H.D. Kim and Y.W. Kim, JHEP 0211 (2002) 033;
     L.J. Hall and Y. Nomura
[54] N. Seiberg, Phys. Lett. B388 (1996) 753;
     K. Intriligator, D.R. Morrison and N. Seiberg, Nucl. Phys. B497 (1997) 56.
[55] A. Hebceker and A. Westphal, Annals Phys. 305 (2003) 119;
     idem., Nucl. Phys. B701 (2004) 273.
[56] P.H. Chankowski, A. Falkowski and S. Pokorski, JHEP 0208 (2002) 003;
     S. Chang and H. Georgi, Nucl. Phys. B672 (2003) 101;
[57] K. Agashe, A. Delgado, and R. Sundrum, Annals Phys. 304 (2003) 145;
     W.D. Goldberger and I.Z. Rothstein, Phys. Rev. D68 (2003) 125011;
     K. Agashe, A. Delgado, and R. Sundrum, Nucl. Phys. B643 (2002) 172.
[58] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, Phys. Rev. D65 (2002) 052003.
[59] N. Arkani-Hamed, L. Hall, D. Smith, N. Weiner, Phys. Rev. D61 (2000) 116003;
[60] A. Ioannisian and J. W. F Valle, Preprint hep-ph/9911349;
     E. Ma, M. Raidal and U. Sarkar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 3769;
     E. Ma, G. Rajasekaran, U. Sarkar, Phys. Lett. B495 (2000) 363.
[61] D.E. Kaplan, G.D. Kribs and M. Schmaltz, Phys. Rev. D62 (2000) 035010;
     Z. Chacko, M.A. Luty, A.E. Nelson and E. Pontón, JHEP 0001 (2000) 003;
[62] R.N. Mohapatra and A. Pérez-Lorenzana, Phys. Lett. B468 (1999) 195.
[63] Y. Kawamura, Prog. Theor. Phys. 105 (2001) 999;
     A. Hebecker, J. March-Russell, Nucl. Phys. B625 (2002) 128;
     L. Hall and Y. Nomura, Phys. Rev. D64 (2001) 055003;
     A. Hebecker, J. March-Russell, Nucl. Phys. B613 (2001) 3;
     L.J. Hall, H. Murayama and Y. Nomura, Nucl.Phys. B645 (2002) 85;
     G. von Gersdorff, N. Irges and M. Quirós, Nucl. Phys. B635 (2002) 127.
[64] J. Scherk and J.H. Schwarz, Phys. Lett. B82 (1979) 60;
     idem, Nucl. Phys. B153 (1979) 61;
     E. Cremmer, J. Scherk and J.H. Schwarz, Phys. Lett. B84 (1979) 83.
[65] Y. Hosotani, Phys. Lett. B126 (1983) 309;
     idem, Phys. Lett. B129 (1983) 193;
     idem, Annals of Phys. 190 (1989) 233.
[66] H.C. Cheng, K. T. Matchev, and M. Schmaltz, Phys. Rev. D66 (2003) 036005.
[67] A. Delgado, A. Pomarol and M. Quirós, Phys. Lett. B438 (1998) 255.
[68] For recent reviews and references see R.N. Mohapatra, Preprint hep-ph/0211252;
     P. Langacker, this conference.
[69] T. Appelquist, B.A. Dobrescu, E. Ponton, Ho-U. Yee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (2001) 181802.
[70] N. Arkani-Hamed, M. Schmaltz, Phys. Rev. D61 (2000) 033005.
[71] K.R. Dienes, E. Dudas and T. Gherghetta, Nucl. Phys. B557 (1999) 25;
     N. Arkani-Hamed, et al., Phys. Rev. D65 (2002) 024032.
[72] G. Dvali and A.Yu. Smirnov, Nucl. Phys. B563 (1999) 63.
[73] R. N. Mohapatra, S. Nandi and A. Pérez-Lorenzana, Phys. Lett B466 (1999) 115.
[74] R. N. Mohapatra and A. Pérez-Lorenzana, Nucl. Phys. B576 (2000) 466.
[75] R. Barbieri, P. Creminelli and A. Strumia, Nucl. Phys. B585 (2000) 28.
[76] A. Faraggi and M. Pospelov, Phys. Lett B458 (1999) 237;
     G. C. McLaughlin, J. N. Ng, Phys. Lett. B470 (1999) 157;
     idem, Phys. Rev. D63 (2001) 053002;
     A. Ioannisian, A. Pilaftsis, Phys. Rev. D62 (2000) 066001;
     A. Lukas et al., Phys. Lett. B495 (2000) 136.
[77] R. N. Mohapatra and A. Pérez-Lorenzana, Nucl.Phys. B593 (2001) 451.
[78] R. N. Mohapatra, A. Pérez-Lorenzana and C. A. de S. Pires, Phys. Lett. B491 (2000) 143.
[79] R. N. Mohapatra and A. Pérez-Lorenzana, Phys. Rev. D66 (2002) 035005.
[80] This class of operators has been studied in 4D theories to generate neutrino masses with out large scales. See for instance
     A. Perez-Lorenzana and C.A. de S. Pires. Phys. Lett. B522 (2001) 297.
[81] T. Appelquist, H. C. Cheng and B. Dobrescu, Phys. Rev. D64 (2001) 035002.
[82] B. Dobrescu and E. Poppitz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (2001) 031801.
[83] N. Borghini, Y. Gouverneur, M. H.G. Tytgat, Phys. Rev. D65 (2002) 025017.
[84] M.B. Green, H. Schwarz, Phys. Lett. B149 (1984) 117.
[85] M. Fabrichesi, M. Piai, G. Tasinato, Phys. Rev. D64 (2001) 116006.
[86] L. Alvarez-Gaumé, E. Witten, Nuc. Phys. B234 (1984) 269.
                                                                                                       38

 [87] E. Witten, Phys. Lett. B117 (1982) 324.
 [88] S. Elitzur, V. P. Nair, Nucl. Phys. B243 (1984) 205;
      E. Kiritsis, Phys. Lett. B178 (1986) 53;
      M. Bershadsky and C. Vafa, Preprint hep-th/9703167.
 [89] R.N. Mohapatra and A. Perez-Lorenzana, Phys. Rev. D67 (2003) 075015.
 [90] S.N. Ahmed, et al. [SNO Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 (2004) 102004.
 [91] C. Berger et al. [Frejus Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B269 (1991) 227.
 [92] S. Seidel et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 61 (1988) 2522.
 [93] N. Arkani-Hamed, Y. Grossman and M. Schmaltz, Phys. Rev. D61 (2000) 115004;
      E.A. Mirabelli and M. Schmaltz, Phys. Rev. D61 (2000) 113011.
 [94] G.R. Dvali, M.A. Shifman, Phys. Lett. B396 (1997) 64.
 [95] W.D. Goldberger and M.B. Wise, Phys. Rev. D 60 (1999) 107505.
 [96] S.L. Dubovsky, V.A. Rubakov and P.G. Tinyakov, Phys. Rev. D62 (2000) 105011.
 [97] W.D. Goldberger and M.B. Wise, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999) 4922.
 [98] C. Csáki, M.L. Greasser, L. Randall and J. Terning, Phys. Rev. D62 (2000) 045015;
      P. Kanti, I.I. Kogan, K.A. Olive and M. Pospelov, Phys. Rev. D61 (2000) 10604;
      W.D. Goldberger and M.B. Wise, Phys. Lett. B475 (2000) 275;
      P. Kanti, K.A. Olive and M. Pospelov, Phys. Lett. B481 (2000) 386;
      C. Charmousis, R. Gregory and V.A. Rubakov, Phys. Rev. D62 (2000) 067505.
 [99] C. Csáki, J. Erlich, C. Grogjean and T.J. Hollowood, Nucl. Phys. B584 (2000) 359;
      C. Csáki, M.L. Greasser and G.D. Kribs, Phys. Rev. D 63 (2000) 065002.
[100] For a review see for instance E.T. Akhmedov, Preprint hep-th/9911095.
[101] W. Muck, K.S. Viswanathan and I.V. Volovich, Phys. Rev. D62 (2000) 105019;
      R. Gregory, V.A. Rubakov and P.G. Tinyakov, Phys. Rev. D62 (2000) 105011.
[102] J. Lykken and L. Randall, JHEP 0006 (2000) 014.
[103] D. H. Lyth, Phys. Lett. B448 (1999) 191;
      N. Kaloper and A. Linde, Phys. Rev. D59 (1999) 101303;
      P. Kanti and K.A. Olive, Phys. Rev. D60 (1999) 043502;
      P. Kanti and K.A. Olive, Phys. Lett. B464 (1999) 192;
      R.N. Mohapatra, A. Pérez-Lorenzana and C.A. de S. Pires, Phys. Rev. D 62 (2000) 105030;
      S. Tsujikawa, JHEP 0007 (2000) 024;
      A. Mazumdar and A. Pérez-Lorenzana, Phys. Lett. B508 (2001) 340;
      A.M. Green and A. Mazumdar, Phys. Rev. D65 (2002) 105022;
      N. Arkani-Hamed, et al., Nucl. Phys. B567 (2000) 189;
      G. Dvali, S. H. H. Tye, Phys. Lett. B450 (1999) 72;
      A. Mazumdar and A. Pérez-Lorenzana, Phys. Rev. D65 (2002) 107301;
      E.W. Kolb, G. Servant and T.M.P. Tait, JCAP 0307 (2003) 008;
      A. Mazumdar, R.N. Mohapatra and A. Pérez-Lorenzana, JCAP 0406 (2004) 004.
[104] P. Binetruy, C. Deffayet and D. Langlois, Nucl. Phys. B565 (2000) 269;
      P. Binetruy, C. Deffayet, U. Ellwanger and D. Langlois, Phys. Lett. B477 (2000) 285;
      E.E. Flanagan, S.-H. H. Tye and I. Wasserman, Phys. Rev. D62 (2000) 024011;
      A. Lukas, B. A. Ovrut and D. Waldram, Phys. Rev. D60 (1999) 086001;
      idem, Phys. Rev. D61 (2000) 023506;
      C. Csaki, M. Graesser, C. Kolda and J. Terning, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 79 (1999) 169;
      J.M. Cline, C. Grojean and G. Servant, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999) 4245;
      R.N. Mohapatra, A. Pérez-Lorenzana, C.A. de S. Pires, Int. J. of Mod. Phys. A 16 (2001) 1431;
      T. Shiromizu, K. Maeda and M. Sasaki, Phys. Rev. D62 (2000) 024012;
      R. Martens, D. Wands, B.A. Basset and I.P.C. Heard, Phys. Rev. D62 (2000) 041301
      E.J. Copeland, A.R. Liddle and J.E. Lidsey, Phys. Rev. D64 (2001) 023509;
      R. Allahverdi, A. Mazumdar and A. Pérez-Lorenzana, Phys. Lett. B516 (2001) 431.
[105] N. Arkani-Hamed, et al., Phys. Lett. B480 (2000) 193;
      S. Kachru, M. B. Schulz and E. Silverstein, Phys. Rev. D62 (2000) 045021;
      S. Forste, Z. Lalak, S. Lavignac and H. P. Nilles, Phys. Lett. B481 (2000) 360;
      C. Csáki, J. Erlich, C. Grojean and T. J. Hollowood, Nucl. Phys. B584 (2000) 359;
      C. Csáki, J. Erlich and C. Grojean, Nucl. Phys. B604 (2001) 312;.
[106] A. G. Cohen and D. B. Kaplan, Phys. Lett. B470 (1999) 52;
      T. Gherghetta and M. E. Shaposhnikov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 240;
      A. Chodos and E. Poppitz, Phys. Lett. B471 (1999) 119.
[107] G. Servant and T.M.P. Tait, Nucl. Phys. B650 (2003) 391;
      idem, New J. Phys. 4 (2002) 99;
      H.C. Cheng, J.L. Feng and K.T. Matchev, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002) 211301;
      D. Hooper and G.D. Kribs, Phys. Rev. D67 (2003) 055003.
[108] A. Chamblin, S. W. Hawking and H. S. Reall, Phys. Rev. D61 (2000) 065007;
      J. Garriga and M. Sasaki, Phys. Rev. D62 (2000) 043523;
                                                                                             39

      R. Emparan, G. T. Horowitz and R. C. Myers, JHEP 0001 (2000) 007;
      R. Emparan, G. T. Horowitz and R. C. Myers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 499;
      A. Chamblin, C. Csáki, J. Erlich and T. J. Hollowood, Phys. Rev. D62 (2000) 044012;
      V.P. Frolov, M. Snajdr, D. Stojkovic, Phys. Rev. D68 (2003) 044002;
      V.P. Frolov, D.V. Fursaev, D. Stojkovic, Class. Quant. Grav. 21 (2004) 3483;
      D. Stojkovic, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005) 011603.
[109] N. Arkani-Hamed, A. G. Cohen and H. Georgi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (2001) 4757;
      C. T. Hill, S. Pokorski and J. Wang, Phys. Rev. D64 (2001) 105005.
