                                           Signatures of Topological Defects in the Microwave Sky: An
                                                                  Introduction




arXiv:astro-ph/9703001v1 28 Feb 1997
                                                                             R. Durrer
                                                   Univérsité de Genève, Département de Physique Théorique
                                                                       24, Quai E. Ansermet
                                                                     CH–1211 Genève, Suisse

                                           An introduction to topological defects in cosmology is given. We discuss their pos-
                                           sible relevance for structure formation. Especial emphasis is given on the signature
                                           of topological defects in the spectrum of anisotropies in the cosmic microwave back-
                                           ground. We present simple analytic estimates for the CMB spectrum on large and
                                           intermediate scales and compare them with the corresponding approximations for
                                           models where initial perturbations are generated during an inflationary epoch.


                                       1   Introduction

                                       The formation of structure in the universe is one of the mayor open problems
                                       in cosmology. Already in 1946 Lifshitz has noted 1 that expansion counter-
                                       acts gravitational attraction in such a way, that in an expanding universe the
                                       gravitational potential cannot grow by linear gravitational instability. Also the
                                       growth of density perturbations is reduced to a power law due to expansion.
                                       In a radiation dominated universe, radiation pressure inhibits any significant
                                       growth of density fluctuations. In all, density fluctuations can have grown at
                                       most by a factor ∼ a0 /aeq = zeq ∼ 104 due to linear gravitational instabil-
                                       ity, where a0 denotes the value of the cosmological scale factor today and aeq
                                       denotes its value at the time of equal matter and radiation.
                                            Therefore, initial fluctuations on the order of 10−4 caused by some other
                                       mechanism than gravitational instability are needed. Such initial fluctuations
                                       can then be enhanced by gravity and lead to density fluctuations of order unity
                                       and finally to the observed structures in the universe. Currently two classes of
                                       models which can generate initial perturbations are under investigation.
                                            In the first class, initial perturbations emerge from quantum fluctuations
                                       of a scalar field, which expand during a period of inflation to scales larger than
                                       the Hubble scale and then “freeze in” as classical fluctuations in the energy
                                       density. Generically, inflationary models lead to a so called Harrison-Zel’dovich
                                       spectrum of fluctuations2 . This spectrum is defined by the requirement of
                                       having constant mass fluctuations at horizon crossing:
                                                                  *       2      +
                                                                       δM
                                                                                     = constant,                       (1)
                                                                        M kH (t),t

                                                                                    1
where kH (t) = 2π/t denotes the wave number corresponding to the horizon
scale at time t.
    In inflationary models, initial fluctuations typically are Gaussian, i.e., with
random initial phases. After inflation they evolve deterministically according
to homogeneous linear cosmological perturbation equations. The evolution
of an arbitrary mode k of a perturbations variable δ can thus be described
by means of a deterministic transfer function T and the initial value δ(ti ) is
perfectly coherent with δ(t) = T (t, ti )δ(ti ). In other words

               h|δ(ti )δ(t)|i           h|δ(ti )T (t, ti )δ(ti )|i
            p                       =p                                   =1.   (2)
             h|δ(ti )|2 ih|δ(t)|2 i   h|δ(ti )|2 ih|T (t, ti )δ(ti )|2 i

     In the second class of models, perturbations are induced by topological
defects which may form during a symmetry breaking phase transition. This
mechanism is explained in the next section. The amplitude of initial fluctua-
tions due to topological defects which form at a symmetry breaking energy scale
η is on the order of ǫ = 4πGη 2 . To obtain the correct amplitude thus requires
defects which form during a phase transition at GUT scale η ∼ 1016 GeV.
     In this situation, perturbations in the cosmic fluid are constantly sourced
by topological defects and evolve according to inhomogeneous linear pertur-
bation equations. Since the defects make up only a small perturbation of
the cosmic energy density and since (soon after the phase transition) they do
not interact with the cosmic fluid other than gravitationally, they evolve ac-
cording to the unperturbed geometry (in linear perturbation approximation).
However, defect evolution is in general non-linear and the random initial con-
ditions of the source term in the linear cosmological perturbation equations
of given scale k ’sweep’ into other scales. Therefore, the perfect coherence of
inflationary perturbations is no longer maintained and Eq. (2) is violated. How
strong and how significant this decoherence is, depends on the details of the
model considered.
     Due to this general behavior inflationary models are sometimes called ’co-
herent’ and ’passive’ (no source terms in the linear perturbation equation)
while defect models are called ’decoherent’ and ’active’ (fluid perturbations
are constantly sourced by the defect energy momentum tensor) 3 . In this talk,
we concentrate on the second class of models. The main similarities and dif-
ferences of the two classes are summed up in table 1.




                                           2
    Inflationary models                    Topological defects
                                     Similarities
    • Cosmic structure formation is due to gravitational instability of small
     ’initial’ fluctuations. → Gravitational perturbation theory
     can be applied.
    • GUT scale physics is involved in generating initial fluctuations.
    • The only relevant ’large scale’ is the horizon scale. → Harrison-
     Zel’dovich spectrum.
                                     Differences
    •The amplitude of fluctuations         •The amplitude of fluctuations
     depends on details of the inflatio-    is fixed by the symmetry breaking
     nary potential → fine tuning.          scale η, ǫ = 4πGη 2 .
    •The linear perturbation eqs. are      •The linear perturbation eqs. are in-
     homogeneous (passive).                 homogeneous, have sources (active).
    •For given initial perturbations,      •The source evolution is non-linear
     the entire problem is linear.          at all times.
    •Randomness enters only in the         •Randomness enters at all times due
     initial conditions.                    to the mixing of scales in the non-
                                            linear source evolution (sweeping).
    •The phases of perturbations at        •Phases may become incoherent.
    a given scale λ are coherent.
    •There exist correlations on super •No correlations on super Hubble
     Hubble scales.                         scales.
     Perturbations are ’acausal’.           Perturbations are ’causal’.

Table 1: Similarities and and differences of inflationary perturbations versus perturbations
                                     induced by seeds.



2     Topological Defects

Topological defects are as ubiquitous in physics as are symmetry breaking
phase transitions. Usually they are described by means of a scalar field (order
parameter, Higgs field) evolving in a temperature dependent potential. In
the Landau Ginzburg theory of super-conductivity, e.g., the order parameter
represents the “Cooper pairs” which are described by means of a complex scalar
field. In this example, the scalar field is electrically charged and interacts with
the electromagnetic gauge field. For sake of simplicity, we consider here a pure
scalar field φ, with φ4 interaction term but without gauge field. If φ is in a
thermal bath at temperature T and we have ’integrated out’ the excitations of
energies E ≪ T , we obtain an effective Lagrangian density with temperature

                                             3
dependent potential 4,5
                                     1
                            L(φ) =     (∂µ φ)2 − VT (φ) .                          (3)
                                     2
At very low temperature V approaches the zero temperature potential, V0 =
1      2   2 2
4 λ(|φ| − η ) with vacuum manifold

                              M0 = {φ |φ|2 = η 2 } .                               (4)

(The vacuum manifold denotes the space of minima of the potential V .) At
higher temperatures, there are corrections to V which in general depend on
the interactions of the scalar field with other (fermionic and bosonic) fields.
In our simple case, the main correction is of the form T 2 φ2 which, at high
enough temperature, namely for T > Tc = 2η, changes the ’Mexican hat’
into a parabolic shape with M0 = {0}. At T > Tc therefore, not only the



                                                      T>Tc




                                                             T<<Tc



Figure 1: The temperature dependence of potential of a complex scalar field. The vacuum
                 manifold is a circle for T < Tc and a point for T > Tc .

Lagrangian density but also the only possible vacuum state < φ >= 0 is
symmetric under phase rotations, φ → eiα φ. As soon as the temperature falls
below Tc , the vacuum manifold becomes a full circle, M0 = S1 and a given
vacuum state < φ >= r(T )eiα is no longer invariant under phase rotations.
The function r(T ) is a temperature dependent amplitude with

                         r(Tc ) = 0 and       lim r(T ) = η .                      (5)
                                              T →0

                                          4
This process is the ’spontaneous’ breakdown of a symmetry (here phase ro-
tations or U (1)). Even though the Lagrangian density and M0 as a whole
are invariant under phase rotation, at T < Tc , this is no longer manifest in
phenomena which can be described by expansion around the vacuum, since
the choice of a vacuum state spontaneously breaks the symmetry.
     If such a phase transition takes place in the early universe, the coher-
ence length is finite (it is bounded by the causal horizon). As the universe
cools below the critical temperature, we expect the field φ to assume differ-
ent vacuum expectation values at different patches of space which are sepa-
rated by distances larger than the coherence length. If we now prescribe a
closed curve in a plane through physical space, γ : [0, 1] → R2 : s → x(s),
x(0) = x(1), the field φ can change its phase along the curve Γ = γ([0, 1]).
< φ > (x(s)) = r(T )eiα(s) . By continuity reasons the phase must change by
a multiple of 2π during a full turn, α(1) = α(0) + n2π. If n 6= 0, the loop
Γ cannot be contracted to a point with α(s) changing continuously. The ex-
pectation value < φ > thus must pass through 0 somewhere in the interior of
Γ. In other words, φ must leave the vacuum manifold and assume a state of
higher energy in some small region in the interior of Γ. If we now leave the




                                      Γ

Figure 2: If the map indicated in this figure, : Γ → M : x(s) 7→ φ(x(s)) is non-trivial, a
                                   cosmic string forms.


plane and continue this argument in the third dimension, we obtain a long,
thin string within which φ assumes higher energy, a cosmic string. The cross
section of the string, i.e. of the region where φ leaves the vacuum manifold,
is typically of order 1/η. The length of a string is either infinite or the string
must be closed. The mechanism of defect formation described here is called
the ’Kibble mechanism’ 5 .
     The main ingredient for the Kibble mechanism is the existence non-trivial

                                            5
(non-shrinkable) maps from a closed curve is space ∼ S1 to the vacuum mani-
fold. The classes of these maps form a group, the first homotopy group Π1 (M).
     Similarly, if maps from spheres in space into M cannot be shrunk to a
point, i.e. Π2 (M) is non-trivial, φ might have to leave the vacuum manifold in
a small patch in 3-space, leading to a tiny region of higher energy, a monopole.
Again, the spatial extension of the monopole is on the order of 1/η and thus
extremely small in comparison to cosmological scales.
     Furthermore, if we consider configurations which are asymptotically con-
stant (φ(x) →|x|→∞ const.), we can compactify 3-space to R3 = (R3 ∪ ∞) ∼
S3 , and assign to φ(∞) the value of the asymptotic constant. We then en-
counter the question whether there exist non-shrinkable maps from S3 → M.
(Non-trivial homotopy group Π3 (M).) One can show, that such a configura-
tion is always unstable and will shrink and eventually leave the vacuum mani-
fold and unwind. (In the case of finite energy configurations this is Derrick’s
theorem6 .) A configuration φ which winds once around S3 is called ’texture’ of
winding number 1. (Textures of higher winding numbers are probably unstable
and decay into simple textures.)
     There are some doubts about the applicability of this concept to cosmol-
ogy; especially the notion of an asymptotically constant configuration is not at
all causal. However, in the case of Π3 (and only in this case!) one can define
a texture number density nφ (x), such that
                                       Z
                                   3
                            wφ (R ) =       nφ (x)d3 x                       (6)
                                         R3

determines the winding number (i.e. texture number) of the map φ : R3 → M.
Clearly, if this map is well defined, wφ (R3 ) is always an integer. Nevertheless,
we can also consider the winding number in a finite volume V ∈ R3 and
determine                               Z
                              wφ (V ) =    nφ (x)d3 x                          (7)
                                         V
which need not be an integer. Numerical investigations7 have shown that a
                                            >
configuration shrinks whenever wφ (VH ) ∼ 1/2, where VH denotes the Hubble
volume, independent of the behavior of φ at spatial infinity. Therefore, it
makes sense to talk about textures also in a cosmological context.
    Depending on whether the symmetry is local (gauged) or global (rigid),
defects are called ’local’ or ’global’. In the case of local defects, gradients are
compensated by the gauge potential (∂µ → Dµ = ∂µ + ieAµ ), and there is no
considerable gradient energy. This has two important consequences:
   • The energy of defects is strongly confined, i.e. the extension of defect
     energy is given by the inverse symmetry breaking scale, 1/η.

                                        6
    • Soon after their formation, local defects cease to interact. There are no
      long range interactions between local defects.

In the case of global defects, there are no gauge fields to compensate gradi-
ents and the energy is dominated by gradient energy which is spread out over
typically the horizon scale t. Interactions between defects are very strong. De-
fects of opposite charge annihilate leading to a few (or less) defects per horizon
volume. Energy density always behaves like ρdefect ∼ η 2 /t2 (up to possible
logarithmic corrections) and we thus find ρdefect/ρmatter ∼ 4πGη 2 = ǫ. The
defect energy amounts to a constant small fraction of the total energy density
of the universe. This behaviour is called scaling.
     In the case of local defects, only strings scale. Local monopoles soon come
to dominate the energy density of the universe and local textures quickly die
out. Defects responsible for structure formation and CMB anisotropies are
thus either local strings or global defects.
     In the case of global fields, gradient energy is the main seed for perturba-
tions in the geometry. Whether these gradients lead to topological defects or
not is actually less important. E.g. scalar fields with a φ4 potential and N > 4
components do not lead to topological defects in 3-dimensional space, but
structure formation seeded by such fields is very similar to the N = 4 (global
texture) and N = 3 (global monopoles) models. The limit N → ∞ where the
field equations can be solved exactly, provides a useful approximation to global
defect scenarios 8,9 .
     At temperatures significantly below the symmetry breaking scale, the di-
mensionless field β = φ/η obeys to a very good approximation the scale free
equation of a non-linear σ–model 10 . Scaling arguments then yield O(β̇) =
O(∂i β) = O(1/t).
     The typical amplitude of geometrical fluctuations in scaling defect models
is given by
                         4πGρdefect/(ȧ/a)2 ∼ 4πGη 2 ≡ ǫ .                     (8)

The COBE experiment provides the normalization ǫ ∼ 10−5 and thus η ∼
1016 GeV. In order to create large enough fluctuation to seed the formation of
structure in the universe, defects must thus form during a symmetry breaking
phase transition at Tc ∼ 1016 GeV, i.e. at a typical scale of grand unification.


3   The CMB Anisotropy Spectrum from Topological Defects

Anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background (CMB) are small and can
thus be calculated within linear cosmological perturbation theory.

                                        7
    If we neglect the finite thickness of the last scattering surface, t = tdec , the
temperature anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background can be found
by integrating photon geodesics from tdec until today, t0 . This leads to
                                                      Z f
  δT          1 (r)
     (n) =      D + Vj nj + (Ψ − Φ) (tdec , xdec ) +        (Ψ̇ − Φ̇)(x′ , t′ )dt . (9)
  T           4                                          i

Here D(r) denotes a gauge invariant variable describing intrinsic density fluctu-
ations in the radiation, V is the peculiar baryon velocity, i.e. the velocity of the
emitter (the corresponding term for the observer, which just results in the well-
known dipole contribution has been omitted), and Φ and Ψ are the Bardeen
potentials11 , two geometric variables which describe scalar perturbations of the
Friedmann geometry. Ψ is a close analog of the Newtonian potential. If the
matter causing the geometric perturbation is either non-relativistic or an ideal
fluid, Φ = −Ψ. A derivation of Eq. (9) can be found in Ref. 12.
     The first two terms in Eq. (9) are mainly caused by acoustic oscillations
of the baryon photon fluid prior to recombination. This causal process acts
only on sub horizon scales and thus comes to dominate on angular scales θ <
1o . The third term is the ordinary Sachs Wolfe contribution13 . It is due
to the gravitational potential at the last scattering surface, which induces a
redshift(blueshift) of the free photons climbing out of it (falling down from it).
The integral in Eq. (9) is the integrated Sachs Wolfe term, which is induced
by a time varying gravitational potential along the path of the photon from
the last scattering surface into the antenna of the observer. The Sachs Wolfe
contributions are relevant on large angular scales, θ ≫ 1o .
     The finite thickness of the last scattering surface leads to diffusion damp-
ing at very small angular scales: During recombination, the mean free path of
photons grows from effectively 0 to much larger than the Hubble scale. Pertur-
bations with are small enough so that photons can diffuse out of them during
the recombination process, are thus damped away. This process is called Silk
damping14 . To a reasonable approximation it can be taken into account by
multiplying the result of Eq. (9) with an exponential damping envelope15 . For
a more accurate treatment, one has to solve Boltzmann’s equation taking into
account non-relativistic Compton scattering of photons and electrons12 .
     In addition to these fluctuations which are determined entirely within lin-
ear perturbation theory, some secondary effects due to the formation of the
first non-linear structures might influence the perturbations. There are no-
tably gravitational lensing, the Rees Sciama effect and the Sunyaev Zel’dovich
effect which can influence very small scales; as well as early reionization which
may lead to damping of fluctuations on intermediate scales. Here we just dis-
cuss the Sachs Wolfe and acoustic contributions which dominate on large and

                                          8
intermediate angular scales.
    Since δT
           T is a function on the sphere, it make sense to expand it in terms
of spherical harmonics:

                             δT       X
                                (n) =   aℓm Yℓm (n) .                              (10)
                              T
                                        ℓm

The anisotropy spectrum is then defined by

                                 h m |aℓm |2 i
                                  P
                            Cℓ =               .                                   (11)
                                     2ℓ + 1
In the case of Gaussian perturbations, the Cℓ ’s contain the full statistical
information of the CMB anisotropies since they are the ’harmonic transform’
of the two point correlation functiona :
                            
               δT     δT ′                  1 X
  C(cos ϑ) ≡      (n) (n ) (n·n′ =cos ϑ) =       (2ℓ + 1)Cℓ Pℓ (cos ϑ) , (12)
               T       T                   4π
                                                       ℓ

where Pℓ denotes the Legendre polynomial of order ℓ.
    Since the relevant quantity for CMB anisotropies are the Cℓ ’s, angular
regimes are often translated into intervals of ℓ’s. Small ℓ’s probe large angular
scales whereas large ℓ’s probe small angular scales. The angular scale corre-
sponding to a given ℓ is about θℓ ∼ 1/ℓ. In terms of ℓ, ’large angular scales’
                 <                                                   >
correspond to ℓ ∼ 50 and Silk damping becomes relevant at ℓ ∼ 800. The
scales in between are intermediate angular scales.

3.1   Large scales
Angular scales, θ ≫ 1o , which correspond to spherical harmonics with index
ℓ ≪ 200 subtend a distance which is larger than the size of the horizon at
recombination. Temperature fluctuations on these angular scales are either
due to super horizon fluctuations, if they result from fluctuations at the last
scattering surface, the ’recombination shell’, or they have been induced during
the propagation of the photons from the last scattering surface into the antenna
of the observer.
     The Sachs Wolfe (SW) contributions to the CMB anisotropies from infla-
tionary models and defect models are as different as they can be. Nevertheless
   a The expansion into spherical harmonics on the sphere is the exact analog of Fourier

transform in Rn . Since the sphere is compact, the ’harmonic transform’ of a function on
the sphere lives on a discrete set.

                                           9
they finally lead to the same Harrison Zel’dovich spectrum of Cℓ ’s. Let us
elaborate on this ’accident’ in some detail.
     For a pure CDM (cold dark matter) model, it is easy to show from the
linear perturbation equations that Φ = −Ψ and Ψ̇ = 0. Furthermore, assum-
ing adiabatic perturbations, one finds from the analog of Poisson’s equation,
(1/4)D(r) = −(5/3)Ψ + O((kt)2 ). On super horizon scales, kt ≪ 1, Eq. (9)
thus yields for pure CDM

                           δT      1
                              (n) = Ψ(tdec , xdec ) .                        (13)
                           T       3
This is the well known Sachs Wolfe result. For a typical inflationary spectrum,
the Bardeen potentials behave like

                  h|Ψ(k)|2 i ∝ 1/k 3    for inflation + CDM.                 (14)

Using this and Eq. (13), one can calculate the anisotropy spectrum and finds
(see appendix)
                                         1
                               Cℓ ∝           .                         (15)
                                     ℓ(ℓ + 1)
For topological defect models, the situation is very different. One can show,
that (due to compensation) the Bardeen potentials have white noise spectra on
super horizon sales 3,16 . By dimensional reasons therefore h|Ψ(k)|2 it−3 =constant.
Furthermore, one finds that D(r) behaves like (kt)2 Ψ and is thus negligible on
super horizon scales. Once a perturbation enters the horizon, t ∼ 1/k the de-
fect contribution decays and it is dominated by the contribution due to CDM
which then becomes time independent. A reasonable approximation to the
Bardeen potentials from defect models is thus
              3
                t ,       on super horizon scales, kt ≤ 1,
h|Ψ(k)|2 i ∝                                                  for defects + CDM.
                1/k 3 , on sub horizon scales,     kt ≥ 1,
                                                                             (16)
Using this approximation, it is easy to see that the ordinary Sachs Wolfe effect
is very small (for scales which are super horizon at decoupling), whereas the
integrated SW term behaves like the inflationary SW contribution leading to
the same spectrum of CMB anisotropies on large angular scales, Eq (15). A
derivation of this result is given in the appendix.
     Of course, our argumentation in the case of topological defects is very
crude. It is, however, useful to interpret the findings from numerical simula-
tions. Large scale CMB anisotropies from simulations of Global defects17 are
presented in Fig. 3. Similar results have been obtained for cosmic strings18 .

                                       10
Figure 3: The large scale CMB anisotropies from global texture simulations. The spectra
for 27 observers are plotted. The sharp drop after ℓ ∼ 30 is due to finite resolution. (Figure
                           taken from Durrer and Zhou, Ref. 17.)



3.2   Intermediate scales
The signal from CMB anisotropies on intermediate scales is most interesting
since it contains the most structure and thus the most detailed information.
     As already mentioned, fluctuations on intermediate scales are due to acous-
tic oscillations in the tightly coupled photon baryon plasma prior to recombi-
nation. To understand the basic principle, we treat these oscillations here in
a very simple way. We neglect the presence of baryons and thus set the sound
velocity of the plasma, c2s = 1/3. Energy and momentum conservation then
lead to the following equations of motion for the density perturbation D(r) and
the peculiar velocity potential V (r) (see Ref. 12):

                            4                               1
                   Ḋ(r) = − kV (r) ,         V̇ (r) = 2kΨ + kD(r) .                     (17)
                            3                               4

(In the second equation we have suppressed the difference between Ψ and
−Φ which is unimportant for our qualitative discussion.) Eqs. (17) can be
combined to a second order equation for D:

                                     1            8
                              D̈(r) + k 2 D(r) = − k 2 Ψ .                               (18)
                                     3            3
                                             11
Using the behavior Ψ ∝ t3/2 on super horizon scales, and Ψ ∝ k −3/2 on sub
horizon scales, we obtain the solutions
                 32
                    (kt)2 Ψ√
           
              − 105                 on super horizon scales, kt ≪ 1
   D(r) =                                                             (19)
              8Ψ(cos(kt/ 3) − 1) on sub horizon scales,      kt ≫ 1.

     This behavior of D(r) is very different to the adiabatic inflationary
                                                                 √          case.
There D(r) ∼ Ψ on super horizon scales and D(r) ∼ Ψ(sin(kt/ 3) − 1) on sub
horizon scales. For defects thus D(r) is very small at horizon crossing and first
has to grow to achieve its maximum whereas in the adiabatic inflationary case,
D(r) is already at its maximum on super horizon scales and starts decaying at
horizon crossing. This is the reason why the first acoustic peak is displaced to
larger ℓ for defect models. In a flat, Ω = 1 universe the position of the first
acoustic peak is about ℓpeak ∼ 360 for global defects where it is at ℓ = 220 for
adiabatic inflationary models19,20 .
     I carefully always said ’adiabatic inflationary models’ since the second or-
der Eq. (18) of course allows for two modes and in inflationary models one
is actually free to choose the adiabatic mode, which is defined by V (r) =
V (CDM) on super horizon scales or the isocurvature mode which is defined by
D(r) →kt→0 0. For defect models, however, we want to pick out the peculiar
solution induced by the defect fluctuations without adding an arbitrary ho-
mogeneous solution, a perturbation which then would have to be induced by
some other mechanism like, e.g. inflation. For defect models we thus have no
freedom in the choice of the mode. The resulting CMB anisotropy spectrum
for a typical model with global defects is shown in Fig. 4.
     An additional phenomenon which can be important for the acoustic peaks
in the CMB anisotropy spectrum is decoherence: For inflationary perturbations
the phase of an acoustic oscillation is entirely determined by its wave number,
i.e. all fluctuations with fixed wave number k are at fixed phase in their
temporal oscillations. In models with topological defects, the fluctuations are
induced by the defect energy which evolves in a complicated non-linear way.
Decoherence can be described by the decay of the correlation function

                                  h|Ψ(k, t)Ψ(k, ti )|i
                     C(k, t) = p                             .              (20)
                                h|Ψ(k, t)|2 ih|Ψ(k, ti )|2 i

Since defects evolve causally, they are ’frozen in’ on super horizon scales and
no decoherence can thus occur on these scales, C(k, t) = 1, for kt ≪ 1. As soon
as defects enter the horizon, they start evolving in a complicated non-linear
way and their gravitational potential looses coherence with a characteristic
time scale tc . On the other hand, the defects themselves decay with a decay

                                        12
Figure 4: The CMB anisotropy spectrum from global topological defects. The vertical scale
   is arbitrary. This result was obtained by a model calculation as explained in Ref. 16.




time td . Once the defects have decayed, dark matter and radiation fluctua-
tions evolve according to homogeneous perturbation equations not loosing any
remaining coherence. The question whether decoherence is effective or not, is
thus determined by the ratio r = tc /td . For r ≤ 1 decoherence is unimportant
where as for r ≫ 1 decoherence smears out secondary acoustic peaks leaving
over just one broad ’hump’ 3 . This process is illustrated in Fig. 5.
     Local cosmic strings decay only via the very weak process of gravitational
radiation and are thus relatively long lived. A cosmic string loop, after entering
the horizon, typically survives for about 104 horizon times. Global defects, on
the other hand, decay very effectively within a few horizon times via the radia-
tion of massless Goldstone modes. Furthermore, there are hints from numerical
simulations, that coherence decays exponentially for cosmic strings3 but only
like a power law for global defects9 . These findings have led to the conjecture
that decoherence is effective in scenarios with local cosmic strings but not for
global defects. However, to fully understand and quantify decoherence, more
detailed simulations and analytical work are needed.




                                           13
                         100        1000   100        1000   100     1000




Figure 5: CMB anisotropies from topological defects. The effect of decoherence is shown.
The variables τc and xc correspond to td and tc respectively. The ratio r is thus largest for
 the top right frame and smallest for the bottom left one. (From Magueijo et al., Ref. 3.)



4   Conclusion

We have seen that the anisotropies in the CMB provide interesting possibil-
ities to distinguish between models of structure formation from inflationary
perturbations or from topological defects. The first tests for physical theories
at very high energies ∼ 1016 GeV might thus come from cosmology and not
from accelerator experiments!
     One of the reasons for its usefulness certainly lies in the simplicity of calcu-
lations of CMB anisotropies. All the effects discussed here can be determined
within linear perturbation analysis. The complicated non-linear physics in-
volved in the formation of celestial bodies plays only a minor role for CMB
anisotropies, while it might significantly obscure the relation between observa-
tions and calculations of large scale structure. There, the quantities simple to

                                                 14
observe are the clustering properties of light, while linear perturbation analysis
just determines the clustering of mass.
    We have justified hopes that the next decade, when experimental results
determine CMB anisotropy to an accuracy of a few percent, will revolutionize
cosmology. On the one hand, the dependence of the details of the acoustic
peaks on cosmological parameters22 might help us to determine these param-
eters to an accuracy of a few percent. On the other hand, the acoustic peaks
probably contain information about the physics at GUT scales which is not
available to us by any other means.
    I have not discussed here the distinction of inflationary and defect models
by statistical means: While generic inflationary models lead to Gaussian per-
turbations, topological defects are inherently non-Gaussian. It may however
be quite difficult to detect this deviation from Gaussian statistics: On very
large scales, a significant obstacle is cosmic variance, while on intermediate
scales, several defects might contribute to a given perturbation and thus re-
duce non-Gaussian signatures (central limit theorem). The best prospects are
probably on small scales, where one might actually ’see’ the discontinuity due
to one cosmic string21 . An interesting discussion of the problem of statistics is
given in the contribution by J. Magueijo in these proceedings.


Acknowledgments

It is a pleasure to thank Monique Signoret and Francesco Melchiorri for orga-
nizing this short but stimulating and active meeting. I also want to express my
thanks to Mairi Sakellariadou who contributed to much of the original work
reported here. I gratefully acknowledge support by the Fonds National Suisse.


Appendix

In this appendix we show in some detail how Eqs. (14) and (16) lead both
to a Harrison Zel’dovich spectrum of microwave background anisotropies, i.e.
Cℓ ∝ 1/ℓ(ℓ + 1).
     Using xdec = x0 −n(t0 −tdec ) ≈ x0 −nt0 , the Fourier transform of Eq. (13)
yields
                     δT          1
                        (n, k) = exp(in · kt0 )Ψ(tdec , k) .                (21)
                      T          3
Using the well-known identity23 exp(iαµ) = ℓ (2ℓ + 1)iℓ jℓ (α)Pℓ (µ), where jℓ
                                              P
denotes the spherical Bessel function and Pℓ is the Legendre polynomial of

                                       15
index ℓ, we find
                            δT          X
                               (k, µ) =   iℓ ∆ℓ (k)Pℓ (µ) ,                    (22)
                            T
                                             ℓ

with µ = n · k/k, and
                                       2ℓ + 1
                         ∆ℓ (k) =             Ψ(k, tdec )jℓ (kt0 ) .           (23)
                                          3
Inserting this in the two point correlation function, Eq. (12), one obtains

                                 2         h|∆(k)|2 i
                                   Z
                           Cℓ =      dkk 2            .                     (24)
                                 π         (2ℓ + 1)2

To arrive at this result we replace the ensemble average of Eq. (12) by an
integration over observer positions x0 , a kind of ’ergodic hypothesis’. Then we
use unitarity of the Fourier transform and elementary orthogonality properties
of spherical harmonics. The average h|∆(k)|2 i represents an integral over k-
directions. For Eq. (24) to hold, it is important that the Fourier transform is
defined by
                                1
                                   Z
                      fˆ(k) = √       d3 xf (x) exp(ik · x) ,               (25)
                                 V V
otherwise, the pre-factor in front of the integral in Eq. (24) changes.
    Inserting now h|Ψ|2 (k)i = Ak −3 , the integral in Eq (24) becomes
                                   2A     dx
                                       Z
                             Cℓ =            jℓ (x)2 .
                                   9π      x

This integral can be performed exactly with the result24

                   (inf lation)            AΓ(ℓ)             A
                Cℓ                =                    =            .          (26)
                                      36Γ(3/2)Γ(ℓ + 2)   9πℓ(ℓ + 1)
The dimensionless constant A is given by the specific inflationary model and
has to be tuned to A ∼ 10−9 .
    For topological defects the situation is somewhat more complicated since
Ψ is time dependent. The same reasoning which led to Eq. (23) yields
                                               Z t0
        1
            ∆ℓ (k) = 2Ψ(tdec , k)jℓ (kt0 ) + 2       Ψ̇(t, k)jℓ (k(t0 − t))dt . (27)
     2ℓ + 1                                     tdec

If we now make use of the approximation for the p
                                                geometry perturbations from
defects given in Eq. (16) and simply set Ψ(k) ∼ h|Ψ(k)|2 i , the integration

                                              16
in Eq. (27) has to be performed only until t = 1/k, since Ψ̇ vanishes for
kt > 1. We thus may neglect the weak time dependence of jℓ in the interval of
integration. The integral in Eq. (27) can then be performed. The ordinary SW
contribution is canceled by the lower limit of the integral and only the much
larger contribution from the upper limit of the integral remains leading to

                    ∆ℓ (k) = 2(2ℓ + 1)Ψ(t = 1/k, k)jℓ (kt0 ) .                (28)

Inserting this finding in Eq. (24) with h|Ψ(t = 1/k, k)|2 i = Aǫ2 k −3 , we find as
in Eq. (26)
                               (defect)     8Aǫ2
                             Cℓ         =           .                          (29)
                                          πℓ(ℓ + 1)
Here A is a dimensionless constant which is model dependent, but generically
of order unity, and ǫ = 4πGη 2 is given by the symmetry breaking scale.
    Even if the integration encountered in this derivation can be performed
exactly, we should not forget that the crucial ingredient, Eq. (16) is a simple
approximation and the constant A should be determined by numerical sim-
ulations. Also in the simple inflationary CDM model, massless neutrini and
the contribution of radiation to the expansion of the universe induce a small
integrated SW contribution which has been neglected in this approximation.
    In general, if h|∆ℓ (k)|2 i = Ak −n t3−n
                                         0   in a certain range of harmonics ℓ,
one can compute the Cℓ ’s in this range exactly with the result

                               Γ(n − 1)Γ(ℓ + 3−n
                                               2 )
                       Cℓ = A n−1                    .
                             2    Γ(n/2)2 Γ(ℓ + n+1
                                                 2 )


References

  1. E. Lifshitz, J. Phys. USSR 10, 116 (1946).
  2. E. Harrison, Phys. Rev. D1 2726 (1970);
     Ya. B. Zel’dovich, Mont. Not. R. Astr. Soc. 160, P1 (1972).
  3. J. Magueijo, A. Albrecht, P. Ferreira and D. Coulson, Phys. Rev. D54,
     3727 (1996).
  4. J.I. Kapusta, “Finite Temperature Field Theory”, Cambridge University
     Press (1989).
  5. T. W. B. Kibble, Phys. Rep. 67, 183 (1980).
  6. J. Derrick, Math. Phys. 5, 1252 (1964).
  7. J. Borill, E.J. Copeland, A.R. Liddle, A. Stebbins and S. Veeraraghavan,
     Phys. Rev. D50, 2469 (1994), and references therein.
  8. N. Turok and D. Spergel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 3093 (1991).

                                        17
 9. M. Kunz and R. Durrer, Phys Rev. D, in press, archived under
    astro-ph/9612202 (1996).
10. R. Durrer in: Formation and Interaction of Topological Defects, NATO
    ASI Series B349, eds. A.C. Davis and R. Brandenberger (1995).
11. J. Bardeen, Phys. Rev. D22, 1882 (1980).
12. R. Durrer, Fund. of Cosmic Physics 15, 209 (1994).
13. R.K. Sachs and A.M. Wolfe, Astrophys. J. 147, 73 (1967).
14. J. Silk, Astrophys. J. 151, 459 (1968).
15. W. Hu and N. Sugiyama, Astrophys. J. 471, 542 (1996).
16. R. Durrer and M. Sakellariadou, Phys. Rev. D, submitted, archived un-
    der astro-ph/9702028 (1997). (See also Sakellariadou & Durrer, these
    proceedings.)
17. R. Durrer and Z.H. Zhou Phys Rev. D53 (1995).
18. B. Allen, R.R. Caldwell, E.P.S. Shellard A. Stebbins and S. Veeraragha-
    van, Phys. Rev. Lett., submitted, archived under astro-ph/9609038
    (1996)
19. R. Crittenden and N. Turok, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2642 (1995).
20. R. Durrer, A. Gangui and M. Sakellariadou, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 579
    (1996).
21. N. Kaiser and A. Stebbins, Nature 310, 391 (1984);
    A. Stebbins Astrophys. J. 327, 584 (1988).
22. W. Hu, N. Sugiyama and J. Silk, Nature, in press, archived under
    astro-ph/9604166 (1997).
23. M. Abramowitz and I.A. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical Functions,
    Dover Publications, New York (1972).
24. I.S. Gradshteyn and I.M. Ryzhik, Tables of Integrals, Series and Prod-
    ucts, Academic Press, San Diego (1980).




                                   18
