                                                 Lectures on Cosmic Topological Defects


                                                               Tanmay Vachaspati




arXiv:hep-ph/0101270v2 4 Feb 2001
                                                    Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics,
                                                          T.I.F.R., Homi Bhabha Road,
                                                          Colaba, Mumbai 400 005, India
                                                                       and
                                                               Physics Department,
                                                        Case Western Reserve University,
                                                        Cleveland, OH 44106-7079, USA.

                                    These lectures review certain topological defects and aspects of their cosmology.
                                    Unconventional material includes brief descriptions of electroweak defects, the
                                    structure of domain walls in non-Abelian theories, and the spectrum of magnetic
                                    monopoles in SU(5) Grand Unified theory.




                                                                           1
Contents
  I. Introduction
       A. Friedman-Robertson-Walker cosmology
       B. Cosmological phase transitions
       C. Vacuum manifold
 II. Domain Walls
       A. Topology: π0
       B. Example: Z2
       C. SU(5)
       D. Formation
       E. Evolution and constraints
       F. Further complexities
 III. Strings
       A. Topology: π1
       B. Example: U(1) local
       C. Semilocal and electroweak strings
       D. Formation and Evolution
       E. One scale model
       F. Cosmological constraints and signatures
          (a) CMB and P(k)
          (b) Gravitational wave background
          (c) Gravitational lensing
          (d) Other signatures
       H. Zero modes and superconducting strings
 IV. Magnetic Monopoles (in brief)
       A. Topology: π2
       B. Examples: SU(2)
       C. Electroweak monopoles
       D. SU(5)
       D. Cosmology (extremely brief)
       A. Further reading


                                      2
1     Introduction
1.1    FRW cosmology
As indicated by observations, the universe is assumed to be homogeneous and
isotropic on large scales. The line element is:
                                     dr2
                                                                   
                                                            2
               ds2 = dt2 − a2 (t)          + r 2
                                                 (dθ 2
                                                       + sin  θdφ2
                                                                   )     (1)
                                   1 − kr2
where the function a(t) is known as the scale factor, and the parameter k =
−1, 0, +1 labels an open, flat or closed universe. The Einstein equations give:
                             2
                              ȧ       k    8πG
                                    + 2 =       ρ(t)                        (2)
                              a       a      3
where ρ(t) is the energy density of the cosmological fluid. Conservation of
energy-momentum yields
                            ρ̇ + 3H(ρ + p) = 0                          (3)
where H ≡ ȧ/a is the Hubble parameter and p denotes the pressure of the
cosmological fluid. The properties of the cosmological fluid are given by its
equation of state:
                                  p = p(ρ)                               (4)
which must be specified to determine the expansion rate of the universe. If the
fluid is relativistic (eg. photons): p = ρ/3; while if it is dust: p = 0; and for
vacuum energy (cosmological constant): p = −ρ.
     If the fluid is in thermal equilibrium, the evolution of the temperature of
the fluid can be derived by using the conservation of entropy which gives

                                a(t)T = constant .                           (5)

The temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation (i.e. cosmo-
logical photons as opposed to those produced by stars and other astrophysical
sources) at the present epoch is measured to be 2.7◦ K.
     It is sometimes convenient to work with the “conformal time” τ instead of
the “cosmic time” t. The relation defining τ in terms of t is:

                                   dt = a(t)dτ .                             (6)

In terms of the conformal time, the FRW line element is:
                                      dr2
                                                                    
                                                2     2      2    2
            ds2 = a2 (t(τ )) dτ 2 −         + r   (dθ   + sin  θdφ  )  .     (7)
                                    1 − kr2

                                         3
1.2    Cosmological phase transitions
We consider a field theory of scalar, spinor and vector fields:

                                    L = LB + LF                             (8)

with the bosonic Lagrangian:
                            1                      1 a µνa
                    LB =      Dµ Φi Dµ Φi − V (Φ) − Fµν F                   (9)
                            2                      4
where Φi are the components of the scalar fields. The fermionic Lagrangian
for a fermionic multiplet Ψ is:

                           LF = iΨ̄γ µ Dµ Ψ − Ψ̄Γi ΨΦi .                  (10)

In addition we have the following definitions:

                                 Dµ ≡ ∂µ − ieAaµ T a                      (11)

where the T a are group generators;
                        a
                       Fµν ≡ ∂µ Aaν − ∂ν Aaµ + +ef abc Abµ Acν            (12)

where, Aaµ are the gauge fields.
   If the expectation values of the scalar fields are denoted by Φ0i , then the
mass matrices of the various fields are written as:
                                 ∂2V
                       µ2ij =                ,       scalar fields        (13)
                                ∂Φi ∂Φj Φ=Φ0

                            m = Γi Φ0i ,       spinor fields              (14)
where, the Γi are the Yukawa coupling matrices, and
                      2
                     Mab = e2 (Ta Tb )ij Φ0i Φ0j ,     vector fields      (15)

      Then the finite temperature, one-loop effective potential is:

                                                  M2 2 π 2
                    Vef f (Φ0 , T ) = V (Φ0 ) +      T −    NT4           (16)
                                                  24     90
where
                                           7
                                   N = NB + NF                            (17)
                                           8
                                           4
is the number of bosonic and fermionic spin states, and

                                       1
                   M2 = Trµ2 + 3TrM 2 + Tr(γ 0 mγ 0 m) .                    (18)
                                       2
Note that M2 depends on the expectation value Φ0 through the defining equa-
tions for the mass matrices given above. Then, for example, M2 will contain
a term proportional to Tr(Φ20 ).
     For us the important feature of the effective potential is that it can lead
to cosmological phase transitions. If there are scalar fields with negative mass
squared terms in V (Φ), the contributions from the M2 T 2 term in the effective
potential can make the effective mass squared positive for these fields if the
temperature is high enough. Therefore when the universe is at a high temper-
ature, the effective squared mass is positive and the minimum of the potential
is at Φ0 = 0. In the more recent cooler universe the effective mass squared is
negative and the minima of the effective potential will occur at non-zero values
of Φ0 . That is, the scalar fields will acquire vacuum expectation values. This
is the phenomenon of spontaneous symmetry breaking and, if it occurs, will
manifest itself as a cosmological phase transition.

1.3   Vacuum manifold
In general the field theoretic action under consideration will be invariant under
some transformations of the fields. The set of all such symmetry transforma-
tions form a group which we denote by G.
     Next consider the situation where a scalar field acquires a vacuum expec-
tation value (VEV) φ0 . Then all transformations of φ0 by elements of G will
also be legitimate VEVs of the scalar field. However, not all elements of G will
have a non-trivial effect on φ0 . There will be a subgroup of G which will have
a trivial action on φ0 . This is the unbroken subgroup of G and we denote it
by H.
     Now we wish to determine the set of possible VEVs of the scalar field.
This set is given by the elements of G that have a non-trivial action on φ0 .
Now consider an element of g ∈ G that has a non-trivial action on φ0 and
transforms it to φ1 . Then every element of the form gh where h ∈ H, also
takes φ0 to φ1 . Therefore the non-trivial transformations are given by the left
cosets of H, and the space of all non-trivial transformations is called a coset
space and denoted by G/H. Therefore the vacuum manifold of the theory is
G/H.
     As we shall see, topological defects occur due to non-trivial topology of
the vacuum manifold.

                                       5
    Note that the topology does not care if the symmetries are local or global.
For most of these lectures, I will consider local (gauged) symmetries.

2     Domain walls
2.1    Topology: π0
Domain walls occur when the vacuum manifold has two or more disconnected
components. For example, G can be a discrete group like Z2 which can be
broken completely (H = 1). Then G/H consists of just two points.
     The topology of various manifolds has been studied by mathematicians
and they characterize the type of topology by stating the homotopy groups of
the manifold. The nth homotopy group of the manifold G/H is denoted by
πn (G/H) and denotes the group that is formed by considering the mapping of
n−dimensional spheres into the manifold G/H. Each element of the group πn
is the set of mappings that can be continuously deformed into one another.
     In the case when the vacuum manifold has disconnected components,
π0 (G/H) is non-trivial since there are points (zero dimensional spheres) that
lie in different components that cannot be continuously deformed into one
another. Therefore domain walls occur whenever π0 (G/H) is non-trivial.

2.2    Example: Z2
Consider the Z2 Lagrangian in 1+1 dimensions labeled by (t, z)

                              1          λ
                         L=     (∂µ φ)2 − (φ2 − η 2 )2                     (19)
                              2          4
where φ(t, z) is a real scalar field - also called the order parameter. The La-
grangian is invariant under φ → −φ and hence possesses a Z2 symmetry. For
this reason, the potential has two minima: φ = ±η, and the “vacuum manifold”
has two-fold degeneracy.
     Consider the possibility that φ = +η at z = +∞ and φ = −η at z = −∞.
In this case, the continuous function φ(z) has to go from −η to +η as z is
taken from −∞ to +∞ and so must necessarily pass through φ = 0. But
then there is energy in this field configuration since the potential is non-zero
when φ = 0. Also, this configuration cannot relax to either of the two vacuum
configurations, say φ(z) = +η, since that involves changing the field over an
infinite volume from −η to +η, which would cost an infinite amount of energy.
     Another way to see this is to notice the presence of a conserved current:

                                 j µ = ǫµν ∂ν φ

                                       6
where µ, ν = 0, 1 and ǫµν is the antisymmetric symbol in 2 dimensions. Clearly
j µ is conserved and so we have a conserved charge in the model:
                            Z
                       Q = dzj 0 = φ(+∞) − φ(−∞) .

For the vacuum Q = 0 and for the configuration described above Q = 1. So
the configuration cannot relax into the vacuum - it is in a different topological
sector.
    To get the field configuration with the boundary conditions φ(±∞) = ±η,
one would have to solve the field equation resulting from the Lagrangian (19).
This would be a second order differential equation. Instead, one can use the
clever method first derived by Bogomolnyi 1 and obtain a first order differential
equation. The method uses the energy functional:
                   1          1
             Z
     E =        dz[ (∂t φ)2 + (∂z φ)2 + V (φ)]
                   2          2
                   1          1
             Z
                dz[ (∂t φ) + (∂z φ − 2V (φ) )2 + 2V (φ)∂z φ]
                          2
                                       p             p
         =
                   2          2
                                                      Z φ(+∞)
                   1          1
             Z                         p                           p
                          2                      2
         =      dz[ (∂t φ) + (∂z φ − 2V (φ) ) ] +               dφ′ 2V (φ′ )
                   2          2                         φ(−∞)


Then, for fixed values of φ at ±∞, the energy is minimized if

                                      ∂t φ = 0

and                                   p
                             ∂z φ −    2V (φ) = 0 .
Furthermore, the minimum value of the energy is:
                                 Z φ(+∞)           p
                        Emin =               dφ′    2V (φ′ ) .
                                  φ(−∞)

In our case,                            r
                            p          λ 2
                             V (φ) =     (η − φ2 )
                                       4
which can be inserted in the above equations to get the “kink” solution:
                                      r        
                                           λ
                             φ = ηtanh       ηz
                                           2

                                         7
for which the energy per unit area is:
                                   √              √
                                  2 2√ 3         2 2 m3
                         σkink =         λη =         √                      (20)
                                    3              3    λ
             √
where m = λη is the mass scale in the model (see eq. (19)). Note that the
energy density is localized in the region where φ is not in the vacuum, i.e. in
a region of thickness ∼ m−1 around z = 0.
     We can extend the model in eq. (19) to 3+1 dimensions and consider the
case when φ only depends on z but not on x and y. We can still obtain the
kink solution for every value of x and y and so the kink solution will describe
a “domain wall” in the xy−plane.
     At the center of the kink, φ = 0, and hence the Z2 symmetry is restored in
the core of the kink. In this sense, the kink is a “relic” of the symmetric phase
of the system. If kinks were present in the universe today, their interiors would
give us a glimpse of what the universe was like prior to the phase transition.

2.3   SU(5)
An example that is more relevant to cosmology is motivated by Grand Unifi-
cation. Here we will consider the SU(5) model:

                                  1
                   L = Tr(Dµ Φ)2 − Tr(Xµν X µν ) − V (Φ)                    (21)
                                  2
where, in terms of components, Φ = Φa T a is an SU(5) adjoint, the gauge field
                           a
strengths are Xµν = Xµν      T a and the SU(5) generators T a are normalized such
that Tr(T a T b ) = δ ab /2. The definition of the covariant derivative is:

                            Dµ Φ = ∂µ Φ − ie[Xµ , Φ]                        (22)

and the potential is the most general quartic in Φ:

      V (Φ) = −m2 Tr(Φ2 ) + h[Tr(Φ2 )]2 + λTr(Φ4 ) + γTr(Φ3 ) − V0 ,        (23)

where, V0 is a constant that we will choose so as to set the minimum value of
the potential to zero.
    The SU (5) symmetry is broken to [SU (3) × SU (2) × U (1)]/Z6 if the Higgs
acquires a VEV equal to
                             η
                        Φ0 = √ diag(2, 2, 2, −3, −3)                        (24)
                            2 15
                                       8
where
                               m                7
                         η = √ , λ′ ≡ h + λ .                          (25)
                                λ′             30
For the potential to have its global minimum at Φ = Φ0 , the parameters are
constrained to satisfy:
                               λ ≥ 0 , λ′ ≥ 0 .                        (26)
For the global minimum to have V (Φ0 ) = 0, in eq. (23) we set
                                           λ′ 4
                                 V0 = −      η .                           (27)
                                           4
    The model in eq. (21) does not have any topological domain walls because
there are no broken discrete symmetries. In particular, the Z2 symmetry under
Φ → −Φ is absent due to the cubic term. However if γ is small, there are walls
connecting the two vacua related by Φ → −Φ that are almost topological.
In our analysis we will set γ = 0, in which case the symmetry of the model
is SU (5) × Z2 and an expectation of Φ breaks the Z2 symmetry leading to
topological domain walls.
    The kink solution is the Z2 kink along the Φ0 direction (see eq. (24)).
Therefore:
                               Φk = tanh(σz)Φ0                            (28)
              √
with σ ≡ m/ 2 (see eq. (25)), and all the gauge fields vanish. It is straight-
forward to check that Φk solves the equations of motion with the boundary
conditions Φ(z = ±∞) = ±Φ0 .
    The energy per unit area of the kink is (see eq. (20)):
                                       √
                                      2 2 m3
                               Mk =            .                          (29)
                                       3 λ′
    The existence of a static solution to the equations of motion only guar-
antees that it is an extremum of the energy but this extremum may not be
a minimum. To determine if the kink is a minimum energy solution we need
to examine its stability under arbitrary perturbations. (As far as I know, a
Bogomolnyi type analysis has not been constructed for the SU(5) model.)
    Here we will examine the stability of the kink under general perturbations.
So we write:
                                 Φ = Φk + Ψ                                (30)
Since the kink solution is invariant under translations and rotations in the
xy−plane, it is easy to show that the perturbations that might cause an in-
stability arise from perturbations of the scalar field and can only depend on z.
Therefore we may set the gauge fields to zero and take Ψ = Ψ(t, z).

                                       9
     The Z2 kink is stable and hence we can restrict the scalar perturbations to
be orthogonal to Φk . The perturbative stability of the kink has been studied
by Dvali et. al. 2 , and, Pogosian and Vachaspati 3 . Here we only consider the
off-diagonal perturbation

                         Ψ = ψT ≡ ψdiag(τ 1 , 0, 0, 0) ,                    (31)

where τ 1 is the first Pauli spin matrix.
   Next we analyze the linearized Schrodinger equation for small excitations
ψ = ψ0 (z)exp(−iωt) in the background of the kink:

                   [−∂z2 − m2 + φ2k (z)(h + λr)]ψ0 = ωi2 ψ0 ,               (32)

where φk ≡ tanh(σz) and r = 7/30. The kink is unstable if there is a solution
to eq. (32) with a negative ω 2 . Substituting eq. (28) into eq. (32) yields:

                    [−∂z2 + m2 (tanh2 (σz) − 1)]ψ0 = ω 2 ψ0 .               (33)

This equation has a bound state solution ψ0 ∝ sech(σz) with the eigenvalue
ω 2 = −m2 /2. Since this result is independent of the parameters in the poten-
tial, we conclude that the kink in SU(5) is always unstable.
     So we still need to find the topological domain wall solution in the model.
     The domain wall solution is obtained if we choose the gauge fields to vanish
at infinity and the scalar field to satisfy the boundary conditions:
                                 η
             Φ(z = −∞) = Φ− ≡ √ diag(3, −2, −2, 3, −2)
                              2 15
                                                 √
                           r
                             5              η
                        =η      (λ3 + τ3 ) − (Y − 5λ8 )                     (34)
                             12             6
and
                                  η
              Φ(z = +∞) = Φ+ ≡ √ diag(2, −3, 2, 2, −3)
                                2 15
                                               √
                         r
                            5             η
                      =η      (λ3 + τ3 ) + (Y − 5λ8 ) .                     (35)
                           12             6
Here λ3 , λ8 , τ3 and Y are the diagonal generators of SU(5):
                                 1
                          λ3 =     diag(1, −1, 0, 0, 0) ,                   (36)
                                 2
                              1
                         λ8 = √ diag(1, 1, −2, 0, 0) ,                      (37)
                             2 3
                                        10
                                  1
                           τ3 =     diag(0, 0, 0, 1, −1) ,                   (38)
                                  2
                           1
                       Y = √ diag(2, 2, 2, −3, −3) .                         (39)
                          2 15
Alternately, we could have chosen the boundary conditions to be like those of
the kink with Φ(z = +∞) = −Φ(z = −∞). However, then the solution for the
domain wall will not be diagonal at all z. We prefer to use the above boundary
conditions so that the solution is diagonal throughout.
    The domain wall solution can be written as

                ΦDW (z) = a(z)λ3 + b(z)λ8 + c(z)τ3 + d(z)Y .                 (40)

The functions a, b, c, and d must satisfy the static equations of motion:

                                2λ 2                λ 2
           a′′ = [−m2 + (h +       )d     +   (h +    )(a + b2 ) + hc2 ]a
                                 5                  2
                                               2λabd
                                          +     √                            (41)
                                                  5


                                2λ 2                 λ 2
           b′′ = [−m2 + (h +       )d     +   (h +     )(a + b2 ) + hc2 ]b
                                 5                   2
                                               λd
                                          +    √ (a2 − b2 )                  (42)
                                                5


                                     9λ 2                λ 2
               c′′ = [−m2 + (h +        )d + (h      +     )c
                                     10                  2
                                                     +   h(a2 + b2 )]c       (43)


                                       7λ 2          2λ 2
              d′′ = [−m2    +     (h +    )d + (h +     )(a + b2 )
                                       30             5
                                       9λ 2       λb       b2
                            +     (h +    )c ]d + √ (a2 − ) ,                (44)
                                       10          5        3

where primes refer to derivatives with respect to z. For reference, the kink so-
lution (eq. (28)) corresponds to a(z) = 0 = b(z) = c(z) and d(z) = η tanh(σz).
     The equations of motion for b and c and can be solved quite easily:
                                √
                        b(z) = − 5d(z) , c(z) = a(z) .                      (45)

                                         11
This is consistent with the boundary conditions in eqs. (34) and (35). In
addition, we require
                                r
                                   5                    η
                a(z = ±∞) = +η       , d(z = ±∞) = ± .                (46)
                                  12                    6
Then the remaining equations can be written in a cleaner form by rescaling:
                       r
                          12 a             d
                A(z) =         , D(z) = 6 , Z = mz .                    (47)
                          5 η              η
This leads to
                               (1 − p) 2 (4 + p) 2
                                                  
                    A′′ = −1 +        D +         A A                       (48)
                                  5         5
                                                
                         ′′          2         2
                        D = −1 + pD + (1 − p)A D                            (49)

where primes on A and D denote differentiation with respect to Z, and
                                           
                               1       5λ
                          p=       1+         .                       (50)
                               6      12λ′

Note that p ∈ [1/6, ∞) because of the constraints in eq. (26). The boundary
conditions now are:

                   A(z = ±∞) = +1 ,         D(z = ±∞) = ±1 .                (51)

     This system of equations has been solved by numerical relaxation and a
sample solution is shown in Fig. 1. To find an approximate analytical solution,
assume that |A′′ /A| << 1 is small everywhere. This assumption will be true
for a certain range of the parameter p which we can later determine. Then the
square bracket on the right-hand side of eq. (48) is very small. This gives:
                                                  1/2
                                        (1 − p) 2
                                   
                                 5
                       A≃            1−        D                            (52)
                                4+p        5

We insert this expression for A in eq. (49) and obtain the kink-type differential
equation:
                              D′′ = q[−1 + D2 ]D ,                          (53)
where
                                  6p − 1      6λ
                            q=           =                                  (54)
                                  p+4      λ + 60λ′
                                       12
  0.8




  0.6




  0.4




  0.2




    0




 -0.2
          -20          0          20
                       z




Figure 1: Numerical solution for the domain wall in the case λ = 1, h = −0.2 (p = 2.25).
The solid line shows a(z) and the dashed line shows d(z).


and the solution is:                      r 
                                            q
                               D(Z) ≃ tanh    Z                                    (55)
                                            2
The parameter q lies in the interval [0, 6]. For q = 1 (i.e. p = 1) it is easy to
check that this analytical solution is exact.
    We can now check that our assumption |A′′ /A| << 1 is self-consistent
provided p is not much larger than a few.
    The energy density for the fields A and D can be found from the La-
grangian in eq. (21) together with the ansatz in eq. (40), the solution for b
and c in eq. (45) and the rescalings in eq. (47). The resulting expression for
the energy per unit area of the domain wall is:
                             m3
                                  Z
                                           2     2
                  MDW =         ′
                                    dZ[5A′ + D′ + V (A, D)]                  (56)
                            12λ
where,
                                                 (p + 4) 4
                V (A, D) = −5A2        − D2 +           A
                                                    2
                                           p 4
                                       +     D + (1 − p)A2 D2 + 3 .                (57)
                                           2
                                           13
      Table 1: Size distribution of + clusters found by simulations on a cubic lattice.



 Cluster size         1          2          3          4         6        10         31082
      Number         462         84        14         13         1         1              1



The energy can be found numerically. However, here we will find an approx-
imate analytic result. We can insert the approximate solution given above in
eq. (56) but this leads to an expression that is not transparent. Instead it is
more useful to consider another approximation for A and D:
                                           r      
                                                p
                        A ≃ 1 , D ≃ tanh          Z .                     (58)
                                                2

(This approximation is exact for p = 1.) A straightforward evaluation then
gives:                                      √
                                              p
                          MDW approx = Mk                             (59)
                                             6
where, Mk is given in eq. (29).
     It can be shown for a range of parameters that this domain wall solution
is perturbatively stable. Numerically we find that it is lighter than the kink
for all values of p. (Eq. (59) shows it to be lighter for p < 36.)
     The interior of the domain wall has less symmetry than the exterior. So the
domain wall does not contain a trapped region of the early universe. Instead
it is a region that may be to our future where the SU (3) symmetry is broken
down to SU (2) × U (1). In this sense, the domain wall is a relic from the early
universe but not a relic of the unbroken symmetry of the theory.

2.4    Formation
The properties of the network of domain walls at formation has been deter-
mined by numerical simulations. The idea behind the simulations is that the
vacuum in any correlated region of space is determined at random. Then, if
there are only two degenerate vacuua (call them + and -), there will be spatial
regions that will be in the + phase and others in the - phase. The boundaries
between these regions of different phases is the location of the domain walls.
    By performing numerical simulations, the statistics shown in Table I was
obtained 4 .

                                             14
     The data shows that there is essentially one giant connected + cluster. By
symmetry there will be one connected - cluster. In the infinite volume limit,
these clusters will also be infinite and their surface areas will also be infinite.
Therefore the topological domain wall formed at the phase transition will be
infinite.

2.5   Evolution
Once the inifinite domain wall forms, it tries to straighten out since it has
tension – in this way, the wall can minimize its energy. In the cosmological
setting, the wall will be stretched out by the Hubble expansion. In addition,
the wall will interact with the ambient matter and suffer friction. Sometimes
different parts of the walls will collide and interact. The interaction leads to
the reconnection of colliding walls.
     The details of the evolution of the walls are quite complicated. However,
the simplest cosmological scenario is easy to analyze and leads to an interesting
bound. The basic idea is to use causality to get an upper bound on the energy
density in domain walls at any epoch. Causality tells us that the different
domains that are separated by walls cannot smooth out faster than the speed
of light. Therefore every causal horizon must contain at least one domain
wall at any epoch and so the energy density in domain walls ρDW obeys the
following bound:

                       energy in one wall in horizon  σt2  σ
               ρDW ≥                                 ≃ 3 =                    (60)
                             horizon volume            t   t
where σ is the energy per unit area of the wall. If we require that the energy
density in walls be less than the present critical density of the universe ρcr =
3H 2 /8πG with H ≃ 70 km/s/Mpc we get the constraint

                                       3H 2 t0
                                  σ<           ,                              (61)
                                        8πG
where t0 ∼ 1017 secs is the present epoch.
     If we use eq. (20) to connect σ to the symmetry breaking scale and take the
coupling constant to be order one, we find that the symmetry breaking scale
is constrained to be less than about a GeV. A stronger bound is obtained by
realizing that the energy density fluctuations in domain walls should not cause
fluctuations in the cosmic microwave background radiation (CMBR) greater
than 1 part in 105 . This leads to the constraint that η should be less than
a few MeV. Particle physics at such low energy scales – such as the standard
model – do not show any phase transitions involving domain walls and so we

                                        15
do not expect to have domain walls in the universe. Another way to view the
constraint is that if a particle physics model predicts domain walls above the
few MeV scale, cosmology rules out the model.


2.6    Further complexities

One can evade the constraints derived in the previous section by introducing
some new cosmological and particle physics elements.
     For example, the constraint that domain walls have to be formed below
the few MeV scale does not hold if cosmological inflation follows the phase
transition in which heavy domain walls were produced. In such a scenario, the
domain walls are inflated away and our present horizon need not contain any
domain wall.
     In particle physics model building, one might have a situation where a
discrete symmetry is broken at some high temperature and then restored at
some lower temperature. In this case, heavy domain walls would be formed
at the first phase transition and then would “dissolve” at the second phase
transition. Then there would be a period in the early universe where domain
walls would be present but they would not be around today.
     Another situation of some interest is when the discrete vacuua are not
exactly degenerate. In the SU(5) example discussed above, if γ (eq. (23)) is
very small, domain walls will be formed at the phase transition. Suppose the +
phase has slightly less energy density than the - phase. Then the domain walls
will experience a pressure on them that will drive them towards the higher
energy - phase. However, if γ is small, this pressure difference is also small and
is negligible for the early evolution of the wall system. Only after the walls
have straightened out to an extent that the curvature forces are less than the
pressure, will the pressure start to drive the walls and eventually eliminate
them.


3     Strings

3.1    Topology: π1

If the vacuum manifold has one dimensional closed paths that cannot be con-
tracted, there are topological string solutions in the field theory. The homotopy
group π1 (G/H) is the group formed by the equivalence classes of paths that
can be deformed into each other and the group operation joins two paths to get
another path. Each element of π1 (G/H) labels a topologically distinct string
solution.

                                       16
    An example of a field theory in which string solutions exist is based on a
U (1) (global or local) group which is broken down completely. The coset space
U (1)/1 is a one dimensional sphere (circle). Closed paths that wrap around
the circle cannot be contracted to a point and this implies that the U (1) model
contains string solutions.
    The U (1) model is very important as it is relevant to the simplest su-
perfluids and superconductors. However, in more complicated systems the
symmetry groups are larger and calculating the homotopy group can be more
involved. Fortunately there is a result that simplifies matters immensely for
most (though not all!) particle physics applications. This is the result that if
πn (G) and πn−1 (G) are both trivial then,
                             πn (G/H) = πn−1 (H) .                         (62)
With n = 1 this gives
                               π1 (G/H) = π0 (H)                           (63)
provided π1 (G) = 1 = π0 (G). So if G does not contain any incontractable
closed paths and does not have disconnected pieces, then the topologically
distinct incontractable paths of G/H are given by the disconnected pieces of
H. So one can usually tell that there are strings in a particle physics model
simply by checking if the symmetry breaking involves a broken U (1) or if the
unbroken group contains a discrete symmetry. This result cannot be applied
to the electroweak model since there we have G = [SU (2) × U (1)]/Z2 and
π1 (G) = Z 6= 1.

3.2   Example: U(1) local
Consider the Lagrangian
                        1          1          λ
                  L=      |Dµ Φ|2 − Fµν F µν − (Φ∗ Φ − η 2 )2
                        2          4          8
where Φ is a complex field and
                                Dµ = ∂µ − ieAµ
where, Aµ is an Abelian gauge potential. This model has a U(1) gauge sym-
metry since it is invariant under
                                               1
                        Φ → eiθ Φ ,   Aµ → Aµ + ∂µ θ                       (64)
                                               e
Now since π1 (U (1)/1) = Z, the model has string solutions labeled by an integer
(the winding number).

                                       17
    The string solutions correspond to the non-trivial windings of a circle at
spatial infinity on to the vacuum manifold. Therefore the boundary conditions
that will yield the string solution will have the form:

                        Φ(r = ∞, θ) = ηeinθ ,       n ∈ Z − {0}                     (65)

The gauge fields at infinity must be such that the covariant derivative vanishes
there:
                            Di Φ = 0 , at r = ∞ .                           (66)
    Let us now construct the string solution using Bogomolnyi’s method 1 . The
energy for static configurations in two spatial dimensions is
                                                             
                            1          1           1
                    Z
               E = d2 x |Dx Φ|2 + |Dy Φ|2 + Bz2 + V (Φ)                    (67)
                            2          2           2
with
                                          λ
                                V (Φ) =     (|Φ|2 − η 2 )2                          (68)
                                          8
The trick is to write this as:
                                    √
                                         
                  1            1            e
         Z                                      Z
    E = d2 x |Dx Φ ± iDy Φ|2 + (Bz − 2V )2 + η 2 d2 xBz                             (69)
                  2            2            2

in the special case that λ = e2 (so called “critical coupling”) a . The Bogomolnyi
equations are:
                                 Dx Φ + iDy Φ = 0                             (70)
                                         √
                                  Bz − 2V = 0                                 (71)
and the energy per unit length of the string is:
                      e                 e
                           Z                I
                 µ = η 2 d2 xBz = η 2 dθAθ = πη 2 .                                 (72)
                      2                 2
For non-Bogomolnyi strings, this expression will be multiplied by a factor
which depends on λ/e2 . Unless this parameter is very large or small, numerical
evaluations show that the numerical coefficient is of order unity.
    For strings formed at the Grand Unified phase transition η ∼ 1016 GeV, we
find µ ∼ 1022 gms/cm which is like the mass of a mountain range packed into
a centimeter of string. When calculating the gravitational effects of strings
µ always appears in the dimensionless combination Gµ. For GUT strings,
Gµ ∼ 10−6 .
a Unlike in the case of the Z
                             2 domain wall, the Bogomolnyi trick over here works only for
the form of the potential given in eq. (68) and with critical coupling.

                                           18
3.3   Semilocal and electroweak strings
The standard model symmetry breaking is SU (2)L ×U (1)Y → U (1)em and does
not give topological strings. However, it still contains embedded strings which
can be perturbatively stable for a range of parameters which are not realized
in Nature. In these lectures I will only briefly describe semilocal strings 5 .
    Consider the generalization of the Abelian Higgs model in which the com-
plex scalar field is replaced by an SU (2) doublet ΦT = (φ1 , φ2 ). The action
is
                 "                                                2 #
                                                               η2
                                                      
                                      1
         Z
              4                  2            µν          †
    S = d x |(∂µ − iqYµ )Φ| − Yµν Y               − λ Φ Φ−              ,      (73)
                                      4                         2

where Yµ is the U (1) gauge potential and Yµν = ∂µ Yν − ∂ν Yµ its field strength.
     This model has symmetry under G = [SU (2)global × U (1)local ]/Z2 . Ele-
ments of the SU (2)global act on the Higgs doublet, while elements of U (1)local
multiply the doublet by an overall phase and transform the gauge field in the
usual manner. The action of the center of SU (2)global on the Higgs doublet
is identical to a U (1)global phase rotation by π. This is the reason for the Z2
identification. The model in eq. (73) is just the scalar sector of the Glashow-
Salam-Weinberg (GSW) electroweak model with sin2 θw = 1.
     Once Φ acquires a vacuum expectation value, the symmetry breaks down
to H = U (1)global , as in the GSW model. The vacuum manifold is S 3 . This
may also be seen by minimizing the potential explicitly. The vacuum manifold
is described by Φ† Φ = η 2 /2 which is a three sphere. Hence there are no
incontractable paths on the vacuum manifold. Yet, it is possible to perform a
Bogomolnyi type analysis to find that the configuration:
                                       
                                        0           v(ρ)
                         Φ = f (ρ)eiθ       , Yθ =                           (74)
                                        1            qρ

is a solution in cylindrical coordinates (ρ, θ). The profile functions f (ρ) and
v(ρ) can be determined by solving the Bogomolnyi equations.
     It is also possible to show that the solution is perturbatively stable when
2λ < q 2 , neutrally stable at critical coupling (2λ = q 2 ) and unstable for 2λ >
q2 .
     For the case when the SU(2) is gauged, the string solution continues to
exist and can be stable for sin2 θw > 0.9 if the scalar mass is small. In the
standard model, however, sin2 θw = 0.23 and the string solution is certainly
unstable. Certain external conditions (eg. a magnetic field) can stablize the
string.

                                        19
3.4   Formation and evolution
The formation of strings has been studied by numerical methods. Here one
throws down U (1) phases on a lattice and checks for topological winding around
the plaquettes. If the winding around a plaquette is non-trivial, it means that
a string is passing through it. Then the strings are connected and in this way
one obtains a network of closed and open strings.
     The lattice simulations show several interesting properties of the initial
network of strings. First and foremost is the result that most (over 80%) of
the string density is in strings that are infinite. Secondly, the string loops
occur in a scale invariant distribution – that is, the number density of loops
having size between R and R + dR is proportional to dR/R4 , just as would
be expected based on dimensional analysis. Thirdly, the long strings have
a Brownian shape and so the length l of string in a distance R is given by:
l ∝ R2 .
     There has been much effort in extending the lattice simulations to make
them more realistic and closer to what might actually happen at a phase tran-
sition. However, the essential results of the lattice simulations have held up
very well. There has also been a lot of theoretical and experimental effort de-
voted to determining the density of defects after the phase transition. (In the
simulations the density of defects is set by the lattice spacing.) The statistical
properties of the network described above are expected to be insensitive to
the initial string density. The exact fraction of strings in infinite strings might
vary somewhat.
     Once the string network has formed, it evolves under the forces that we
discussed in the domain wall case: (i) tension, (ii) friction with ambient mat-
ter, (iii) Hubble expansion, (iv) intercommuting (reconnection) when strings
collide, and (iv) energy loss mechanisms such as gravitational wave emission.
Of these factors, frictional forces are important for a short period (for GUT
strings) since the Hubble expansion dilutes the ambient matter. The energy
loss mechanisms are important but to calculate their effect on the string dy-
namics is a nasty back-reaction problem. The “zeroth order” factors are the
tension, Hubble expansion and intercommutings.
     Ignoring friction, energy loss and intercommutings for now, the strings
move according to the Nambu-Goto action in a background FRW spacetime:
                                      Z      p
                              S = −µ d2 σ −g (2)                               (75)

where g (2) is the determinant of the two dimensional string world-sheet metric.
If the string worldsheet is written as: xµ (σ a ) with a = 0, 1 where (σ 0 , σ 1 ) are

                                         20
the worldsheet coordinates, then the worldsheet metric is:
                               (2)
                             gab = gµν ∂a xµ ∂b xν                         (76)

where, gµν is the four dimensional spacetime metric in which the strings move.
    The freedom of choosing coordinates on the worldsheet (reparametrization
invariance) can be used to simplify the equations of motion for the string
derived from eq. (75). We choose

                               σ0 = τ ,    σ1 = ζ                          (77)

where ζ is a parameter along the string at any given instant of the conformal
time τ (see eq. (6)). Then the equation of motion is:
                                                   ′ ′
                                                   x
                        ẍ + 2H(1 − ẋ2 )ẋ = ǫ−1                         (78)
                                                   ǫ
where overdots refer to derivatives with respect to τ and primes with respect
to ζ.
     The equation of motion for a single string allows numerical evolution of
the network of strings but does not take intercommutings into account. In
practice, the network is numerically evolved until two strings intersect and
then the reconnection is done by hand.
     To study the evolution of cosmic strings by solving the equations of motion
is similar to studying a box of gas by solving Newton’s equations of motion for
each particle in the box and taking care of collisions by hand. For almost all
cosmological purposes, only the statistical properties of the string network are
relevant. So one should define “statistical variables” and find their evolution.
The one scale model for string evolution is precisely such an attempt.

3.5   One scale model
As the name suggests, the “one scale model” is based on the assumption that
there is only one length scale that characterizes the infinite strings in the
network 6,7 . (The short loops are considered separately.) If we denote this
scale by L then the distance between strings and the correlation length of a
single string (the distance out to which it is straight) are both given by L.
With time L can change and hence we need to derive an equation for L(t).
    The usual way of defining the length L is by considering the total energy
E in strings lying inside a volume V . Then
                                      E   µ
                                 ρ≡     ≡ 2                                (79)
                                      V  L
                                      21
defines L. The energy changes with time since the Hubble expansion dilutes
and stretches the string network. Also, the velocity of a string redshifts due
to the Hubble expansion. Long strings also lose energy by self-intersecting to
form short loops. This gives
                                         2                   ρ
                           ρ̇ = −2H(1 + vrms )ρ − c                            (80)
                                                             L
where
                                                    dζǫẋ2
                                               R
                              2
                             vrms ≡ hv 2 i =       R                           (81)
                                                     dζǫ
is the average rms velocity of strings and c is a parameter that accounts for the
frequency of self-intersection (the so called “chopping efficiency”). Equation
(80) can also be written as an equation for L:
                                          2             c
                             L̇ = HL(1 + vrms )+                               (82)
                                                        2
(Since the chopping term must vanish if the velocity of the strings vanishes,
one frequently writes c = c̃vrms .)
     The network is said to scale if, at every epoch, the network has the same
statistical properties. Hence the scale L should be a fixed fraction of the horizon
size t. In this case, the energy density ρ in long strings will fall off like 1/t2 ,
exactly as the total matter density does in a radiation or matter dominated
universe. In a universe with a cosmological constant, scaling will hold in a
trivial sense since the rapid expansion will dilute the strings to vanishing energy
density. Scaling will not hold in the epochs during the period in which the
universe changes from being radiation dominated to matter dominated, or from
matter dominated to cosmological constant dominated. Both these transitions
are relevant for examining the cosmological signatures of strings (eg. the cosmic
microwave background anisotropies), making the problem quite hard.
     To check for scaling we write

                                   L = γ(t)t ,                                 (83)

insert this relation into eq. (80) to get
                                                         
                        γ̇   1 c                   2
                           =        − {1 − Ht(1 + vrms )}                      (84)
                        γ    t 2γ
There is a fixed point solution (γ̇ = 0) at the point:
                                c         1
                           γ=                   2
                                                      .                        (85)
                                2 1 − (Ht)(1 + vrms )

                                        22
Note that for a power law expansion Ht does not depend on time. The rms
                                                           2
velocity could depend on time though we can prove that vrms     = 1/2 in flat
spacetime suggesting that it may be a reasonable assumption to take it to be
roughly constant even in the expanding universe. However, we can derive an
equation for vrms by differentiating eq. (81) with respect to time and then
using the equation of motion. This gives
                                                     
                                    2      k
                      v̇rms = (1 − vrms )    − 2Hvrms                   (86)
                                           L

where k is a parameter (the “momentum parameter”) related to the typical
radius of curvature of the strings. The second term gives the redshifting of the
velocity due to Hubble expansion while the first describes the change in the
velocity due to the tension in the string.
    Equation (82) and (86) are the one scale model equations for the string
network. These equations depend on the chopping efficiency c (or c̃) and the
momentum parameter k that need to be specified. The practice has been to
use the values found in numerical simulations. Martins and Shellard 8 give

                                c̃ = 0.23 ± 0.04                           (87)

and a velocity dependent value of k
                                       √
                                      2 2 1 − 8v 6
                             k(v) =                                        (88)
                                       π 1 + 8v 6

4     Cosmological constraints and signatures
Numerical evidence suggests that the density of strings scales with the expan-
sion of the universe and so we have: ρ ∼ µ/t2 . Compared to the critical density
in a radiation- or matter-dominated universe ρc ∼ 1/Gt2 , the string density
is at least a factor ∼ Gµ smaller at all times. So the strings never come to
dominate the universe.

4.1    CMB and P(k)
The energy-momentum of the network of strings causes perturbations in the
metric which can introduce fluctuations in the cosmic microwave background.
The metric produced by a straight string is conical with deficit angle 8πGµ and
photons arriving to us from either side of a moving string have a temperature
difference of ∼ 8πGµv where v is the velocity component of the string trans-
verse to the direction of propagation of the photons. Therefore, on dimensional

                                       23
grounds, the CMBR anisotropy produced by strings is:
                                  δT
                                     ∼ 8πGµ                                (89)
                                   T
which for GUT strings is about what is observed.
     Several sophisticated calculations of the CMBR anisotropy induced by
strings have been done. I would like to draw a distinction between some of
the analyses that have been done for global strings and others that have been
done for local strings. Here I will only discuss the specific analysis done by
Pogosian and me of CMBR anisotropies produced by local strings 9 .
     First of all we need to find the energy-momentum tensor of the string
network as it evolves over time. For this we adopt a model first developed by
Albrecht, Battye and Robinson 10 . The string network at any time is taken
to be a gas of straight string segments of length L and moving with velocity
vrms . Then we evaluate the energy-momentum tensor of the network. For the
evolution, we follow the one-scale model described earlier. A tricky part of the
problem is to allow some of the strings to decay. This is done by eliminating
some of the segments with time in such a way as to preserve the scaling form
of the string energy density. Once the energy-momentum of the string network
is obtained, we feed it into the program CMBFAST to evaluate the anisotropy
and also the power spectrum of density fluctuations.
     Some of the results are shown in Fig. 2. (I am assuming that you have
already been introduced to the theory behind the microwave background mea-
surements.) Clearly there is only one Doppler peak and it occurs at l ∼ 400
and this does not agree with observations.
     It is known that larger values of Ω bring down the position of the Doppler
peak. So Pogosian has recently investigated local strings in a closed model 11 .
The result that the peak position only scales as Ω−1.58 would seem to imply
that we would need to go to Ω ∼ 3 in order to bring down the peak position by a
factor of two or so. However, this result does not apply to perturbation sources
such as cosmic strings where the anisotropy is affected by the gravitational
potentials produced after last scattering. Simulations by Pogosian 11 show
that the peak position shifts to l ∼ 200 for Ω ≃ 1.3 (see Fig. 3). Furthermore,
the closest fit to the data occurs for Gµ = 1 − 2 × 10−6 . While this matches
the GUT scale, the poor fit to the data means that GUT strings cannot be
solely responsible for producing the required density inhomogeneities.

4.2   Gravitational wave background
When local strings oscillate at very low frequencies, they can only radiate
very low energy particles. Frequencies set by cosmic scales are ∼ 1/t and the

                                      24
  100




   80




   60




   40




   20




    0
              10           100         1000
                       l




Figure 2: The spectrum of microwave background fluctuations for the network of wiggly
strings with L = 0.1. The solid and dotted lines correspond to two values of the network
parameters. The observations with error bars are also shown.




   80




   60




   40




   20




               10                100          1000
                       l




Figure 3: As in Fig. 2 but for a closed universe with Ω = 1.3. See the article by Pogosian
11 for fuller account of the parameters used and the underlying assumptions.



                                                 25
only known particles that can be radiated are massless - photons and gravitons.
(Neutrinos are assumed to have a non-zero mass.) Generally the (local) strings
are made of neutral fields and hence do not radiate significantly in photons b .
Then the primary decay channel for strings is into gravitons c .
     To estimate the power emitted in gravitational radiation by a string loop
of length L, it is most convenient to use the quadrupole formula. The only
dimensional parameters available to us are G, µ and L. However, we know
that the power loss into gravitational waves is proportional to one factor of G
and two factors of µ since the power is the square of the quadrupole moment.
Now since the power has dimensions of mass squared, we must have

                                         P ∼ Gµ2                                        (90)

and the length of the loop drops out from the estimate. In the cosmic scenario
we are interested in the average gravitational energy emitted per unit time by
all strings. So we write:
                                  P̄ = ΓGµ2                               (91)
where Γ is a numerical factor. By examining the power emitted by many
different loops, one finds Γ ∼ 100 12 .
     To find the present gravitational wave background amplitude and spectrum
one needs to sum over all strings in the network, include appropriate redshift
factors etc.. The final result is 13 :
                                                         β−1
                              18π 2 (β − 1)2 νGµ
                                                  
                                                    4π
                    Ωg (ω) =                                                            (92)
                             (3 − β) sin[(2 − β)π] Γµωt0

where ν is a parameter that sets the amplitude for the number density of loops
and 4/3 ≤ β << 2 is a parameter that characterizes the typical spectrum of
gravitational radiation emitted by loops, t0 is the present epoch. The peak of
the spectrum is at
                                          4π
                               ωpeak ∼          .                         (93)
                                       ΓGµt0
    The strongest constraints on the amplitude of the gravitational wave back-
ground arise from the timing of the millisecond pulsar. In 1993 the constraint
was:
                              Ωg < 4 × 10−7 h−2                           (94)
b If the strings are superconducting they may carry electrical charges and currents, and then

they would lose energy by emitting photons.
c Global string loops decay primarily by emitting Goldstone bosons.



                                             26
The constraint gets more stringent the longer the millisecond pulsar is ob-
served without encountering noise in its timing. Today the constraint would
be slightly stronger than in 1993. In terms of Gµ, this gives

                                Gµ < 4 × 10−5                               (95)

    The emission of gravitational radiation from strings also contributes to
the energy density prior to nucleosynthesis. If the gravitational radiation con-
tribution to the content of the universe exceeds about 5% , it will interfere
unacceptably with BBN. This gives another constraint on the parameter Gµ
that is slightly better, though comparable to, the one in eq. (95).

4.3    Gravitational lensing
Spacetime distortions due to cosmic strings would lead to gravitational lensing
of background sources. The angular separation of images can be deduced from
the value of the conical deficit angle to be:
                                             d
                               δφ = 8πGµ                                    (96)
                                            d+l
where d is the distance between the source and the string and l is the distance
between string and observer. This leads to an image separation of about 5 arc
sec from GUT strings and is quite large by astronomical standards.
     Initially it was thought that a string would produce a line of lensed images
of sources and this would be a unique signature. However, since the strings
are wiggly, this conclusion is no longer obvious. Instead one needs to examine
the lensing of sources due to a more realistic (wiggly) string. This was done
by de Laix et. al. 14 and the results are shown in Fig. 4.

4.4    Other signatures
Cosmic strings and other topological defects have been considered as sources
for ultra high energy cosmic rays and gamma ray bursts.

5     Zero modes and superconducting strings
The interaction of fermions with strings can often lead to “zero modes” i.e.
zero energy solutions to the Dirac equation in the string background. If these
fermions carry electric charge, electric fields along the string (equivalently,
string motion through a magnetic field) can produce electric currents on the
string which will persist even when the electric field is turned off. Hence such
strings are said to be “superconducting”.

                                       27
         20




         10




          0
              0           10             20
                           arc sec




Figure 4: The projection of a long wiggly string on the sky is shown together with a variety
of point sources (hatched circles). The images of the point sources are shown as unfilled
circles.




                                              28
     The current on a superconducting string depends on the initial current on
it at formation and also on the flux of magnetic field that it has traversed.
The motion of the current carrying string leads to electromagnetic radiation
that can dissipate the string energy. At the same time, the electromagnetic
radiation can cause spectral distortions in the cosmic microwave background.
This places constraints on the density of superconducting strings in the early
universe and also the amount of current on them if they exist.

6     Magnetic monopoles
6.1    Topology: π2
Magnetic monopoles are formed when the vacuum manifold has incontractable
two spheres. The relevant homotopy group is π2 (G/H). As discussed in the
string case, if π2 (G) = 1 = π1 (G), then

                               π2 (G/H) = π1 (H) .                            (97)

Hence we get magnetic monopoles whenever the unbroken group contains in-
contractable paths. We know that today the unbroken group contains the U(1)
electromagnetic gauge symmetry which contains incontractable paths. Hence,
any GUT predicts magnetic monopoles.

6.2    Example: SU(2)
The ’t Hooft-Polyakov monopole is based on an SU(2) model:
                           1 a aµν 1
                      L = − Xµν X + (Dµ Φa )2 − V (Φ) ,                       (98)
                           4       2
                                           a
where Φ is an SU(5) adjoint scalar field, Xµν  (a = 1, ..., 24) are the gauge field
strengths and the covariant derivative is defined by:

                           Dµ Φa = ∂µ Φa − ie[Xµ , Φ]a                        (99)

and the group generators are normalized by Tr(Ta Tb ) = δab /2. Once Φ acquires
a VEV, the symmetry is broken down to U(1), consisting of SU(2) rotations
that leave Φ invariant.
    It is possible to give a Bogomolnyi type derivation of the monopole solution
in the case that the potential vanishes i.e. V (Φ) = 0. The explicit solution in
spherical coordinates is 15 :
                                1    Cr
                          Φ=     2
                                   (       − 1)xa Ta                         (100)
                               er tanh(Cr)

                                        29
                        xj
                                              
                                       Cr
              Wia = ǫaij 2     1−                  .(a, i, j = 1, 2, 3) ,   (101)
                         er         sinh(Cr)
This V = 0 monopole is referred to as the Bogomolnyi- Prasad-Sommerfield
(BPS) monopole. For V 6= 0, the profile functions can be found numerically.
    The mass of the BPS monopole also follows from the Bogomolnyi analysis
and is:
                                     4π
                               M = 2 mV                               (102)
                                      e
where mV is the mass of the massive vector bosons after symmetry breaking.
In terms of the vacuum expectation value η of Φ, mV = eη.

6.3   Electroweak monopoles
The standard electroweak model does not contain the suitable topology to
have magnetic monopole solutions. This is because π1 (G) 6= 1 and the in-
contractable loops in the unbroken U(1) are also incontractable in G. Yet, as
originally discovered by Nambu 16 , the model does contain magnetic monopoles
that are confined by strings. (This is closely analagous to the picture of quarks
being confined by QCD strings.)
    The standard model has a doublet Φ, SU(2) gauge fields Wµa and the hy-
percharge gauge field Yµ . The SU(2) and U(1) coupling constants are denoted
by g and g ′ and the vacuum expectation value of Φ is denoted by η. The
weak mixing angle θw is defined via tan θw = g ′ /g. The asymptotic configura-
tion of the electroweak monopole can be written in spherical coordinates (with
r → ∞) as:                                         
                                 η       cos(θ/2)
                           Φ= √                  iϕ                         (103)
                                  2 sin(θ/2)e
            gWµa = −ǫabc nb ∂µ nc + i cos2 θw na (Φ† ∂µ Φ − ∂µ Φ† Φ)        (104)

                    g ′ Yµ = −i sin2 θw (Φ† ∂µ Φ − ∂µ Φ† Φ)                 (105)
where
                                        Φ† (x)τ a Φ(x)
                           na (x) ≡ −                  .                    (106)
                                         Φ† (x)Φ(x)
     Note that the configuration has a singularity along the negative z axis –
the lower component of Φ is not single-valued here. This is the location of a
real string. As described in Sec. 3.3, this string is the semilocal string when
θw = π/2 and the electroweak Z-string for general θw .
     The electroweak monopole is not a static solution of the equations of mo-
tion but only a field configuration. One way to see this is that to note that the

                                        30
Table 2: The quantum numbers (n8 , n3 and n1 ) on stable SU (5) monopoles are shown
and these correspond to the SU (3), SU (2) and U (1) charges on the corresponding standard
model fermions shown in the right-most column.


                n       n8 /3         n3 /2         n1 /6
                +1      1/3           1/2            1/6         (u, d)L
                -2      1/3            0            -1/3           dR
                -3       0            1/2           -1/2         (ν, e)L
                +4      1/3            0            2/3            uR
                -6       0             0              -1           eR


string is pulling on the monopole and this unbalanced force will tend to accel-
erate the monopole and to shorten the string. Eventually the monopole will
annihilate the antimonopole at the other end of the string. However this fact
may not diminish the importance of the monopole – the important aspect to
consider is the lifetime of the electroweak monopole and antimonopole and to
evaluate if they can lead to some experimental signatures 16 . At the moment,
it seems unlikely that the electroweak monopole can survive long enough to be
seen in accelerator experiments though this issue needs further exploration.

6.4   SU(5) monopoles
The Grand Unified symmetry breaking SU (5) → [SU (3) × SU (2) × U (1)]/Z6
leads to topological magnetic monopoles. The magnetic monopoles in this
model have been constructed 17 . Here I will not go into the details of the con-
struction. Instead I will only point out an interesting feature of the spectrum
of stable magnetic monopoles.
     The winding one monopole in the model has SU(3), SU(2) and U(1)
charges. Then one can construct higher winding monopoles by assembling
together unit winding monopoles. In some cases, the assembly will be stable
while in other cases the higher winding monopole will be unstable to decay-
ing into lower winding monopoles. It turns out that, for a broad range of
parameters, the stable monopoles are the winding ±1, ±2, ±3, ±4, and ±6
monopoles. The magnetic charges on these can be calculated. As shown in
Table II an interesting feature is that the known quarks and leptons have pre-
cisely the same spectrum of charges in the electric sector! This observation has
led to the possibility that it might be possible to understand the fundamental
particles as magnetic monopoles 18 .



                                           31
6.5    Cosmology of monopoles
Once magnetic monopoles are produced at a phase transition in the early uni-
verse, their energy density will redshift like pressureless matter ρm ∝ 1/a3 .
The radiation redshifts as ργ ∝ 1/a4 . Hence magnetic monopoles will start
dominating the universe at some epoch. The exact epoch of domination will de-
pend on the details of monopole formation and their evolution. However, even
if we assume one monopole per causal horizon at formation, GUT monopoles
would have started dominating well before big bang nucleosynthesis, which is
clearly in conflict with observations 19,20 .
     Another bound on the monopole density arises from the observation that
galaxies have magnetic fields that would accelerate any magnetic monopoles
that are present. In this way the monopoles would dissipate the magnetic
field. This “Parker bound” leads to a constraint that is stronger than the
cosmological constraint for lighter monopoles 21 .
     The present constraints on monopoles imply that magnetic monopoles
must be more massive than about 1010 GeV if they are to be present in cos-
mology. For certain types of monopoles (eg. those that catalyse proton decay),
the constraints from stellar physics can be much stronger.
     The constraints on magnetic monopoles are clearly in conflict with the
result that the GUT phase transition must have produced magnetic monopoles.
Hence either the GUT philosophy is incorrect, or the standard FRW cosmology
is incorrect. The popular solution to the monopole over-abundance problem
is that the standard cosmology should be modified to include an inflationary
phase of the universe. Then the monopole producing GUT phase transition
occurs during the inflationary stage and any monopoles that were produced
are rapidly diluted to insignificant densities. Other possible solutions are to (i)
modify particle physics such that the monopoles get connected by strings and
then annihilate, 22 (ii) never have an epoch where the Grand Unified symmetry
is restored 23 , and (iii) produce domain walls that sweep away the monopoles
2
  .

7     Further reading
The topological defects literature is vast and the citations have not done jus-
tice to all the work that has been done. Fortunately a number of excellent
review articles and books have been written that can be a guide to the original
literature. Here are some of these articles:

      • “Solitons and Particles”, eds. C. Rebbi and G. Soliani (World Scientific,
        Singapore, 1984). This is an invaluable resource for learning the subject

                                        32
     and for reading most of the classic papers on the field theoretic aspects.

   • “Cosmic Strings and Other Topological Defects”, A. Vilenkin and E.P.S.
     Shellard, Cambridge University Press (1994). This is a comprehensive
     description of the field.

   • M.B. Hindmarsh and T.W.B. Kibble, Rept. Prog. Phys. 58, 477 (1995).
     An excellent discussion of the many different facets of cosmic strings.

   • P. Goddard and D. I. Olive, Rep. Prog. Phys. 41 1357-1437 (1978). A
     classic on magnetic monopoles.

   • S. Coleman, “The magnetic monopoles, fifty years later”, in: The Unity
     of Fundamental Interactions, ed A. Zichichi (Plenum, London, 1983).
     Another classic.

   • J. Preskill, “Vortices and monopoles”, in: Architecture of Fundamental
     Interactions at Short Distance, eds P. Ramond and R. Stora (Elsevier,
     1987). And yet another.

   • “Semilocal and Electroweak Strings”, A. Achúcarro and T. Vachaspati,
     Phys. Rep. 327, 347 (2000).

   • “Aspects of 3 He and the Standard Electroweak Model”, G.E. Volovik
     and T. Vachaspati, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B10 471-521 (1996). A review
     of topological defects in He-3 with a particle physics connection.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Department of Energy, USA.

References
  1. E. B. Bogomolny, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 24 449 (1976); reprinted in
     “Solitons and Particles”, eds. C. Rebbi and G. Soliani (World Scientific,
     Singapore, 1984).
  2. G. Dvali, H. Liu and T. Vachaspati, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2281 (1998).
  3. L. Pogosian and T. Vachaspati, Phys. Rev. D62, 123506 (2000).
  4. T. Vachaspati and A. Vilenkin, Phys. Rev. D30, 2036 (1984).
  5. T. Vachaspati and A. Achúcarro, Phys. Rev. D44, 3067 (1991).
  6. T.W.B. Kibble, Nucl. Phys. B261, 750 (1985).
  7. D.P. Bennett, Phys. Rev. D33, 872 (1986); Erratum: Phys. Rev. D34,
     3932 (1986).

                                     33
 8. C. J. A. P. Martins and E. P. S. Shellard, hep-ph/0003298 (2000).
 9. L. Pogosian and T. Vachaspati, Phys. Rev. D60, 083504 (1999).
10. A. Albrecht, R. Battye and J. Robinson, Phys. Rev. D59, 023508 (1999).
11. L. Pogosian, astro-ph/0009307 (2000).
12. T. Vachaspati and A. Vilenkin, Phys. Rev. D31, 3052 (1985).
13. R.R. Caldwell and B. Allen, Phys. Rev. D45, 3447 (1992).
14. A.A. de Laix, L.M. Krauss and T. Vachaspati, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79,
    1968 (1997).
15. M.K. Prasad and C.H. Sommerfield, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35, 760 (1975).
16. Y. Nambu, Nucl. Phys. B130, 505 (1977).
17. C.P. Dokos and T.N. Tomaras, Phys. Rev. D21, 2940 (1980).
18. T. Vachaspati, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 188 (1996).
19. Ya.B. Zeldovich and M.Yu. Khlopov, Phys. Lett. B79, 239 (1978).
20. J. Preskill, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1365 (1979).
21. E.N. Parker, Ap. J. 160, 383 (1970).
22. P. Langacker and S.-Y. Pi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 1 (1980).
23. G. Dvali, A, Melfo and G. Senjanovic, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 4559 (1995)




                                   34
