                                                                                                     SUSX–TP–94–74
                                                                                              IMPERIAL/TP/94-95/5
                                                                                                              NI94025
                                                                                                     hep-ph/9411342




arXiv:hep-ph/9411342v1 19 Nov 1994
                                     Cosmic strings




                                     M B Hindmarsh†§ and T W B Kibble‡§

                                     †School of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1
                                     9QH, UK

                                     ‡Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College, London SW7 2BZ, UK

                                     §Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences, 20 Clarkson Road, Cambridge
                                     CB3 0EH, UK




                                     Submitted to: Rep. Prog. Phys.

                                     Date: 26 November 2024




                                                                            1
Abstract. The topic of cosmic strings provides a bridge between the physics of the
very small and the very large. They are predicted by some unified theories of particle
interactions. If they exist, they may help to explain some of the largest-scale structures
seen in the Universe today. They are ‘topological defects’ that may have been formed
at phase transitions in the very early history of the Universe, analogous to those
found in some condensed-matter systems — vortex lines in liquid helium, flux tubes
in type-II superconductors, or disclination lines in liquid crystals. In this review, we
describe what they are, why they have been hypothesized and what their cosmological
implications would be. The relevant background from the standard models of particle
physics and cosmology is described in section 1. In section 2, we review the idea of
symmetry breaking in field theories, and show how the defects formed are constrained
by the topology of the manifold of degenerate vacuum states. We also discuss the
different types of cosmic strings that can appear in different field theories. Section 3
is devoted to the dynamics of cosmic strings, and section 4 to their interaction with
other fields. The formation and evolution of cosmic strings in the early Universe is
the subject of section 5, while section 6 deals with their observational implications.
Finally, the present status of the theory is reviewed in section 7.




                                            2
Contents
                                                                           Page
1   Introduction
    1.1 Outline
    1.2 Symmetry, spontaneous symmetry breaking and symmetry restoration
    1.3 Defect formation
    1.4 The Big Bang
    1.5 Unification
    1.6 Inflation
    1.7 Cosmic strings
2   Strings in field theories
    2.1 Global strings
    2.2 Local or gauge strings
    2.3 Vortices and topology
    2.4 Semi-local and electroweak vortices
    2.5 Composite defects: strings and domain walls
    2.6 Composite defects: strings and monopoles
    2.7 Superconducting strings: bosonic currents
    2.8 Superconducting strings: fermionic currents
    2.9 Strings in unified theories
3   String dynamics
    3.1 Equations of motion
    3.2 Strings in Minkowski space
    3.3 Strings with damping
    3.4 Superconducting string effective action
    3.5 Global string effective action
    3.6 Intercommuting
4   String interactions
    4.1 Gravity
    4.2 Gravitational radiation from loops
    4.3 Gravitational radiation from infinite strings
    4.4 Pseudoscalar and electromagnetic radiation
    4.5 Particle emission

                                         3
    4.6 Particle scattering
    4.7 Baryon number violation
5   Strings in the early Universe
    5.1 High-temperature field theory
    5.2 Formation of strings
    5.3 Early evolution
    5.4 The role of loops
    5.5 Simulations of string evolution
    5.6 Analytic treatment of string evolution
    5.7 Inclusion of small-scale structure
    5.8 Scaling configuration
    5.9 Superconducting strings
    5.10 Axion strings
6   Observational consequences
    6.1 Gravitational lensing
    6.2 Effect on microwave background
    6.3 Density perturbations
    6.4 Gravitational waves
    6.5 Cosmic rays
7   Conclusions
    7.1 GUT-scale strings
    7.2 Lighter strings
    7.3 Summary
    References




1. Introduction




1.1. Outline

    There have been rapid and exciting developments over the last few years on the
interface between particle physics and cosmology. Particle physicists pursuing the goal

                                          4
of unification would like to test their theories at energy scales far beyond those available
now or in the future in terrestrial accelerators. An obvious place to look is to the
very early Universe, where conditions of extreme temperature and density obtained.
Meanwhile cosmologists have sought to understand presently observed features of the
Universe by tracing their history back to that very early period.
   The early Universe was an intensely violent environment, so it is not easy to
find direct traces of very early events. There are however some special events that
may have left traces still visible today — in particular, phase transitions. If our
present ideas about unification of forces and about the Big Bang are correct, then the
Universe, in the first fraction of a second after its birth, underwent a series of phase
transitions. Like more familiar transitions in condensed-matter systems, these may
have led to the formation of defects of one kind or another — domain walls, strings or
vortices, monopoles, or combinations of these. In many cases, such defects are stable
for topological or other reasons and may therefore survive, a few of them even to the
present day. If defects exist, they constitute a uniquely direct connection to the highly
energetic events of the early Universe.
   Cosmic strings in particular have very intriguing properties.           They are very
massive objects and may have played an important role in structure formation,
perhaps providing at least some of the density inhomogeneities from which galaxies
eventually grew. Some of their observational signatures are quite distinctive, and
within observational reach.
   In this review, our aim is to explain what cosmic strings are, how they are formed,
how they move and evolve, and what their cosmological implications might be.
   In this introductory section, we review the necessary background material, the
basic ideas about phase transitions, defects and the Big Bang. We begin with the
concept of symmetry and spontaneous symmetry breaking, and discuss the restoration
of symmetry at high temperatures.         Next we examine the conditions for defect
formation at a phase transition. Then we review briefly the standard cosmological
model, the Hot Big Bang, and explain why, in conjunction with ideas about unification,
it suggests a sequence of phase transitions in the very early Universe. The section ends
with a summary of the properties of cosmic strings.
   In section 2, we discuss the topological conditions under which string defects are
formed in field theories. The dynamics of strings are reviewed in section 3 and their

                                             5
interaction with other constituents of the Universe in section 4. Section 5 is devoted
to the formation and evolution of defects, especially strings in the early Universe,
and section 6 to their observational implications. The present status of the theory is
summarized in section 7.



1.2. Symmetry, spontaneous symmetry breaking and symmetry restoration

   The concept of symmetry in particle physics runs very deep. In the space available
we can only sketch the issues involved, and refer readers to the reference books (for
a selection see references [1]) for more detail. The idea that physical laws should be
invariant under groups of transformations is a powerful one, as the theories of relativity
attest. In the context of quantum field theories, symmetries group particles together
and relate their scattering probability amplitudes. The importance of symmetry in
the current understanding of the fundamental structure of nature is such that particle
physics can be characterized as the search for a single underlying symmetry behind
the interactions of particles and fields.
   The symmetries of quantum field theory come in two classes: space-time and
internal. The former are those of the space-time through which the field propagates;
for example, empty space has the Poincaré group of symmetries, consisting of
translations, rotations and Lorentz boosts.       Internal symmetries relate fields to
one another. To implement these symmetries, a field must have some well-defined
transformation properties under the action of the symmetry group: that is, it must
form a representation of the group. The labels of different representations are often
called quantum numbers. For example, the representations of the Poincaré group are
labelled by their mass and their spin. Internal symmetries transform fields into one
another, and (with the exception of fundamental string theory — not directly related
to cosmic strings) there are only finite numbers of fields. The corresponding groups
are finite-dimensional and compact. If they are not discrete groups then they are Lie
groups; thus the study of Lie groups and their representations assumes fundamental
importance in particle physics.      Generally, a relativistic quantum field theory is
specified by the representations of the fields which comprise it (i.e., their masses,
spins and internal quantum numbers), which are then assembled into an invariant
Lagrangian.

                                            6
   The most powerful type of symmetry is the gauge (or ‘local’) symmetry, where the
Lagrangian is invariant under a symmetry transformation which may be different at
every point. (If the invariance exists only for transformations which are constant in
space and time, the symmetries are distinguished by being called ‘global’ or ‘rigid’.)
For internal symmetries this requires a spin 1 field, the gauge field, of which the
electromagnetic field is the prototypical example. Gravity can also be formulated as
a gauge theory of local Lorentz transformations: the gauge field is the gravitational
field itself, which has spin 2.
   Lastly, there is supersymmetry (see for example [2]). This is a powerful symmetry
which relates particles of different spins and, in a sense, combines internal and space-
time aspects. The prospect of uniting the particles of matter (spin 1/2 quarks and
leptons) with those of the known forces (spin 1 gauge bosons) is clearly an exciting
one, which is so far unrealized, for none of the known particles fit together into
representations of supersymmetries, called supermultiplets. Perhaps the superpartners
of today’s particles will be discovered at the Large Hadron Collider currently under
construction at CERN.
   The problem with invoking all these symmetries is how to hide or ‘break’ them.
If one proposes a symmetric Lagrangian, as well as a symmetric ground state for
the theory, then there is a deep theorem which states that the existence of a gauge
symmetry implies that the associated spin 1 particles are massless. Only one such
particle is known: the photon. The resolution of the problem is the breaking of the
symmetry of the ground state by what is known as the Higgs mechanism. This works
by introducing spin 0 fields (denoted φ) transforming non-trivially under the symmetry
group G, and constructing for them an energy density which is minimized at some
non-zero value φ0 . The theory then has a ground state which is invariant only under
the subgroup of G that leaves φ0 unchanged. We say that the symmetry G is broken
to H.
   It is often useful to draw analogies with condensed matter physics, where similar
mechanisms occur. A good example is a nematic liquid crystal [3], which consists of
rod-like or disk-like molecules. The free energy density of this system is invariant under
the group of spatial rotations, SO(3). This is a global symmetry: the thermodynamics
should not depend on the orientation of the sample. However, at low temperatures
and at high pressures the molecules prefer to line up: thus in any particular sample

                                            7
the full rotational symmetry will not be respected by the direction of alignment. The
rotational symmetry is still there, for there is no preferred alignment direction, but
it is broken by the equilibrium state, which has all the molecules pointing one way.
A subgroup of the rotation group is left unbroken, which consists of rotations around
the alignment direction and rotations through π about axes in the orthogonal plane
(the interactions between the molecules do not distinguish between their ends). This
group is O(2), called D∞ in the condensed matter literature. This breaking is usually
denoted
                                     SO(3) → O(2).                                  (1.1)

The degree and direction of alignment of the molecules, when averaged over many
molecular spacings, can be described by a director field Φ(x).            This field must
transform appropriately under SO(3) to describe a ‘headless vector’: it turns out
to be a traceless symmetric tensor. In the nematic phase,

                                 Φij = A(ni nj − 31 δij ),                          (1.2)

where ±ni is the alignment axis of the molecules, known as the director field.
   A good description of the transition between the disordered (Φ = 0) and the
ordered (Φ 6= 0) phases can be obtained by postulating that the free-energy density
for constant fields takes the form

                     f (Φ) = α + β tr Φ2 + γ tr Φ3 + δ(tr Φ2 )2 + . . .             (1.3)

The value of Φ at the minimum of f depends on the coefficients α–δ, which are
temperature and pressure dependent. In particular, the transition occurs when the
sign of β changes. The form of the free-energy function can tell us whether the
transition is first- or second-order: if γ 6= 0, the equilibrium free energy changes
discontinuously from one minimum to another, so that we have a first-order transition;
only if γ = 0 is this transition second-order.
   In the quantum field theory of scalar fields at non-zero (often called finite)
temperature the free energy density for constant fields is known as the finite-
temperature effective potential VT (φ) (see reference [4] and section 5.1). This is in
principle calculable from the zero-temperature classical potential in a perturbative
expansion in powers of h̄, the loop expansion. One finds that broken symmetries in
quantum field theories are almost always restored at high enough temperatures.

                                             8
1.3. Defect formation

   In some phase transitions it happens that the order parameter does not take up
its equilibrium magnitude everywhere, and indeed may vanish inside objects known
as topological defects. Defects may be two-, one- or zero-dimensional, and their origin
lies in the topological properties of the set of equilibrium states, i.e. the minima of the
free energy or the effective potential.
   As an example, let us take a theory of a single real scalar field φ, with a reflection
symmetry φ ↔ −φ. The energy functional for static fields has the form

                                  H = 21 (∇φ)2 + V (φ),                              (1.4)

where the zero temperature classical potential is V (φ) = 81 λ(φ2 −η 2 )2 . The equilibrium
states have φ = φ± = ±η. Suppose that in one region of space we find the field at
φ+ , and nearby at φ− . Then along any path joining these two regions the field must
necessarily pass through zero at least once. The set of points where the field vanishes
form a two-dimensional surface, or domain wall, which separates domains of φ = φ+
from domains of φ = φ− . There is energy associated with the wall, because the
potential energy density inside is higher than its equilibrium value, and also because
the field is not constant.
   It is the disconnected nature of the set of equilibrium states of the theory
which allows domain walls to exist. Other types of defect have different topological
requirements, which we shall discuss in section 2. Here we will merely note that
our example system, the nematic liquid crystal, allows both line and point defects
[5]. (In the condensed matter literature, such defects, arising from broken rotational
symmetries, are called disclinations.) Around the line disclinations the molecules
change their orientation by a rotation through angle π around an orthogonal axis,
while in a point defect the molecules are in a ‘hedgehog’ configuration, directed away
from a central point. Along the central lines and points of the disclinations, the
molecules cannot have any alignment directions and so the order parameter vanishes.
   In section 5.2 we consider in detail how strings (line defects) are formed in
cosmological phase transitions [6]. However, the analogy between the nematic liquid
crystal and a field theory makes it plausible that what happens in the laboratory in
a cooling sample of the liquid crystal also happens in the early universe. Figure 1.1
shows a sequence of frames taken from a video of an isotropic-nematic phase transition

                                            9
in action [7]. The transition is first order, and we see that it proceeds by the nucleation
of bubbles of the low temperature, nematic phase. These bubbles grow, so reducing the
total energy of the system, and then finally merge. Out of the mess emerges a network
of strings. What happens is that the director field takes up random directions in each
bubble when it nucleates. When a set of bubbles nucleate there is an appreciable
probability that the field will be so misaligned that disclinations are formed at the
interstices.


1.4. The Big Bang

    The standard model of the early Universe is based on two observational pillars —
the recession of galaxies and the cosmic microwave background.
    Hubble observed in 1926 that recession velocities determined from redshifts are
roughly proportional to distance [8]:

                                          v = Hr,                                    (1.5)

where H is the Hubble parameter,

                               H = 100h km s−1 Mpc−1 .

                                                < h < 1, encodes our present
The dimensionless parameter h, in the range 0.5 ∼   ∼
uncertainty. The characteristic expansion time is

                                 H −1 = 1010 h−1 years.                              (1.6)

    The microwave background radiation, first observed by Penzias and Wilson [9], is
the redshifted relic of radiation emitted when the Universe was dense and hot. It has
a very accurate blackbody spectrum, with a temperature of 2.726 ± 0.010 K [10].
    It is often convenient to use comoving coordinates, so that (neglecting small
random velocities) each galaxy retains the same fixed coordinates. The true distance
r(t) to a galaxy is related to its coordinate distance x by a universal scale factor a(t):

                                        r(t) = a(t)x.                                (1.7)

Hubble’s law, (1.5), then follows, with
                                                  ȧ
                                          H=         .                               (1.8)
                                                  a

                                             10
The redshifts of distant objects are given by 1 + z = a(t0 )/a(t), where t0 is the current
time and t is the time when the radiation was emitted by the object.
   The evolution of the scale factor a is described according to general relativity by
the Friedmann equation,
                                   ȧ2   8πG   K
                                     2
                                       =     ρ− 2,                                   (1.9)
                                   a      3    a
where G is Newton’s constant, ρ the mass density in the Universe (assumed
homogeneous on the scales of interest), and K a constant, the (uniform) curvature
of the spatial sections. If K > 0, the Universe is spatially closed; it will expand to a
maximum radius and then contract, eventually reaching the ‘big crunch’. If K ≤ 0, it
is open and will continue expanding for ever. The condition for closure may also be
expressed in terms of the density: the Universe is closed if Ω > 1, where

                    ρ                3H 2
                  Ω= ,          ρc =      = 1.88h2 × 10−26 kg m−3 ;                (1.10)
                    ρc               8πG

ρc is the critical density. Observation tells us that Ω lies in the range 0.1 < Ω < 2.
Theoretical prejudice suggests that Ω = 1, as predicted if the Universe underwent an
early inflationary phase (see section 1.6).
   The Friedmann equation (1.9) must be supplemented by the energy equation,

                                         ȧ
                                   ρ̇ + 3 (ρ + p) = 0,                             (1.11)
                                         a

and also by an equation of state giving the pressure p in terms of the density ρ. The
most important cases are a universe dominated by radiation, or extremely relativistic
particles, with p = 13 ρ, and one dominated by dust, or very non-relativistic matter,
for which p = 0. The energy equation (1.11) tells us that in these cases ρ ∝ a−4 and
ρ ∝ a−3 , respectively. In either case, ρ varies much more rapidly than the curvature
term in (1.9), so at early times it is always a good approximation to neglect K. The
solution is then very simple: a ∝ t1/2 in the radiation-dominated universe and a ∝ t2/3
in the case of dust.
   The observed large-scale homogeneity and isotropy of the Universe implies that to
a good approximation space-time may be described by the Robertson–Walker metric.
When K is negligible, we have the spatially flat Einstein-de Sitter Universe, with
metric
                                 ds2 = dt2 − a2 (t)dx2 .                           (1.12)

                                              11
   The Universe today is probably matter-dominated, although it has been suggested
recently that we are entering a phase of vacuum energy domination (ρ ≈ constant),
based on indirect arguments about galaxy correlations [11]. There is compelling
evidence that much of the matter whose gravitational effects we can detect, for example
through measuring rotation curves of galaxies, is invisible [12]. Moreover, studies of
the synthesis of helium and other light elements in the Big Bang [13] place firm limits
on the density of ordinary baryonic matter (protons and neutrons), of

                                 0.01 < ΩB h2 < 0.015.

It is therefore probable that most of the matter in the Universe is of some other type,
known as ‘dark matter’. Dark matter candidates are generally classified as either
‘hot’ or ‘cold’, depending on whether the particles were still relativistic when they
decoupled from the rest of the matter in the Universe.
   Because ρrad falls faster than ρmat , the Universe was initially radiation-dominated,
until the epoch teq of equal radiation and matter densities. If Ω = 1, this occurred at
a redshift zeq ≃ 24000h2 , when the Universe was about 1000h−4 years old. Shortly
after this, the Universe became sufficiently cool for the electrons and the nuclei to
‘re’-combine into neutral gas. This happened when the temperature was of around
0.3 eV, at a redshift zrec ≃ 1100.
   These are important milestones, for density perturbations in cold dark matter
can start to grow only when the Universe becomes matter-dominated, while radiation
pressure prevents the growth of perturbations in the baryons until recombination.
   The period when cosmic strings may have been formed is very early in the history
of the Universe, when it was certainly radiation-dominated. The Hubble parameter
was then H = 1/2t. Since K was negligible, ρ was very nearly equal to ρc . Thus the
density was, by (1.10),
                                             3
                                     ρ=          .                               (1.13)
                                          32πGt2
One can also find a useful relation between time and temperature. The density of a
relativistic gas is given by
                                          π2
                                     ρ=      g∗ T 4 ,                            (1.14)
                                          30
where g∗ is the effective number of distinct spin states of relativistic particles (one
for particles of zero spin and 2 for higher spins, multiplied by 7/8 for fermions) [8].

                                          12
Equating these two expressions for the density, we find
                               r
                                   45 MPl     2.42
                          2
                        T t=               = 1/2 MeV2 s.                        (1.15)
                                  πg∗ 4π      g∗

Here MPl is the Planck mass,

                           MPl = G−1/2 = 1.22 × 1028 eV.

(We use units in which c = h̄ = kB = 1.)


1.5. Unification

   It is now very well established that two of the four fundamental interactions of
elementary particles, the electromagnetic and weak interactions, can be described
by a unified gauge theory, the Weinberg–Salam theory, based on the gauge group
SU(2)×U(1). At low energies, the two interactions appear very different, but the
true underlying symmetry emerges above the characteristic energy scale of the unified
theory, around 100 GeV (the rest energy of the W and Z gauge bosons). The theory
exhibits a phase transition at a temperature of this order.
   The strong interactions too are described by a very successful gauge theory,
quantum chromodynamics, based on the group SU(3). This theory may also exhibit a
phase transition, with a critical temperature of order 100 MeV, associated with quark
confinement. (Above this temperature, we have a dense soup of quarks and gluons;
below it we have individual hadrons, like protons, neutrons and pions.)
   The low-energy physics of elementary particles is thus described by a gauge
theory with three independent coupling constants, g3 , g2 and g1 , associated with the
three groups in the low-energy symmetry SU(3)×SU(2)×U(1). These couplings are
energy-dependent, though only logarithmically. Extrapolating from their low-energy
behaviour, it appears that all three will become roughly equal at an energy scale of
around 1015 to 1016 GeV, only three or four orders of magnitude below the Planck
mass. It is therefore very plausible to suppose that there is a grand unified theory,
encompassing all three interactions. This grand symmetry would be manifest only
above that characteristic energy scale.
   If this is correct, there is probably a grand unification phase transition, with a
critical temperature of about 1015 GeV. There is some reason to believe that this is

                                           13
not a single transition but involves two or more separate transitions. In the simplest
models with only a single transition, the extrapolated couplings do not in fact quite
meet. A better fit can be obtained in models with more than one transition, for
example in a model with supersymmetry broken at some intermediate scale.
   Thus the picture emerges of a sequence of phase transitions occurring in the very
early evolution of the Universe. The corresponding times can be estimated from (1.15).
The expected number of spin states g∗ depends on the precise particle-physics model,
but during the relevant period is roughly of order 100. Thus we see that the electro-
weak and quark-hadron transitions occur when the age of the Universe is about 10−11 s
and 10−5 s, respectively, while a grand unification transition would occur at between
10−39 and 10−37 s.
   Of course one can legitimately question whether we really understand enough of the
basic physics to make reliable predictions of the behaviour of the Universe so close to
the Big Bang. So far as electro-weak and quark-hadron transitions are concerned, we
do now have a rather firm understanding of the basic physics. Grand unification does
admittedly represent a very considerable extrapolation from the region where we have
reliable tests. On the other hand, our theories of fundamental particle interactions
work extremely well at ordinary energies and there is no intrinsic reason to expect
them to break down until we reach the Planck energy, the energy at which gravity also
becomes strong and quantum gravity effects necessarily enter. So although we should
be properly cautious, we do have good reasons to think that our basic understanding
can be pushed this far. Naturally, if our confidence turns out to be misplaced, that
would be an even more dramatic and interesting discovery.



1.6. Inflation

   Some discussion is in order of the relation between the concepts of inflation and
of cosmic strings. There are rival theories of large-scale structure formation based on
these concepts, which at first sight appear incompatible, but can in fact be reconciled
if one really wishes to do so.
   The idea of inflation (for a much more complete exposition see [8]) was invented to
solve a number of cosmological puzzles, particularly the horizon problem, the flatness
problem and the monopole problem.

                                          14
   Since the Universe is of finite age, there is at any epoch t a particle horizon;
no signal from beyond the horizon can yet have reached us.            In the radiation-
dominated era of the standard Friedmann–Robertson–Walker (FRW) Universe, the
particle horizon at time t is of radius 2t. When we observe the cosmic microwave
background radiation coming to us from opposite directions in the sky, we are seeing
light emitted from regions that were then separated by nearly 100 times the horizon
distance at the time. It therefore seems very surprising that the temperature of the
radiation coming from opposite directions is the same: no causal process could have
established thermal equilibrium between such distant parts of the Universe. This is
the horizon problem.
   Another puzzle, the flatness problem, is why Ω today, as defined by (1.10), is so
close to unity. It is easy to verify that Ω = 1 is an unstable point of the FRW evolution
equation (1.9). To have Ω close to 1 today, it must have been very close indeed at
early times — seemingly requiring fine tuning by many orders of magnitude.
   Almost all grand unified theories predict the existence of ultra-heavy stable
magnetic monopoles. Once formed, they are very hard to eliminate and so would
rapidly come to dominate the energy density of the Universe, exceeding by many
orders of magnitude the energy density in baryons. This is the monopole problem.
   All these problems can be cured by invoking the idea of inflation — a very early
period of rapid expansion in which the energy density is dominated by ‘vacuum
energy’. This is achieved by introducing a scalar inflaton field σ with an appropriately
chosen potential V (σ). The energy density and pressure due to such a field in a FRW
background are given by
                            ρ = 21 σ̇ 2 + 12 a−2 (∇σ)2 + V (σ),
                            p = 21 σ̇ 2 − 16 a−2 (∇σ)2 − V (σ).
The trick is to arrange that in some sufficiently large region these expressions are
dominated by the potential term. Thus we have the strange equation of state p ≈ −ρ.
It follows that ρ ≈ constant, and hence, by (1.9), that a(t) increases exponentially.
Actually, ρ is not exactly constant. The field σ does evolve slowly, eventually reaching
a point where the conditions for inflation are no longer satisfied, bringing the period
of rapid expansion to an end. During the period of accelerating expansion Ω tends
towards 1 rather than away from it, thus solving the flatness problem. The horizon
problem is also cured: during inflation, the causal horizon distance increases by a huge

                                            15
factor, so that the entire presently visible Universe was originally well within a single
horizon volume. Finally, the expansion dilutes the density of any previously existing
monopoles to an undetectably low level.
   Unfortunately, inflation also dilutes any other topological defects, in particular
cosmic strings. At first sight, therefore, the two ideas are indeed mutually incompat-
ible. However, it is possible to reconcile the two with models in which strings or other
defects are formed during the late stages of inflation. We discuss them briefly at the
end of section 5.2.


1.7. Cosmic strings

   In the following sections, we shall deal with many different properties of cosmic
strings in detail. To set the scene, it may be useful, however, to review their most
important characteristics here.
   Cosmic strings are linear defects, analogous to flux tubes in type-II super-
conductors, or to vortex filaments in superfluid helium. They might have been formed
at a grand unification transition, or, conceivably, much later, at the electroweak
transition — or somewhere in between. The standard electroweak model does not
predict stable strings, but some quite simple generalizations of it, entirely compatible
with available data, do.
   These strings have enormous energy. In the simplest, canonical type of string,
the energy per unit length, µ, and the string tension are equal. Equivalently, the
characteristic speed of waves on the string is the speed of light. This equality is a
consequence of local invariance of the field configuration around a string under Lorentz
boosts along its direction. Roughly speaking, one expects that for strings produced
at a phase transition at Tc , µ ∼ Tc2 .
   An important number in the theory is the dimensionless quantity Gµ ∼ (Tc /MPl )2 ,
which characterizes the strength of the gravitational interaction of strings. For grand
unified strings, Gµ is of order 10−6 or 10−7 ; it is useful to define a parameter µ6 by

                                      Gµ = 10−6 µ6 .                              (1.16)

Translated into more ordinary units, µ is very large indeed; for example the mass per
unit length is

                  µ = 1.35 × 1021 µ6 kg m−1 = 2.09 × 107 µ6 M⊙ pc−1 .             (1.17)

                                           16
A grand unified string of length equal to the solar diameter would be as massive as
the sun, while such a length of string formed at the electroweak scale would weigh
only 10 mg. The gravitational effects of the latter are essentially negligible, though
such strings may still be of great interest, because of other types of interactions. In
particular, cosmic strings may behave like thin superconducting wires, with a critical
current ∼ Tc . Superconducting strings interact strongly with magnetic fields in the
universe, and even light ones may have significant astrophysical effects.
   The parameter Gµ plays a crucial role in discussions of the observational
consequences of such heavy strings, for the size of the gravitational perturbations
induced by the strings is O(Gµ); Gµ is then the order of magnitude both of the
seed density perturbations for galaxy formation, and of the induced fluctuations in
the Cosmic Microwave Background. In section 6 we shall see that µ6 ∼ 1 provides
fluctuations of the order of 10−5 , just the right magnitude to explain the observed
features of the CMB spectrum and the matter distribution in the Universe today.
The fact that grand unified strings give the right amplitude for the gravitational
perturbations is a good feature of string-based theories of structure formation. In
theories invoking the amplification of quantum fluctuations during inflation, the figure
10−5 is not easily explained [8].




2. Strings in Field Theories


2.1. Global strings

The simplest theory exhibiting string solutions is that of a complex scalar field φ(x),
described by the Lagrangian density

                      L = ∂µ φ∗ ∂ µ φ − V (φ),        V = 21 λ(|φ|2 − 21 η 2 )2    (2.1)

which has a global U(1) symmetry, under the transformation φ → φeiα , with α
constant.
   The Euler-Lagrange equations that follow from (2.1) are

                                 [∂ 2 + λ(|φ|2 − 21 η 2 )]φ = 0.                   (2.2)

                                                 17
                                                √
The ground state, or vacuum, solution is φ = (η/ 2) exp(iα0 ) with α0 constant, which
has zero energy. Since the energy is bounded below by zero this solution (unlike φ = 0)
is clearly stable. It is not invariant under the U(1) symmetry transformation: the
symmetry is said to be broken by the vacuum. The mass ms of the scalar particle in
the symmetry-breaking vacuum is given by m2s = λη 2 . There is also a massless particle,
the Nambu-Goldstone boson, which is associated with the broken global symmetry.
It corresponds to space-depndent oscillations in the phase of φ.
    Besides the vacuum, there are also static solutions with non-zero energy density.
Let us make the following cylindrically symmetric ansatz:

                                     η
                                 φ = √ f (ms ρ)einϕ ,                              (2.3)
                                      2

where {ρ, ϕ, z} are cylindrical polar coordinates, and n is an integer.       The field
equations then reduce to a single non-linear ordinary differential equation

                                1     n2
                          f ′′ + f ′ − 2 f − 21 (f 2 − 1)f = 0,                    (2.4)
                                ξ     ξ

where ξ ≡ ms ρ. As ξ → 0, continuity of φ requires that f → 0. At infinity, f → 1, so
                                                   √
that the field approaches its ground state |φ| = η/ 2. Writing f = 1 − δf , it is not
hard to show that at large ξ, δf ∼ n2 /ξ 2 . Figure 2.1 displays f over the whole range
of ξ, along with the energy density


                               E = |φ̇|2 + |∇φ|2 + V (φ).                          (2.5)


Although E is well localized near the origin, it has a ξ −2 tail at large ξ, which comes
from the angular part of the gradient term. This means that the energy per unit length
of this solution is infinite: inside a cylinder of radius R ≫ m−1
                                                               s  it is approximately
πn2 η 2 ln(ms R).
    These solutions are known as global strings or vortices [14,15]. They are closely
related to the vortices in superfluid helium–4 [16,17], where the complex scalar field
                                                                        ↔
represents the wave function of the condensed 4 He atoms, and −iφ∗ ∂ k φ/2|φ|2 is
proportional to the superfluid velocity, which has a circulation around the vortex
core. In particle cosmology, the most commonly considered global strings are those
associated with a spontaneously broken axial U(1) symmetry, the axion strings [14,18].

                                           18
2.2. Local or gauge strings

Let us now consider what happens when the internal symmetry is a local one. This
requires the introduction of a vector field Aµ . The Lagrangian density is then

                             L = − 14 Fµν F µν + |Dµ φ|2 − V (φ),                             (2.6)

where Dµ = ∂µ + ieAµ and Fµν = ∂µ Aν − ∂ν Aµ . This is the Abelian Higgs model [1],
the prototypical example of a gauge field theory with spontaneous symmetry breaking.
The U(1) invariance is realized by the transformations

                                                      1
                           φ → φeiΛ(x) ,     Aµ → Aµ − ∂µ Λ(x),                               (2.7)
                                                      e

where Λ is a real single-valued function. The field equations are
                                     2
                                     D + λ(|φ|2 − 12 η 2 ) φ = 0,
                                                          
                                                                                              (2.8)
                             ∂ν F µν + ie (φ∗ Dµ φ − Dµ φ∗ φ) = 0.
                                                                           √
The particle spectrum still has the Higgs with mass ms =                       λη, but the Nambu-
Goldstone boson is incorporated into the vector field, which gains a mass mv = eη.
   A vortex solution still exists [20], but its properties are quite different from those
of the global vortex. Now the energy per unit length is finite, because the dangerous
angular derivative of the field is replaced by a covariant derivative, which can vanish
faster than ρ−1 at infinity. To be more specific, let us choose the radial gauge Aρ = 0.
Then we may write the general cylindrically symmetric ansatz for the gauge field as

                             η                                n i
                         φ = √ f (mv ρ)einϕ ,        Ai =        ϕ̂ a(mv ρ).                  (2.9)
                              2                               eρ

The resulting coupled ODEs do not have solutions in terms of known functions, but
it is straightforward to obtain their asymptotic behaviour:

                                                                  |n|f 2
        (                                            (
            f0 ξ |n| ,                                   a0 ξ 2 − 4(|n|+1)
                                                                       0
                                                                           ξ 2|n|+2 , as ξ → 0;
   f≃                          √             a≃
            1 − f1 ξ −1/2 exp(− βξ),                     1 − a1 ξ 1/2 exp(−ξ),
                                                                      as ξ → ∞.
                                                                             (2.10)
                                                                            √
Here, ξ = mv ρ and β = λ/e2 = (ms /mv )2 . (In the case β > 4, ξ −1/2 exp(− βξ) is
replaced by ξ −1 exp(−2ξ).) Note that the energy density is much more localized than
in the global string.

                                                19
   The local string also contains a tube of magnetic flux, with quantized flux
                                                       2πn
                          Z               Z
                              2
                             d x B · ẑ =     dxi Ai =     ,                   (2.11)
                                            1
                                           S∞           e
       1
where S∞ denotes a circle of infinite radius centred on the string.            This flux
quantization is a result of the vanishing of the covariant derivative, which determines
Ai in terms of derivatives of φ. The phase of φ must change by an integer multiple of
2π, which forces the flux to be quantized.
   Local vortices are stable for any n if β < 1 [21,22]. If β > 1, a flux 2πn/e vortex
with |n| > 1 is unstable with respect to splitting into n vortices carrying the elementary
unit of flux 2π/e. At the boundary value, β = 1, the multiply charged vortex is
neutrally stable with respect to dissociation: it has n zero modes, or fluctuations with
eigenvalue zero. One can interpret these results in terms of forces acting between
the vortices. The gauge field generates a repulsive force, because lines of magnetic
flux repel each other, while the scalar field produces an attractive force, essentially
because it is energetically favourable to minimize the area over which the potential
energy density is non-zero. The range of these forces is controlled by the Compton
wavelength of the mediating boson, and whichever has longer range dominates. For
example, when β > 1 the scalar boson is heavier, the gauge force dominates and
vortices repel. If n vortices are sitting on top of one another, as in the n-unit vortex,
any perturbation is likely to disturb the cylindrical symmetry and enable it to break
apart.
   The vortices in the Abelian Higgs model have condensed matter analogues: flux
tubes in superconductors [23]. There are differences [24,25], stemming from the fact
that Nielsen–Olesen vortices exist in a vacuum background, whereas superconductor
vortices live in a background of charged bosons, the Cooper pairs.
                                                         R
    The energy per unit length of the local string is µ = ρ dρ dϕ E(ρ). Substituting
the cylindrically symmetric ansatz for the fields into the energy functional, it is not
hard to see that it must have the form

                                      µ = πη 2 ǫ(β).                               (2.12)

Remarkably, it is possible to show analytically that ǫ(1) = 1 [26]. Numerical studies
[21,27] show that ǫ increases monotonically with β, albeit rather slowly, going as log β
for β > 1.

                                           20
2.3. Vortices and topology

In order to decide whether a theory with a larger symmetry group than U(1) possesses
stable vortex solutions, we need to examine the topology of the vacuum manifold, the
set of minima of the potential [28–34].
   Let us consider a theory of a scalar field φ which transforms under some
representation of a compact Lie group G, with hermitean generators Ta satisfying

                                    [Ta , Tb ] = ifabc Tc .

We are interested in finding vortex solutions, or finite-energy static solutions in R2 to
the field equations. The static energy functional is
                            Z
                       E = d2 x 41 Fija Fija + |Dk φ|2 + V (φ) ,
                                                              
                                                                                    (2.13)

where Fija = ∂i Aaj − ∂j Aai − ef abc Abi Acj and Dk = ∂k + ieAk , with Ak = Aak Ta . The
potential V is some G-invariant quartic polynomial in the fields φ. By the addition of
a constant we can set V = 0 at its minima, thus ensuring that E is non-negative.
   Let us denote the vacuum manifold by M, and let φ0 be one point on M. Then for
any g ∈ G, gφ0 is also on M. But many different elements g may yield the same point.
It is convenient to introduce the isotropy group (or little group) H of φ0 , the set of all
elements h ∈ G such that hφ0 = φ0 . Then clearly gφ0 = g ′ φ0 if and only if g ′ = gh,
with h ∈ H. In other words, the points of M are in one-to-one correspondence with
the left cosets of H in G; we write M = G/H.
   For a finite energy solution, each term in (2.13) must tend sufficiently rapidly to
zero as ρ = |x| → ∞. As before let us choose the radial gauge Aρ = 0, in which the
fields tend to definite values as ρ → ∞. To make the potential term finite, we require
that in any direction ϕ, φ(ρ, ϕ) → φ̄(ϕ) ∈ M. Let us choose φ̄(0) = φ0 . To make the
first, magnetic term finite, we require that A tend to a pure gauge field, i.e.,

                       ieAk (x) → −∂k g(ϕ)g −1 (ϕ) as         ρ → ∞.                (2.14)

for some g(ϕ) ∈ G. Moreover, we can always choose g(0) = 1, the identity. Finally,
to make the gradient term finite, we require that Dk φ → 0 as ρ → ∞. It follows at
once that ∂k [g −1 (ϕ)φ̄(ϕ)] = 0. Since g −1 (0)φ̄(0) = φ0 , this means that

                                     φ̄(ϕ) = g(ϕ)φ0 .                               (2.15)

                                              21
   Now the fields Aak and φ must be single-valued and continuous, but g(ϕ), though
continuous, need not be single-valued; g(2π) need not coincide with g(0), though we
do require g(2π) ∈ H.
   We may regard φ̄(ϕ) as defining a loop in M, a map from the circle S 1 into M,
based at φ0 . Whether or not there is a vortex solution depends on the topological
characterization of this loop. If it is contractible, i.e., can be smoothly shrunk to a
point within M, then it is possible to find a zero-energy solution with this asymptotic
value, so we should not expect to find a stable vortex.
   Non-contractible loops are classified by the elements of the fundamental group, or
first homotopy group of M, denoted π1 (M, φ0 ). Two loops based at φ0 are homotopic
if one can be smoothly deformed into the other without leaving M. This is an
equivalence relation; the equivalence classes, or homotopy classes of loops, are the
elements of π1 (M, φ0 ). These classes have a group structure: the identity is the class
of contractible loops, homotopic to the trivial loop which remains at φ0 ; the inverse
is the class comprising the same loops traversed in the reverse sense; and the product
is defined by traversing two loops in succession. It is intuitively clear that, if M is
connected, then π1 (M, φ0 ) does not depend on the base point φ0 , and so the first
homotopy group is often denoted simply by π1 (M). If π1 (M) is trivial, comprising
the identity element only, then M is said to be simply connected. A necessary, but not
sufficient, condition for the existence of stable vortices is that π1 (M) be non-trivial,
or multiply connected. Figure 2.2 depicts a multiply-connected manifold: the dashed
loop is in the identity class, while the solid loop is not. Hence π1 (M) has more than
one element, and is non-trivial.
   If G is chosen to be simply connected (which can always be done by going to the
‘universal covering group’, for example replacing SO(3) by its two-fold covering group
SU(2)), then an equivalent condition is that H contains disconnected pieces. In fact, if
g(2π) belongs to the connected component, H0 say, of H, then g(ϕ) can be smoothly
deformed, without changing φ̄, so that g(2π) becomes 1. But then since any loop in
G is contractible by hypothesis, so is φ̄. In this case, the group π1 (M) is isomorphic
to the quotient group H/H0 , also denoted by π0 (H), whose order is the number of
disconnected components of H. Figure 2.3 shows a path joining two disconnected
parts of H. Such a path would be mapped to a non-trivial path in G/H, such as the
solid line represents in figure 2.2.

                                           22
   The Abelian case discussed earlier may easily be included in this picture. To do
so, we have to replace U(1) by its covering group, the additive group of reals, R. Then
the isotropy subgroup is the group Z of integers (transformations with phase equal to
a multiple of 2π). Here M = R/Z = S 1 , a circle, and π1 (M) = π0 (Z) = Z.
   If φ̄ is non-contractible, we may suspect the existence of stable vortices, but there
is certainly no guarantee. For example, in the Abelian theory, all loops with non-zero
winding number n are non-contractible, but for β > 1 and |n| > 1 there are no stable
vortices. In any n-vortex configuration, the vortices will repel each other; the energy
can always be lowered by expanding the spatial scale. We shall encounter a more
interesting counter-example below.
   To illustrate these ideas, let us consider the simplest non-Abelian gauge theory,
with G = SO(3) and a scalar field φ = (φa ) in the vector representation.             We
take V = 18 λ(φ2 − η 2 )2 , so here M is the sphere in φ space of radius η. This
is consistent because the isotropy group of a fixed vector φ is H = SO(2) and so
M ≃ SO(3)/SO(2) ≃ S 2 . Since all loops on the two-sphere are contractible, π1 (M)
is trivial and there are no vortex solutions.
   It is not difficult, however, to extend the model to accommodate vortices. Let
us suppose there are two scalar fields φ1 and φ2 each in the vector representation,
and that the potential is chosen so that at the minima, |φ1 | and |φ2 | are fixed and
φ1 · φ2 = 0. Then the group G is completely broken, i.e., H consists of the identity
element only, so M ≃ SO(3). To apply the general criterion, however, we should
replace G by its covering group G̃ = SU(2). Then the isotropy group of a fixed pair
of vacuum fields (φ1 , φ2 ) is H̃ = Z2 = {1, −1}. So π1 (M) ≃ π0 (Z2 ) ≃ Z2 . The single
class of non-contractible loops in M comprises paths from the identity to a 2π rotation
(paths to a 4π rotation are trivial).
   More detailed study reveals that there are two distinct vortex solutions in this
theory [35–37]. The solutions have the asymptotic forms
                       φ̄A (ϕ) = eiϕM φ̄A (0),       Ak = M ϕ̂k /eρ,               (2.16)
where M is an element of the SO(3) algebra in the adjoint representation. For
                                                                                    √
simplicity, let us take the case where |φ1 | = |φ2 | = η. If we set Φ = (φ1 + iφ2 )/ 2, we
can resolve Φ into eigenvectors of M :
                                          1
                                          X
                            Φ(ρ, ϕ) = η          fAn (ρ)einϕ en ,                  (2.17)
                                          n=−1


                                            23
where en · e∗n = 1. It can be shown that the ansatz (2.16) allows two solutions with
different forms:
(i) Φ = ηf+1 (ρ)eiϕ e+1 ;
(ii) Φ = η[f (ρ)(eiϕ e+1 − e−iϕ e−1 ) + if0 (ρ)e0 ],
as well as their charge conjugates. In the first case the equations reduce to those of
the Abelian string (2.8). Thus we find a solution which is an embedding of this
string in the SO(3) model: the scalar field changes phase by 2π at infinity, and
vanishes at the origin. In the second case, there are two independent scalar fields,
f (ρ) = f+1 (ρ) = −f−1 (ρ), and f0 (ρ). The boundary conditions are f (∞) = 21 and
            √
f0 (∞) = 1/ 2, while at the origin only f (ρ) need vanish.
     We can picture the two types of solution by denoting the magnitudes and directions
in internal ‘isospin’ space of φ1 and φ2 by arrows, as in figure 2.4. The solid arrows
represent φ1 , and dotted ones φ2 . This makes the difference between the two solutions
especially clear: in (i) both fields φ1 and φ2 rotate around the origin, while only φ1
does in (ii). This makes it plausible that vortex (ii) has lower energy, which is indeed
the case in the regions of parameter space that have been investigated numerically
[37]. This is because φ2 does not have to vanish at the core.



2.4. Semilocal and electroweak vortices

So far we have assumed that either all or none of the symmetries of the scalar field
theory are gauged. Let us now suppose that only a subgroup is a gauge symmetry. The
local and global symmetries must commute, and so the general symmetry breaking
pattern G → H has the form

                             [Gl × Gg ]/DG → [Hl × Hg ]/DH ,                     (2.18)

where the subscripts indicate whether the symmetry is local or global, and DG and DH
are possible discrete subgroups in common between the local and global groups. We
can move the scalar field to any point on its vacuum manifold M by a transformation
in G, and factoring out the little group we have as before M ≃ G/H. The vacuum
manifold need not separate into local and global parts, Ml ≃ Gl /Hl and Mg ≃ Gg /Hg .
If
                                    M 6≃ [Ml × Mg ]/D,                           (2.19)

                                              24
with D a discrete subgroup, the theory is called semilocal. If there are vortex solutions
they show quite surprising behaviour, at odds with the intuition gained from pure
gauge vortices.
   Let us illustrate some of these points with the original semilocal theory [38]. This
has a complex scalar doublet Φ with components φ1 and φ2 . The Lagrangian is
constructed so that it has total symmetry U (2) ≃ [SU(2) × U(1)]/Z2 , but only the
Abelian part is gauged:

                       L = − 14 Fµν F µν + |Dµ Φ|2 − 21 λ(|Φ|2 − 12 η 2 )2 ,          (2.20)

where Dµ = ∂µ + ieAµ and Aµ is the Abelian gauge field. This is essentially the
bosonic sector of the electroweak theory, in the limit in which the Weinberg angle is
π/2, so that the W field decouples [39]. In the ground state, the potential ensures
                                                                     √
that Φ gains an expectation value, which we can choose to be (0, 1)η/ 2. This leaves
unbroken a global U(1) symmetry, generated by (τ3 + 1)/2. The symmetry breaking
pattern is therefore
                               [SU(2)g × U(1)l ]/Z2 → U(1)g .                         (2.21)

The gauge symmetry is fully broken, so the gauge orbit space Gl /Hl is isomorphic to
a circle, as for the ordinary Abelian Higgs model. The full vacuum manifold is the
3-sphere, defined by |φ1 |2 + |φ2 |2 = 21 η 2 . Now, although S 3 contains circles, it is not
the direct product of a circle with any other space and thus, by the above criterion,
the theory is semilocal.
   Recalling the discussion of section 2.3, the gauge orbits are topologically non-
trivial with respect to the first homotopy group, and thus we should expect to find
finite energy vortex solutions. From the equations of motion, we can see immediately
that one vortex solution is
                                          
                              η       0                           a(ρ)
                           Φ= √              ,         Ak = ϕ̂k        ,              (2.22)
                                2 f (ρ)eiϕ                         eρ

where f and a are the functions introduced in (2.9) for the Nielsen–Olesen vortex.
Others are obtained by global SU(2) rotations.
   We issued a warning earlier that the topological condition did not guarantee the
existence of a stable vortex solution. In the case at hand, M contains Ml but is not
identical to it, and it happens that non-contractible loops in Ml are contractible in

                                                25
M. In that case it is possible, by allowing the upper component of Φ to be non-zero, to
construct field configurations which lie in M everywhere in the plane (still reaching Ml
at infinity). These configurations have vanishing potential energy density, resulting in
a tendency to spread out in order to minimize the total gradient and magnetic field
energies [40].
   The result of a detailed analysis of this spreading instability [41,42] is that the
embedded Nielsen–Olesen vortex is stable only for β < 1. If β > 1 the string is
unstable and the vortex spreads out to infinity. At the borderline, where β = 1, the
vortices can be any size, and there are also stable multivortex solutions. We refer the
reader to references [43,44] for more information.
   The significance of semilocal strings is that they violate the canonical law about
gauged topological defects: that stable defects exist if the relevant homotopy group is
non-trivial. This has implications for cosmology, for one has to careful in predicting
whether a particular theory will make strings in the early universe. It has also been
shown that the perturbative stability of the β < 1 string persists when one gauges
the SU(2) symmetry, provided the Weinberg angle remains close to π/2 [45], although
for physical values of the Weinberg angle these electroweak strings are unstable [46].
However, they do have some features in common with the sphaleron [47,48], another
unstable defect of the Standard Model, so electroweak strings may still have an
important role to play.


2.5. Composite defects: strings and domain walls

Realistic theories have several stages of symmetry breaking, each associated with a
Higgs field gaining an expectation value. As the early Universe cooled it would have
gone through a series of phase transitions (see section 5.1) at which the symmetry
was progressively reduced, so a symmetry breaking sequence arranged in order of
decreasing symmetry can be thought of as a sequence in time. This section is concerned
with studying situations where H is not the final unbroken symmetry.
   Let us first consider the sequence
                                        φ        χ
                                     G → H → H ′,                                 (2.23)
                                        η        v

where the letter over each arrow denotes the field which breaks the symmetry, and
the letter underneath the scale of the symmetry breaking. We assume that π1 (G/H)

                                            26
is non-trivial. Without loss of generality we may take G to be simply connected, in
which case H must be disconnected, and π1 (G/H) ≃ π0 (H) ≃ H/H0 . For simplicity
we also suppose that v ≪ η, so that when χ gets an expectation value, any change in
φ can be ignored.
    The direction of χ in the vacuum is partly determined by its coupling to φ in the
potential V (φ, χ). Let us suppose that V is minimized at (φ0 , χ0 ), and normalized to
zero at the minimum. Then V (φ0 , gχ0 ) 6= V (φ0 , χ0 ) unless g ∈ H or unless there were
an enlarged symmetry. * In the string background

                    φ(ϕ) = g(ϕ)φ0 ,          Ak = −ig∂ k g −1 /e = M ϕ̂k /eρ,               (2.24)

and it follows that there will be a quadratic divergence in the potential energy per
unit length unless χ ‘follows’ φ around the string, or

                                         χ(ϕ) = g(ϕ)χ0 .                                    (2.25)

    Consider for example the model whose symmetry breaking pattern is

                                             5        3
                                     SO(3) → O(2) → SO(2),                                  (2.26)
                                             η        v


where the boldface numbers indicate the dimension of the representation. The 5-
dimensional representation of SO(3) is a traceless symmetric tensor Φ, while the 3 is
just the adjoint representation of SO(3) vectors. The sequence can be arranged with
a suitable potential containing couplings χT Φχ and χT Φ2 χ, such that

                                              √
                       Φ0 = η diag(−1, −1, 2)/ 6,            χ0 = v(0, 0, 1).               (2.27)

The intermediate O(2) then consists of matrices exp(iαT3 ) and exp(iπT1 ) exp(iαT3 ).
The disconnected component of O(2) changes the sign of χ0 , and so the final symmetry
is SO(2).
    After the first symmetry breaking, strings will form. A typical string configuration
at large distances may be written

                        Φ = eiϕT1 /2 Φ0 e−iϕT1 /2 ,       Ak = T1 ϕ̂k /2eρ.                 (2.28)

* If one could make separate transformations on both fields, this would enlarge the symmetry group

to Gl × Gg , or some subgroup thereof. In this case the string becomes ‘frustrated’ [49].


                                                 27
Thus, as χ follows Φ around the string it comes back to exp(iπT1 )χ0 = −χ0 [49–51].
The problem is a discontinuity in χ at ϕ = 2π, where it must change from −χ0 back to
χ0 . The best that can be done is to allow χ to leave its vacuum manifold, and possibly
vanish, on one or more planes of constant ϕ, creating structures called domain walls
[52,53]. Domain wall solutions appear in theories with disconnected vacuum manifolds,
and can be characterized by two quantities: their thickness, which is the Compton
wavelength of χ in the vacuum, m−1                                   −1
                                χ ; and their surface energy σ ∼ Vw mχ , where Vw

is the potential energy density at the centre of the wall.
    Topologically, the string exists because π1 (SO(3)/O(2)) ≃ Z2 . The existence of
the domain wall depends on the properties of the element h̃ = g(2π) ∈ H; in this
case h̃ = diag(1, −1, −1). Domain walls appear if h̃ is not equivalent to the identity
under the action of H ′ , and thus lies in a non-trivial class of H/H ′ . This condition is
satisfied here, for h̃ is invariant under H ′ , which in this case is the SO(2) generated
by T1 , and clearly inequivalent to the identity.
    Similar symmetry breaking sequences occur in SO(10) models, where there is a
discrete charge conjugation symmetry at intermediate energies, analogous to h̃, which
is broken at a lower scale [53].


2.6. Composite defects: strings and monopoles

Let us now suppose that G is not the full symmetry group of the theory. There will
then be a sequence
                                             σ         φ
                                         G′ → G → H,                                        (2.29)
                                              s        η

and we shall assume that the scales s and η are well separated. If we were unaware of
the existence of the larger symmetry, we would predict strings if π1 (G/H) 6≃ {1}. The
topological stability of these strings ultimately depends on the fundamental group
of the true vacuum manifold, π1 (G′ /H). By analogy with the above discussion of
domain walls and strings, we might guess that it might be possible to break strings
corresponding to trivial elements of π1 (G′ /H) by creating a pair of point defects, or
monopoles [55].*

* Monopoles [56,30,31] play a similar role in 3+1-dimensional Yang–Mills–Higgs theories to vortices

in 2+1 dimensions. Gauge monopoles have finite energy, while the energy of global monopoles is

linearly divergent [57].


                                                  28
   It can be shown that if G′ is simply connected then monopoles exist if and only
if G is not. To see heuristically how this comes about, let us again choose the radial
gauge x̂k Ak = 0, in which the scalar field σ has a well-defined value on the 2-sphere
             2
at infinity S∞ , and maps it into the vacuum manifold M′ ≃ G′ /G. The monopole
field at infinity can be written

                   σ(θ, ϕ) = g ′ (θ, ϕ)σ(N ),         Ak = −ig ′ ∂k g ′−1 /e,      (2.30)

where N is the north pole θ = 0. The image of g ′ in G′ can be thought of as a
smooth set of loops g ′ (τ, ψ) (τ, ψ ∈ [0, 1]), fixed at N for ψ = 0, 1. These loops sweep
over the whole sphere as τ and ψ vary over their ranges (see figure 2.5). Without
loss of generality, we can choose g ′ (0, ψ) = 1. Then, in order for σ(θ, ϕ) to be
continuous at N , the loop g̃(ψ) ≡ g ′ (1, ψ) must lie in G. If G is multiply connected,
and g̃ is non-contractible in G, g ′ (τ, ψ) cannot be continuously deformed to the trivial
constant configuration without g ′ (1, ψ) leaving G. Therefore, one cannot eliminate
the monopole without introducing discontinuities in the field.
   When the symmetry group G is broken further to H by the field φ, the potential
forces φ to follow σ:
                                   φ(θ, ϕ) = g ′ (θ, ϕ)φ(N ).                      (2.31)

However, if g̃(ψ) is not in H, φ must fall into a string configuration near N to maintain
continuity. In this way monopoles become attached to strings in subsequent stages
of symmetry breaking. Conversely, strings can break by the creation of monopole-
antimonopole pairs [55,58,59].
   As an instructive example, let us take the SO(3) model of section 2.3, and separate
the scales of the fields φ1 and φ2 , so that the breaking sequence expressed in terms of
the covering group is
                                            φ1        φ2
                                    SU(2) → U(1) → Z2 ,                            (2.32)
                                            η1        η2

where Z2 = {1, −1}. After the first stage the theory supports monopoles, since
π1 (U(1)) ≃ Z. There are strings of the Nielsen–Olesen type associated with the
second stage, because π1 (G/H) ≃ Z. The significance of the unbroken Z2 is that
strings with winding number n = 1 are stable while those with n = 2 (or any even
n) can be broken by creating monopole-antimonopole pairs. A flux 2 string is in the
same topological class as two flux 1 strings: this leads one to envisage a configuration

                                                 29
in which the monopole is attached to two flux 1 strings at the north and south poles.
This topologically stable configuration, in which the string ‘threads’ the monopole, is
known as a bead [35]. This situation is depicted in figure 2.5: the non-contractible loop
in G, which defines the monopole, passes through the two disconnected components
of H. This path can be divided into two segments, each of which is a closed loop in
G/H, and thus represents a string.
   Beads can also be thought of as kinks [60] interpolating between topologically
distinct string solutions. At first sight there appears to be only one type of string,
since there is only one non-trivial class in π1 (G′ /H). However, the vacuum possesses
a discrete symmetry which is broken by the string solution, given for this model in
                                                        √
section 2.3. If we write the vacuum Φ0 = (η1 , iη2 , 0)/ 2, then this discrete symmetry
is Φ0 → diag(1, 1, −1)Φ0. This is violated by type (ii) strings, but not by type (i).
This broken symmetry means that there are two distinct type (ii) strings which can
be smoothly deformed into each other via a type (i) configuration, which has higher
energy. This is the bead. The number of different string solutions is clearly related to
the number of discrete vacuum symmetries broken by the string solution. If there are
more than two, then the bead can be the junction of several strings [35, 61,62].



2.7. Superconducting strings: bosonic currents

   Models with extra fields can often support currents in the core of the string [63],
which can have quite dramatic dynamical effects, as we shall see in section 3.4. If the
currents are electromagnetic, then the string behaves as a thin superconducting wire,
with an enormous critical current by terrestrial standards.
   Consider an Abelian U(1)×U(1) model with Lagrangian

               L = |Dµ φ|2 + |Dµ χ|2 − V (φ, χ) − 14 Gµν Gµν − 14 Fµν F µν ,               (2.33)

where Dµ φ = (∂µ + ieBµ )φ, Dµ χ = (∂µ + iqAµ )χ, Fµν , Gµν are field strengths
associated with Aµ and Bµ , respectively, and the potential is given by

             V (φ, χ) = 12 λ1 (|φ|2 − 12 η 2 )2 + 21 λ2 |χ|4 + λ3 (|φ|2 − 12 v 2 )|χ|2 .   (2.34)

Let us suppose that the parameters are chosen so that the minimum of V is at
        √
|φ| = η/ 2, |χ| = 0, so that the U(1) symmetry associated with Aµ remains unbroken;

                                                 30
this we consider to be the electromagnetic U(1). (This minimum is ensured by having
v 2 < η 2 and λ23 v 4 < λ1 λ2 η 4 ). As in the case of the semilocal vortex, there is a solution
in which φ and Bµ make up a Nielsen–Olesen vortex, and χ and Aµ vanish.
    However in large regions of parameter space, a solution is preferred in which
χ 6= 0 in the core [27,64,65]. For given couplings, there is a critical value of the ratio
r = m2χ /m2φ , where m2χ = 12 λ3 (η 2 − v 2 ) and m2φ = λ1 η 2 , below which a χ condensate
exists. This ratio tends to 1 as λ3 /λ1 → ∞, which is when the fields are strongly
coupled to each other. Given a condensate, there is, in fact, a family of solutions,
                √                                                               √
for if χ = X(ρ)/ 2 is a solution to the field equations then so is χ = X(ρ)eiα / 2.
This phase constitutes an extra, ‘internal’ degree of freedom for the string. This is the
Nambu-Goldstone boson of the electromagnetic U(1) symmetry, broken in the core of
the string.
    Suppose the phase varies linearly with time and position, i.e. that α = kz − ωt.
Then the string carries an electromagnetic current

                         ↔µ
              J µ = +iqχ∗ ∂ χ − 2q 2 Aµ |χ|2 = qX 2 (ω − qA0 ; 0, 0, k − qA3 ).          (2.35)

Now let us compute ∂t J 3 in the gauge A0 = 0. Providing the current is sufficiently
small for us to ignore time-dependent back-reaction terms on X, we have

                                       ∂J 3
                                            = q2X 2E 3.                                  (2.36)
                                        ∂t

Thus the current increases linearly in time in proportion to the electric field: this
is the London equation, characteristic of a superconductor [66]. Borrowing from our
knowledge of superconductors, we see that if the penetration depth ∼ (qX(0))−1 is
much greater than the width of the condensate, the applied electric field changes very
little over the cross-section of the string, so we may integrate equation (2.36) to get

                                 dI
                                     = 2q 2 κE 3 ,                     (2.37)
                                  dt

where I is the total current and κ = 21 dxdyX 2 . The current cannot continue
                                        R

increasing indefinitely: just as in ordinary superconductors there is a critical current
                                                               √
above which the string goes ‘normal’. Substituting χ = Xeikz / 2, which corresponds
to a current ∼ qkκ, the effective mass-squared ratio is increased:

                                r → r eff = r + I 2 /4q 2 κ2 m2φ .                       (2.38)

                                               31
Thus, if I 2 becomes too large, we leave the region of parameter space where the χ
condensate exists. Since there is an implicit dependence on X in this equation, it
is not straightforward to calculate the critical current Ic from the parameters of the
potential. Roughly speaking, we would expect Ic ∼ qκmφ . Numerical work [64,65,
67–70] bears this out, showing that the implicit dependence of I/κ on X(ρ) causes
the quenching to occur very rapidly at Ic [65].
   Current can also be lost by quantum tunnelling [63,71,64]. The rate per unit length
of this process is estimated to be [64]

                                     dΓ
                                        ∼ m2χ e−2πκ .                            (2.39)
                                     dz

Thus strings with long-lived currents must have large values of κ ∼ v 2 /m2χ , meaning
that the condensate must be large and wide. Stability against quantum tunnelling
then turns out to favour the region of parameter space where λ2 is small [64].
   To summarize, a bosonic superconducting string in this U(1)×U(1) model must
be constructed from fields which are weakly self-coupled but strongly coupled to each
other, and preferably with a large difference between the masses of the string field φ
and the current-carrying field χ.
   More general cases can be analysed. The underlying point is that the vortex
solution need not preserve the vacuum symmetry H. If it does not, there then exist
transformations, generalizations of χ → χeiα , which generate new vortex solutions
[72,51,75]. A supercurrent is set up on the string when the transformations are space-
and time-dependent. The analysis is complicated if H does not commute with the
generator of flux on the string, M , for it is then conjugated by g(ϕ) = exp(iϕM )
around the string, giving a position-dependent isotropy group:


                               H(ϕ) = g(ϕ)H(0)g −1(ϕ).


It is certainly true that H(2π) = H(0), and hence h̃ = g(2π) is an inner automorphism
of H(0). If it is trivial, so that h̃hh̃−1 = h for all h ∈ H(0), then the isotropy group
is well-defined around the string and it is possible to show that there are bosonic zero
modes corresponding to every generator of H(0) acting non-trivially on the string
fields [72,75]. If the automorphism is not trivial, then H(0) is said to be globally
unrealizable, and the vortices are so-called ‘Alice’ strings [73,74].

                                            32
    As one might expect from their name, Alice strings have curious properties. Any
particle transported around the string comes back conjugated by h̃. In many cases
(the SO(3) string of section 2.5 is one of them), h̃ is actually the charge conjugation
operator, and so particles come back as their own antiparticles. Charge conservation
is maintained by the string’s acquiring a balancing charge, although it is charge of
a rather peculiar nature, for it cannot be localized anywhere (continuing the theme,
this has been dubbed ‘Cheshire’ charge [75]). The reason it cannot be pinned down
is that it is actually a non-Abelian charge, and thus is not gauge-invariant [76]. Alice
strings can also carry magnetic charge [77], and a closed loop can collapse to form a
monopole (indeed, this process can be observed in nematic liquid crystals [78]). It is
perhaps unfortunate for students of the bizarre that there can be no Alice strings in
the Universe today, for charge conjugation is not a symmetry of the Standard Model
of particle physics.


2.8. Superconducting strings: fermionic currents

It is also possible for currents to be carried by fermionic degrees of freedom confined to
the core of the string [63]. Let us extend our bosonic U(1)×U(1) symmetric Lagrangian
to include a fermionic sector

                         Lf = ψ̄l i6Dψl + ψ̄r i6D ψr − gφψ̄l ψr − gφ∗ ψ̄r ψl ,              (2.40)

where ψr and ψl are Weyl spinors with chirality ±1. The coupling to the φ field
constrains the couplings to Bµ : they must differ by an integer multiple of e. We
choose ±e/2, and we will also suppose that the electromagnetic charges are both
q/2.*
                                    √
   In the vacuum background |φ| = η/ 2, this Lagrangian describes a Dirac fermion
                  √
with mass mf = gη/ 2. In the vortex background it appears that the fermion mass
is position dependent, and vanishes at the core of the string. Thus there could be
massless states confined to the string. There is indeed a solution to the transverse
Dirac equation with zero eigenvalue [79,80],
                                       iγ A DA ψl − gφψr = 0,
                                                                                            (2.41)
                                     iγ A DA ψr − gφ∗ ψl = 0.

* This theory is anomalous: however, since the gauge symmetry is violated in an instructive way, we

will tackle the problem later.


                                                  33
It has the form ψr = ζr P [φ̄, B̄], where ζr is a constant right handed spinor satisfying
iγ 1 γ 2 ζr = ζr , and P is a function of the background vortex fields φ̄ and B̄. At large
ρ, P goes as exp(−mf ρ), showing the localization of the state.
   Now, we can generate new space- and time-dependent solutions ψr,l exp iβ(t, z),
provided
                           i[γ 0 ∂t + γ 3 ∂z ]ψr,l exp iβ(t, z) = 0.               (2.42)

Using γ 0 γ 3 ζr = ζr , we see that β = β(t − z) solves this equation. Thus the string
supports modes moving at the speed of light in the +z direction only, which we call
right-moving. If we want a left-moving fermion, we should couple ψ̄l ψr to φ∗ instead
of φ.
   These massless fermionic solutions are often called zero modes. Their existence
is actually a consequence of the topology of the background field: it is possible to
show by quite general methods [81] that in the winding number n sector of the field
configuration space there are at least 2|n| − 1 zero modes.
   Let us now consider the behaviour of our string-fermion system under an applied
electric field. In the ground state, all levels of the Dirac sea up to zero energy are
occupied, much like a 1D metal with zero Fermi momentum kF . In the presence of an
electric field E 3 applied along the string, the occupied states move under the Coulomb
force, so that after time ∆t the Fermi surface is at 12 q ∆t E 3 (t)dt. Depending on which
                                                         R

way the surface moves, fermions or antifermions are created. The 1D density of states
is 1/2π, so the result is the appearance of a current I at a rate
                                   dI    1  q 2 3
                                      =           E .                              (2.43)
                                   dt   2π 2
This is identical in form to (2.37), the equation for the current on a bosonic
superconducting string in an electric field. However, it is not strictly fair to call
this a superconductor: it is more precisely a perfect conductor. A metal would also
behave in this way if there were no impurities to scatter fermions from one side of the
Fermi surface to the other.
   It may have been noticed that we are creating a charge density on the string at the
same rate as the current increase. This type of violation of charge conservation at the
quantum level is known as an anomaly [82]. The classical field theory with Lagrangian
(2.40) has two conserved currents coupled to the two gauge fields, but adding the
fermion gives anomalies to both [63,83,84]. We may restore charge conservation to

                                              34
the theory by adding another fermion with charges (−e/2, q/2), a procedure known as
‘cancelling’ the anomaly. This fermion couples to φ∗ where the first coupled to φ, and
so produces a set of left-moving zero modes. When the electric field is applied along the
string, we create (assuming both q and E 3 positive) left-moving anti particles of charge
−q/2 at the same rate as the right moving particles, and thus charge is conserved.
The antiparticles contribute to the current with the same sign as the particles, so the
rate of current increase is doubled: dI/dt = q 2 E 3 /4π 2 .
   Another way to ensure a consistent theory is to set e = 0. This means that we
are considering fermions in the background of a global string (section 2.1). There
still seems to be a violation of charge conservation, but a careful calculation of the
anomaly in the global theory shows that the scalar field contributes an extra piece to
the current [85]:
                                                                ↔
                            µ     1      µ         q µνρσ     φ∗ ∂ σ φ
                        j       = 2 qhψ̄γ ψi − i       ǫ  Fνρ          .          (2.44)
                                                 32π 2         |φ|2
                              ↔
In the string background, −iφ∗ ∂ σ φ/2|φ|2 is in the azimuthal direction, so an electric
field along the string induces an inward radial current of just the right magnitude to
keep the charge conserved on the string. This is an important case, for it models the
interaction of an axion string with an ordinary fermion of the Standard Model [86].
   It was mentioned above that fermionic superconducting strings should really be
called perfect conductors. If there were a way for right-moving fermions to scatter into
left-moving states, then the string would behave like an ordinary conductor and exhibit
resistance: the current would stop growing when the scattering rate matches the
accelerating effect of the electric field. In our fully gauged model, charge conservation
ensures that this cannot happen. The only way that current can be lost is if the
zero modes scatter off each other with enough energy to produce a fermion with
sufficient energy to escape the string. The threshold is when the sum of the Fermi
momenta equals the sum of the fermion masses. This is the analogue of the critical
current in the bosonic superconductor. However, models can be constructed which
do exhibit resistance [87], although they are somewhat complicated. Whether or
not this complexity is in some sense generic to grand unified theories, and fermionic
superconducting strings are therefore rare, is another question.
   In general, one might expect to see both bosonic and fermionic superconductivity
present at once. The possibility then arises that the bosonic condensate χ couples left

                                                 35
and right-movers together [88,89,90]. Remarkably, in the light of the above argument,
this does not destroy the superconductivity, unless χ is electrically neutral and the
sum of the electric charges of the zero modes is zero [90].


2.9. Strings in unified theories

As mentioned above, the electroweak theory does not possess any topologically stable
string solutions, because its gauge orbit space is isomorphic to S 3 , which is simply
connected. Thus if cosmic strings exist in nature, they must arise from the breaking
of as yet unknown symmetries, perhaps those of a grand unified theory or GUT [91].
In a GUT, where the gauge interactions are unified in a simple compact Lie group,
stable gauge strings require an unbroken discrete subgroup at low energies.
   Minimal SU(5) grand unification [92] does not incorporate any such discrete
symmetries: the smallest group to do so is SO(10), or rather its simply connected
covering group Spin(10) [93]. In this scheme, each family of fermions is supplemented
by a left-handed antineutrino and assembled into a spinorial 16. A possible discrete
symmetry D is then just −1 in Spin(10). In order to leave D unbroken, subsequent
symmetry breakings must be performed by scalar fields invariant under this element.
Such representations can be constructed from the tensor product of an even number
of spinor 16s and 16s. The natural representation to use is the 126, which is in the
symmetrized product 16×16, for it alone gives the left-handed antineutrinos Majorana
masses at tree level via the ‘see-saw’ mechanism [94].
                                                126
   The symmetry breaking scheme Spin(10) → SU(5) × Z2 is closely analogous to
                    3×3
the breaking SU(2) → Z2 discussed earlier. The Spin(10) string is indeed very similar
to the SO(3) string of section 2.3 [37, 101].
   From a phenomenological point of view, this Spin(10) theory is similar to SU(5)
unification, and so supersymmetry seems to be necessary for the consistency of
the scheme [95].    There are many other types of SO(10) unification [93]: non-
supersymmetric ones tend to go via S[O(6)×O(4)] at the grand unification scale,
with SU(2)R surviving to lower energies. The strings produced at the first symmetry
breaking do not survive to low energies [53] and would therefore not be important for
producing density perturbations (see section 6), while stable strings produced much
below 1015 GeV could only be astrophysically important if they were superconducting
[96–100].

                                           36
   There may also be spontaneously broken global symmetries in nature. The most
commonly considered is an axial U(1)A or Peccei-Quinn symmetry [102–104], which
rotates the phases of the left- and right-handed fermions in the opposite sense. This
can only be accommodated in a model with at least two Higgs doublets. Its breaking
allows global strings of the type discussed in section 2.1. However, axion strings are
in a category of their own, because the axial symmetry is anomalous. Under normal
circumstances, the axion field a, which is essentially the phase of a complex scalar
field, would be a massless Goldstone boson. At the quantum level however, it gains a
temperature-dependent potential, via its anomalous coupling to instantons, which are
topologically non-trivial configurations of the gluon field [105]. This potential has the
form
                             V (a) = Ω(T )[1 − cos(N a/fa )]                      (2.45)

where N is a model-dependent integer, and fa is the expectation value of the
field breaking the Peccei-Quinn symmetry, also known as the axion decay constant.
Ω(T ) increases with decreasing temperature, giving the axion a mass-squared m2a =
N 2 Ω(T )/fa2 . At temperatures which are low in comparison to the QCD scale of
∼ 100 MeV, a current algebra calculation gives the mass directly: ma = mπ fπ /fa ,
where mπ and fπ are the pion mass and decay constant respectively. The axion
decay constant also controls the strength of the coupling of the axion to ordinary
fermions. This coupling is axial, of the form i(mf /fa )aψ̄γ5 ψ. Thus, the larger the
scale fa the smaller the couplings to fermions. There are very stringent astrophysical
and cosmological bounds on fa . If fa is too low, the couplings to ordinary fermions
become sufficiently large to affect calculations of stellar models [107]. The strongest
                                                                 > 109−10 GeV.
astrophysical constraint comes from SN1987a [108], which puts fa ∼
Radiation from axion strings gives a cosmological upper bound of about 1011 GeV
[109,110,111]. We shall say more about this in section 5.
   Larger global symmetries, such as family symmetry [112], have been proposed. If
there are three families of fermions, the symmetry can only be SU(2) or SU(3), with a
possible U(1) factor for the overall phase of the fermions. There are many possibilities
for topological defects in models with family unification [113], and several models
with strings have been proposed [114]. Perhaps the most intriguing proposal is for
quaternionic strings [115], where the first homotopy group is the non-Abelian group
of quaternions. This results in strings with rather unusual proporties: for example,

                                           37
they can come together in 3-way junctions. Although such strings are seen in biaxial
nematic liquid crystals, very little is known about their cosmological effects.




3. String dynamics



3.1. Equations of motion

    So far we have found a rather limited class of solutions to the field equations:
straight, static strings. Here, we seek an effective action whose extrema give moving
string solutions. The idea is to start from the field theory action and to reduce the
number of degrees of freedom from those of a four-dimensional field theory down to
the coordinates of the two-dimensional string worldsheet. We consider only the case
in which the curvature of the worldsheet is small when compared to the width of the
string.
    We begin by defining the position of the string as the coordinates of the zeroes
of the Higgs field φ(x), which we denote X µ (σ a ) (a = 0, 1). (We ignore technical
complications posed by non-Abelian theories whose strings do not necessarily have a
zero of the Higgs field.) There is a metric γab induced on this surface by the embedding
in the background space-time, given by

                                 γab = ∂a X µ ∂b X ν gµν .                          (3.1)

The Lagrangian density for a static solution in a flat background space-time [20,116] is
just the negative of the energy density. In terms of the energy per unit length, µ, the
action for a straight string on the z axis is therefore the Nambu-Goto action [117,118]

                                                          √
                                    Z               Z
                           S0 = −µ dt dz = −µ d2 σ −γ.                            (3.2)

This last expression is generally covariant both in two and in four dimensions, so it
holds for any background metric gµν and for any embedding X µ (σ), providing the
string remains close to being straight. This is the first term in the expansion of the
effective action for a string in powers of the curvature; we shall consider the next term
briefly below.

                                            38
    Let us first study the equations of motion of the pure Nambu-Goto string. Two
of the three degrees of freedom of the worldsheet metric may be removed by using 2D
reparametrization (general coordinate) invariance [119]. That is, we can always make
a coordinate transformation σ a → σ̃ a (σ) such that the metric takes the form

                                               γab = Ω2 (σ)ηab ,                       (3.3)

where ηab = diag(1, −1). This is known as the conformal gauge. Let us call the
timelike worldsheet coordinate τ and the spacelike one σ, and denote differentiations
of X with respect to τ and σ by Ẋ and X́ respectively. Then the conformal gauge
imposes the constraints

                                   Ẋ 2 + X́ 2 = 0,        Ẋ · X́ = 0,                (3.4)

and the equations of motion obtained by varying S0 are

                             Ẍ µ − X̋ µ + Γµνρ (Ẋ ν Ẋ ρ − X́ ν X́ ρ ) = 0.          (3.5)

    The string stress tensor T µν (x) is obtained by variation of the action with respect
to gµν , giving

                  √                                √
                                           Z
                            µν
                      −gT        (x) = µ       d2 σ −γγ ab ∂a X µ ∂b X ν δ4 (x − X).   (3.6)

    If the string curvature is small but no longer negligible, we may consider an
expansion in powers of the curvature. The relevant measure of curvature is given
                                   A
by the extrinsic curvature tensor Kab (A = 1, 2), which is computed in terms of an
orthogonal pair of spacelike unit normals nµA , satisfying

                                 nA · nB = −δAB ,          ∂a X · nA = 0.              (3.7)

Then
                                  A
                                 Kab = −∂a nA     µ    A        µ
                                            µ ∂b X = n µ ∂a ∂b X .                     (3.8)

In two dimensions, the Ricci curvature scalar R is a function of the extrinsic curvature,
namely,
                                      R = K abA Kab
                                                 A
                                                    − K AK A,                          (3.9)

where K A = γ ab Kab
                  A
                     .

                                                      39
   It can be shown that to second order in K, the effective action takes the form

                                       √
                               Z
                        S=−        d2 σ −γ(µ − αK A K A + βR)                    (3.10)

where α and β are dimensionless numbers. By the Gauss-Bonnet theorem [120],
the integral of R over the worldsheet is 4π times its Euler characteristic, which is a
topological invariant. Thus β does not affect the equations of motion.
   Both the sign and the magnitude of the constant α have been subjects of some
disagreement in the literature [121–128], due in part to some ambiguity in the
definition of the problem. A simple energy argument appears to show that α is in
fact positive 121]. However, the correction term proportional to α is proportional to
the extrinsic curvature K A , which vanishes identically when the lowest-order Nambu-
Goto equation (3.5) is satisfied. Thus, any solution of the Nambu-Goto equation is
actually also a solution of the corrected equation. To this order, α too does not affect
the equations of motion.



3.2. Strings in Minkowski space

   The conformal gauge condition still leaves considerable freedom. To analyse the
solutions of the equations of motion, it is convenient to fix the gauge further. In
Minkowski space, with metric gµν = ηµν ≡ diag(1, −1, −1, −1), the usual choice is the
temporal gauge [117], in which one identifies the worldsheet time τ with the Minkowski
time X 0 . The constraints and the equations of motion become

                              2      2
                            Ẋ + X́ = 1,              Ẋ · X́ = 0,
                                                                                 (3.11)
                                      Ẍ − X̋ = 0.

   This choice has two happy results: the velocity is orthogonal to the string tangent
vector; and σ measures equal energy intervals along the string. From (3.6), we have
                                             Z
                              T 00 (x) = µ       dσδ3 (x − X).                   (3.12)

The general solution to the wave equation and constraints (3.11) is

                                                                        2
                    X = 21 [a(σ − t) + b(σ + t)],           á2 = 1 = b́ .       (3.13)

                                                 40
Thus we solve the Nambu-Goto equations by specifying two curves on the unit sphere
[129].
    If we require a length L of string to form a closed loop, there is an additional
constraint on the curves:
                               Z L                Z L
                                     dσ X́ = 12         dσ(á + b́) = 0.                       (3.14)
                                0                  0

Furthermore, in the centre of momentum frame
                              Z L                Z L
                                    dσ Ẋ = 12         dσ(−á + b́) = 0.                       (3.15)
                               0                  0


Thus the curves á and b́ are both centred on the origin for stationary loops. From
the periodicity of á and b́ it follows that:


                X(t + L/2, σ + L/2) = 12 [a(σ − t) + b(σ + t + L)] = X(t, σ).                  (3.16)


Thus although the defining curves have period L the loop itself has period L/2.
    Another property of loops in Minkowski space is that their mean square velocity
is 1/2 in their rest frame [130], as may easily be verified from (3.11).
    There can be points on the worldsheet where the string moves at the speed of light.
Through the constraints we see that if |Ẋ| = 1, the string tangent vector vanishes,
and so at that point
                                     á(σ − t) + b́(σ + t) = 0.                                (3.17)

Providing X̋ is not zero at that point, the string takes the appearance of a cusp. These
cusps are in a loose sense generic, for b́ and −á are both closed curves centered on the
origin, so it is intuitively ‘likely’ that there will be points of intersection. However,
this need not happen: we could, for example, wrap the curves rather like seams on a
tennis ball [131]. There is also no formal need for á and b́ to be continuous [131]. The
string then has discontinuities in the tangent vector, or ‘kinks’, moving in one or other
direction at the speed of light. It is relatively easy to construct kinky loops with no
cusps. A simple example is a loop made up entirely of kinks and straight segments:
           (                                                 (
               e1 ,    nl ≤ u < (n + 12 )L,                      e2 ,   nl ≤ v < (n + 21 )L,
 á(u) =                                           b́(v) =                                     (3.18)
               −e1 ,   (n + 21 )L ≤ u < nL;                      −e2 , (n + 12 )L ≤ v < nL;

                                                   41
where e1 · e2 = 0. Over one period, this solution changes from a square to a doubled
line in the e1 + e2 direction, back to a square, and then to a doubled line again, but
in the e1 − e2 direction.
   In the simplest class of continuous solutions, á and b́ are great circles at an angle
ψ [132]:
              á(u) = cos(2πM u/L)e1 + sin(2πM u/L)e2
                                                                                  (3.19)
              b́(v) = cos(2πN v/L)e1 + sin(2πN v/L)(cos ψe2 + sin ψe3 )
with M and N relatively prime. In figure 3.1 we display a sequence of projections of
the string over one period for M = 1 and N = 2. This trajectory has two cusps, at
t = 0 and t = 8, on opposite sides of the loop.
   In an infinite universe we may also consider strings which do not join up on
                                       R
themselves and do not therefore satisfy dσ X́ = 0. The simplest such solution is
of course just a stationary straight string Ẋ = 0, X́ = n̂. There is also a simple
solution describing helical standing waves [133]

                á(u) = ωA[cos(ωu)e1 + sin(ωu)e2 ] + (1 − ω 2 A2 )1/2 e3
                                                                                  (3.20)
                 b́(v) = ωA[cos(ωv)e1 + sin(ωv)e2 ] + (1 − ω 2 A2 )1/2 e3

where A is the amplitude, and the pitch of the helix is (1 − ω 2 A2 )1/2 /2πω.
   The temporal gauge has the advantage of being easy to interpret, although
solutions in closed form are hard to find because of the non-linear constraints. There
is another gauge which does solve the constraints: the light-front gauge [119,137].
Instead of the condition τ = X 0 , we identify τ with a parameter labelling a family of
null 3-surfaces, or
                                   τ = X + ≡ X 0 + X 3.                           (3.21)

Thus a constant-τ slice of the worldsheet is simply its intersection with a family of
null geodesics with 4-velocity (1; 0, 0, −1). It is exactly as if we were looking at the
shadow of the string illuminated by a distant source and projected on an imaginary
screen. The independent degrees of freedom are the two transverse coordinates X A ,
which satisfy a wave equation
                                       Ẍ A − X̋ A = 0.                           (3.22)

The constraints are now solvable in terms of these coordinates, for

                      Ẋ − = (Ẋ A )2 + (X́ A )2 ,   X́ − = 2Ẋ A X́ A .          (3.23)

                                               42
The general solution in the light-front gauge is thus given by any two curves X́LA (σ −τ )
and X́RA (σ + τ ). There is in fact one further constraint if one wishes to consider only
closed loops of string, for not merely do we have to make the transverse coordinates
periodic, but X 3 must be periodic too. Hence dσ Ẋ A X́ A = 0.
                                               R

   We shall see in section 5.2 that when strings are formed in a phase transition, they
are random walks. The mean square distance is given by

                                h(X(σ) − X(0))2 i ≃ ξ 2 (σ/ξ)2ν ,                                      (3.24)

where ξ is the persistence length. The exponent ν is 1/2 for σ/ξ ≫ 1, and ∼ 1 for
small σ/ξ. Numerical and analytic studies, discussed in section 5.5, indicate that as
the string network evolves, ξ settles down to a ‘scaling’ solution where it grows in
proportion to the time t. On small scales, ν approaches 1 rather slowly as σ/ξ → 0.
This slow approach towards the value for a straight string indicates that there is
a significant amount of ‘wiggliness’ on the string network on scales well below its
persistence length.
   We would like to have some description of the string dynamics which ignores the
details of the wiggles while keeping track of their effects. Consider for example a
string along the z-axis, which is straight apart from small wiggles [134]. For the two
functions in the general solution (3.13) we take

                        a(u) = kuẑ + a⊥ (u),              b(v) = kv ẑ + b⊥ (v),                      (3.25)

where k is a constant in the range 0 < k < 1 and a⊥ and b⊥ lie in the x-y plane. The
gauge constraints require
                                        a′2 = b′2 = 1 − k 2 .

   We may define an effective stress-energy tensor for the string, by averaging over a
length scale ∆ which is large compared to the wiggles:
                                 µν
                                Teff (t, x⊥ , z) = θ µν (t, z)δ2 (x⊥ ),                                (3.26)

where                         Z t+∆/2            Z z+∆/2
                          1
                                                                    Z
                   µν
               θ        = 2             dt   ′
                                                           dz   ′
                                                                        d2 x⊥ T µν (t′ , x⊥ , z ′ ).
                         ∆     t−∆/2              z−∆/2

We then find that the only two non-vanishing components of θ µν are the coarse-grained
energy per unit length and the coarse-grained tension,

                          µeff ≡ θ 00 = µ0 /k,             Teff ≡ −θ 33 = kµ0 .

                                                     43
Note that the product of the effective energy density and tension remains constant:

                                      µeff Teff = µ2 ,                            (3.27)

a result first derived for wiggly or ‘noisy’ strings by Carter [135], and then
demonstrated for straight strings with wiggles by Vilenkin [134].


3.3. Strings with damping

      The motion of strings in the early Universe is damped for two reasons — the
Hubble expansion and the friction due to interaction with other particles. Let us first
consider the effect of expansion.
      We shall limit ourselves to a spatially flat Friedmann–Robertson–Walker cos-
mology (a very good approximation in the early universe) for which

                    ds2 = dt2 − a2 (t)dxi dxi = a2 (η)(dη 2 − dxi dxi ),          (3.28)

where η is the ‘conformal time’. Then the temporal and conformal gauge conditions
are no longer compatible; one must be sacrificed. It is very convenient for numerical
purposes to keep the identification of worldsheet time with the background (conformal)
time, so instead we drop the condition Ẋ 2 + X́ 2 = 0. We define ǫ by ǫ2 = −X́ 2 /Ẋ 2 =
  2          2
X́ /(1 − Ẋ ), where dots now denote d/dη, and find that the equations of motion
become [136]
                                                           2
                                              ǫ̇ + 2hẊ ǫ = 0,
                                      2     1
                                                  
                                                    1
                                                                                 (3.29)
                        Ẍ + 2h(1 − Ẋ )Ẋ − ∂σ       X́ = 0,
                                            ǫ       ǫ
with h = ȧ/a = aH (not to be confused with the dimensionless parameter h defined
in section 1.4). The effect of the expansion of the universe is to provide a damping
term. The significance of ǫ is seen if we compute the total energy of the string:
                                              Z
                                           −2
                                   E = µa       dσ ǫ.                             (3.30)

We see that ǫ is simply a dimensionless measure of the linear mass density of the
string, which in Minkowski space we could set to be unity for all time.
      A rough idea of string dynamics in an expanding background is obtained by
considering two opposite limits for waves on infinite string, set by whether the

                                            44
curvature radius is large or small compared with the comoving Hubble length h−1
[138,136]. For very long wavelength modes we can neglect the σ derivatives, to obtain
                                                               2
                                      Ẍ + 2h(1 − Ẋ )Ẋ = 0,                                       (3.31)

which has an attractor at Ẋ = 0. Thus the comoving velocity of the string is zero, and
we infer that long wavelength configurations are conformally stretched as the universe
expands. Conversely, we can neglect the Hubble damping for short wavelengths, to
obtain approximately Minkowski equtions of motion

                                              Ẍ − ∂s2 X = 0                                        (3.32)

where ds = ǫdσ. This is also true of small loops of string.
   We now turn to the effect of friction. In the early universe the strings are moving
through a hot medium of particles with which they interact, resulting in a frictional
force [6,139]. In the rest frame of the string, the force per unit length f exerted by a
fluid of density ρ moving with velocity v is, in the conformal temporal gauge,
                                                                         2
                                    f = σρ[v − (X́ · v)X́/X́ ],                                     (3.33)

where σ is the scattering cross-section per unit length (the calculation of σ will be
discussed in section 4.6). A covariant generalization of (3.33) is [140]

                                 f µ = σρ(v µ − γ ab ∂a X µ ∂b X ν vν ).                            (3.34)

Thus the frictional effect of a fluid with velocity v µ (x) is to change the equations of
motion to
                                                      
            µ                                     σρ
        X       + Γµνρ γ ab ∂a X ν ∂b X ρ =                [v µ (X) − γ ab ∂a X µ ∂b X ν vν (X)].   (3.35)
                                                  µ

In a radiation dominated FRW universe, the fluid velocity is v µ = (a−1 ; 0, 0, 0), and
it is found that the temporal gauge equations of motion become [140]
                                                                                 2
                                           ǫ̇ + (2h + aσρ/µ)Ẋ ǫ = 0,
                          
                                aσρ
                                    
                                               2      1
                                                         
                                                           1
                                                                                                   (3.36)
                      Ẍ + 2h +       (1 − Ẋ )Ẋ − ∂σ       X́ = 0.
                                 µ                    ǫ    ǫ

Thus friction acts in exactly the same way as the damping due to the expansion of the
universe. Associated with the friction there is a length scale lf = µ/σρ which acts in

                                                       45
the same way as the Hubble length. If lf < 2h/a, frictional damping dominates over
expansion; the network is conformally stretched on scales greater than lf , while short
wavelengths evolve as for Minkowski space. We will see (in section 5.3) that the cross
section per unit length σ goes as the inverse momentum of the scattering particles, so
σ ≃ T −1 ∝ t1/2 . The density ρ goes as t−2 . Thus, although friction is important at
early times, it eventually becomes subdominant to expansion damping at (physical)
time t∗ given by [6]
                            t∗ = σ(t∗ )ρ(t∗ )/µ ∼ (Gµ)−1 tc ,                          (3.37)

where tc is the time at which the Universe was at the string critical temperature
Tc ≃ µ1/2 .


3.4. Superconducting string effective action

Superconducting strings carry currents in the worldsheet, which have a similar effect
to small amplitude waves in that they change the effective tension and linear mass
density [141–143]. If these currents are sources of a long-range gauge field, then there
are additional complications due to the self-interaction of the string. Let us first
neglect the gauge field, and consider a straight static string with a bosonic condensate
           √
χ = Xeiα / 2. This condensate contributes an extra piece to the action
              Z
         Sχ = dtdzdxdy 21 {X 2 [(∂t α)2 − (∂z α)2 ] − (∂x X)2 − (∂y X)2 }.        (3.38)

To zeroth order in the curvature, the first two terms are constants, unimportant for
the string dynamics. Introducing a pair of coordinates ρA in the plane orthogonal to
the worldsheet, we may write
                                               √
                                       Z
                             Sχ ≃          d2 σ −γκγ ab ∂a α∂b α,                      (3.39)

where, as in section 2.7, κ = 21       d2 ρ X 2 . The phase of the scalar field is therefore a
                                   R

massless bosonic degree of freedom on the worldsheet. In principle, κ is a function of
(∂α)2 , since the current ja = ∂a α reacts back on the condensate; we shall return to
this point below. So, for small currents and curvatures, the equations of motion for
the superconducting string are
                              √
                          ∂a [ −γ(µγ ab + θ ab )∂b X µ ] = 0,
                                        √                                              (3.40)
                                   ∂a ( −γγ ab κjb ) = 0,

                                                46
where X µ now representes the string worldsheet position and is unrelated to the field
X above. Here θab is the worldsheet energy-momentum tensor, given by

                                θab = κ(2ja jb − γab j 2 ).                       (3.41)

By virtue of the equations both the current and the stress tensor are covariantly
conserved: moreover, θab is traceless.
   Let us examine the dynamical effect of a constant current ja = (ω, k) on a string
in a Minkowski background. The stress tensor is
                                                               !
                                         ω 2 + k2    2ωk
                            θab = κ                                ,              (3.42)
                                          2ωk       ω 2 + k2

In principle, it would seem to be possible to construct a stationary loop solution by
arranging that µ − κ(ω 2 + k 2 ) = 0 [97,142,143]. (It is easy to see that (3.40) reduces
to this single condition for a static loop with constant current.) However, one has
to be careful in pushing the equations of motion this far, because the stabilization
of the loop would require a current of order (µ/κ)1/2 . One would not then expect
backreaction effects on κ to be negligible. Furthermore, if µ − κ(ω 2 + k 2 ) were to
become negative, the loop would become unstable to small transverse perturbations
[144]. The existence of classically stable loops has cosmological relevance, for such
objects would have a relatively long lifetime and could contribute to the mass density
of the universe, even to the extent of ruling the theory out [142,64,145]. The crucial
issue is whether or not the critical current, at which the condensate is ‘quenched’ and
the superconductivity of the string is lost, is higher than the current which stabilizes
the loop.
   From numerical investigations of superconducting cosmic strings [64,65,67–70], it
has emerged that null currents (j 2 = 0) have no back reaction, while timelike currents
actually increase the size of the condensate. Loops with null currents (‘vortons’ [65])
seem to be the best bet for forming stable stationary congurations, although it should
be emphasized that all stability studies have been carried out for straight strings. A
general framework for the analysis of the stability of current-carrying strings has been
developed by Carter [144]. The variation of the linear mass density µ and the tension
T with the conserved current Ja = κja gives the string an equation of state T = T (µ),
which can be computed numerically for the model field theory of section 2.7 [69]. This

                                             47
equation of state allows one to calculate the speeds of propagation of transverse and
longitudinal waves, which are respectively given by

                            c2T = T /µ,     c2L = −dT /dµ.                       (3.43)

The longitudinal waves are disturbances of varying current density, which involve
the magnitude of the condensate. If dT /dµ becomes positive an instability develops
in the condensate, and so the string cannot support currents beyond the threshold
dT /dµ = 0. We display the generic behaviour of µ and T for spacelike currents
    √
I = (−J 2 ) in figure 3.2. Classically stable loop configurations can exist only if the
tension can vanish before the critical current Ic is reached. Numerical studies indicate
that this is not possible for spacelike currents without the extra help of a gauge field
[65,70].
    So, let us now consider the dynamics when a massless gauge field Aµ , which couples
to the worldsheet current, is included. The condensate field χ now contributes
                        Z
               Sχ = 2 dtdzdxdy X 2 [(∂t α + qAt )2 − (∂z α + qAz )2 ]
                      1
                                                                               (3.44)

to the action. Provided we are interested only in gauge field configurations with
wavelengths much greater than the string width, we may approximate Aµ (x) across
the string by its value at the centre, Aµ (X), and write
                                 √
                          Z
                    Sχ = d2 σ −γκγ ab (∂a α + qAa )(∂b α + qAb ),                (3.45)

where Aa = ∂a X µ Aµ (X) is the (unnormalized) projection of the gauge field into the
worldsheet. The string carries a gauge current J µ = −δSχ /δAµ , which in turn acts as
a source for the gauge field. The equations of motion for the superconducting string
interacting with the gauge field are then
           √                                √
       ∂a [ −γ(γ ab + θ ab )∂b X µ ] = −2qκ −γF µν (X)∂ aXν ja ,
                    √
                ∂a ( −γγ ab κjb ) = 0,                                           (3.46)
                                              √
                                          Z
                            ∂ν F = 2qκ d2 σ −γ ∂ a X µ ja δ4 (x − X(σ)) ,
                                µν



with ja = ∂a α + qAa .
    These equations first appeared in a dimensionally reduced classical string theory
[146,147]. They arise naturally from a string propagating in a five-dimensional space-
time, where one of the spatial dimensions is compactified to a circle. This is the

                                          48
original Kaluza-Klein construction [148], which results in a theory of gravity and
electromagnetism. When strings propagate in this background, the periodic coordinate
in the compactified direction behaves in the same way as α, the phase of the scalar
field. There is also a parameter playing the same role as κ, which is essentially the
radius squared of the compactified dimension in units of the inverse string tension.
   The self-interaction of the current-carrying string now makes true solutions hard
to find, although perturbative solutions exist for small q. The principal effects of
the gauge field are, firstly, to contribute a logarithmic term to the stress tensor and,
secondly, to cause the string to lose energy through radiation. We consider radiation
in section 4.4: here we find the logarithmic term. Formally, the gauge field from the
string source is                    Z
                         Aµ (x) =   d4 x′ Gret (x − x′ )Jµ (x′ ),
                                                                                    (3.47)
                                  q        √
                                    Z
                                       d2 σ −γ ∂ a Xµ ja δ (x − X)2 .
                                                                   
                                =
                                  π
The leading logarithmic divergence can be extracted [149], and we find that the gauge
field on the string is
                                               q
                                    Aa (X) =     ln(L/w)ja (X),                     (3.48)
                                               π
where the upper and lower cut-offs L and w are interpreted as a local curvature radius
and a string width. This is quite familiar for a wire carrying current and charge. Thus
if ja = (ω, k) as before, the worldsheet stress tensor becomes

                         θab = κ(2ja jb − γab j 2 )[1 + (q 2 /π) ln(L/w)]2 .        (3.49)

The effect of the gauge field is to reduce the effective tension and increase the effective
mass density still further. It was found in [64] that zero effective tension (including
the gauge field) could be reached with purely spacelike currents in a straight string for
some parameter values in the simple model of section 2.7. However, relatively large
values of L/w were necessary, and so it is the pressure in the magnetic field which
resists the collapse of a loop. The local tension in the string remains positive [70].


3.5. Global string effective action

The global string differs markedly from the gauge string in that it is surrounded by
a long-range Nambu-Goldstone field ∂µ α, which falls off as r −1 away from the string.

                                                 49
The string is a source for this field and interacts with it, making a general solution
to the equations of motion impossible. Even perturbative solutions are not without
problems, for there is no small coupling constant in which to expand.
   Let us consider once again the action of a straight string on the z axis, this time
                                                                     √
separating out the Nambu-Goldstone mode α. By writing φ = f eiα / 2, we have
            Z       Z                                 Z
        S = dtdz dxdy[ 2 (∂f ) − 8 λ(f − η ) ] + d4 x 12 f 2 (∂α)2 .
                           1     2   1    2     2 2
                                                                                (3.50)

We know from section 2.1 that the last term is logarithmically divergent, but
                                       R
the first term is finite, and gives −µ0 dtdz. The action of the massless field
α generally has two contributions: a multivalued part from the string itself, and
single-valued propagating Nambu-Goldstone modes. Both can be described by a
single-valued antisymmetric tensor field Bµν and its accompanying field strength
Hµνρ = ∂µ Bνρ + ∂ν Bρµ + ∂ρ Bµν [150–152].               Locally, the fields are related by
Hµνρ = ηǫµνρσ ∂ σ α, (where η is the expectation value of the field away from the
string), but in the presence of the string there are extra terms in the action describing
the coupling between the string and the antisymmetric tensor field. Davis and Shellard
[153] have found the canonical transformation which takes the action (3.50) into the
dual form

                            √                                   1
                 Z                    Z                              Z
       ∗
      S = −µ0           2
                     d σ −γ + 2πη          2   ab    µ       ν
                                          d σ ǫ ∂a X ∂b X Bµν +          d4 x H 2 .   (3.51)
                                                                6

The equations of motion that follow from this action are

                   µ0     X µ = 2πηH µνρ ∂a Xν ∂b Xρ ǫab ,
                                                                                      (3.52)
                                   Z
                          µνρ
                     ∂ρ H     = 2πη d2 σǫab ∂a X µ ∂b X ν δ (4) (x − X(σ)).

In the temporal gauge it is not hard to check that the straight string on the z axis
gives rise to a field
                                     Hµνρ = ηǫµνρi ϕ̂i /ρ,                            (3.53)

which is consistent with α = ϕ. The strength of the coupling between the string and
the antisymmetric tensor field is in fact fixed by this equality [152], which amounts to a
consistency condition: we must always have dxµ ∂µ α = 2π when taken on some curve
                                               H

C around the string. By Stokes’ theorem, this implies that η −1 dΣµν ∂ ρ Hµνρ = 2π
                                                                      R

over a surface whose boundary is C, and hence the value for this coupling of 2πη. We

                                               50
can think of the field generated by the string as a Coulomb-type field arising from
a ‘charge’ per unit length of 2πη/µ0 . This is not small compared with the string
scale 1/η, for µ0 is also fixed in terms of η 2 (and is independent of λ). Thus the
string coupling is always strong. We shall amplify the discussion of global string
self-interactions when we come to discuss radiation in the next chapter.



3.6. Intercommuting

The Nambu action described in section 3.1 is a good approximation for string segments
which are well-separated. However, a crucial dynamical question lies outside the
framework: what happens when strings cross. To answer this question fully, one has
to go to numerical solutions of the underlying classical field theory [154–158]. However,
some qualitative and heuristic remarks serve to set the scene [159].
   In figure 3.3, two segments of string, assumed Abelian, have just crossed. For our
purposes it is irrelevant whether they are global or local. If we examine the planes A
and B, we see that the total winding number in A is 2, while in B it is zero. Thus
there is no topological reason for plane B to be pierced by any string at all. It is
almost as if plane B contains a vortex and an antivortex which, if they get sufficiently
close, can annihilate into radiation. By the same token, plane A contains two vortices,
whose total flux is conserved. Thus the evolution of the fields subsequent to figure 3.3
seems likely to eliminate the strings passing through B, so that end 1 joins end 2′ and
vice versa. The strings are said to ‘intercommute’.
   Numerical simulations of this process for both global [154] and local [155–157]
strings, as well as for superconducting ones [158], confirm that this picture is correct.
The string ends exchange partners, with the creation of sharp bends in each string.
Each bend is resolved into two kinks moving in opposite directions at the speed of
light (figure 3.4). Intercommuting can even be observed in the laboratory, between
line disclinations in a liquid crystal [78], although in this system the strings are heavily
damped and so we do not see kinks.
   One possible complication is if the strings are carrying currents. Suppose string
11′ carries current I1 and 22′ carries I2 . Then, if reconnection takes place, charge must
build up on the bridging segment on string 12′ , at a rate (I2 − I1 ). Since each kink is
moving at the speed of light, the length of that segment is increasing at a rate equal

                                            51
to 2c, and so the charge density between the kinks is ρ = (I2 − I1 )/2 in natural units,
where c = 1. However, it might be argued that if I1 and I2 are oppositely oriented, the
momentum in the current will act to preserve the connectivity 11′ , 22′ . Nonetheless,
numerical simulations by Laguna and Matzner [158] find that reconnection nearly
always takes place, despite the build-up of charge on the reconnected strings.
   Finally, we note that this discussion has been entirely about Abelian strings. The
original argument in favour of intercommutation clearly does not apply to Z2 strings,
where neither plane has any topologically conserved flux. Given that strings cannot
break, reconnection must occur, but it can happen between 1 and 2 as well. This may
be energetically disfavoured if, for example, it leads to the creation of a pair of beads
(section 2.6). If π1 is non-Abelian, then there is an additional possibility: the two
strings may correspond to elements h̃1 , h̃2 , of the unbroken subgroup H which do not
commute. In that case they pass through each other and create a third which joins
the two intersection points, associated with the element h̃1 h̃2 h̃−1  −1
                                                                   1 h̃2 [5].




4. String interactions

The observational effects of strings (see section 6) are the results of their interactions
with the various particles and fields of nature. To some extent, the interactions
are model-dependent: if the strings are global they radiate Goldstone bosons; if
superconducting, electromagnetic waves. They also interact with particles through
scattering off the strong fields in the core of the string. However, all strings are the
source of a gravitational field, through which they become a candidate for the origin
of primordial density perturbations.



4.1. Gravity

The energy density of a gauge string is concentrated in its core, where we therefore
expect a region of high curvature. Rather than working with the energy-momentum
tensor of the field directly, it is often more convenient to approximate the string as
a δ-function source. For a gauge string obeying the Nambu action (3.2), the energy-
momentum tensor for a string moving through a general background space-time was

                                           52
given in (3.6). In Minkowski space, where we can use the conformal temporal gauge
(3.11), a straight string on the z axis has

                            T µν = µ diag(1, 0, 0, −1)δ(x)δ(y).                        (4.1)

The string is a line source with equal tension and mass density, a result which can
be derived purely from Lorentz invariance along the string, together with energy-
momentum conservation [160]. Although the space-time curvature on the string is
formally infinite in this approach, outside the string we may use the linearized Einstein
equations for the perturbation hµν = gµν − ηµν . In the harmonic gauge these are

                             ∂ 2 hµν = −16πG(Tµν − 21 ηµν T ).                         (4.2)

With the source (4.1) the inhomogeneous part of the solution is

                            hµν = 8Gµ ln(ρ/ρ0 ) diag(0, 1, 1, 0)                       (4.3)

where ρ2 = x2 + y 2 , and ρ0 is an arbitrary scale. The linearized solution cannot be
correct everywhere, since the logarithm blows up for large and small ρ. However,
this solution can be matched onto an exact solution by the coordinate transformation
[1−8πGµ ln(ρ/ρ0 )]ρ2 = (1−4Gµ)2 R2 . To order G2 µ2 the metric in the new coordinates
is [160]
                      ds2 = dt2 − dz 2 − dR2 − (1 − 4Gµ)2 R2 dϕ2                       (4.4)

With a new angular coordinate ϕ̄ = (1 − 4Gµ)ϕ the space-time is seen to be flat
everywhere (except at R = 0), but with the angular coordinate running from 0 to
2π − δ, with δ = 8πGµ. Thus it has the form of a cone in the plane transverse to the
string, with an angle deficit δ. Being flat, it clearly satisfies the full Einstein equations
everywhere where T µν = 0. It can be shown that the solution inside the string can be
matched on to the asymptotic conical metric [161–163]. In the resulting metric, the
angle deficit is no longer quite proportional to the mass per unit length, there being
O(G2 µ2 ) corrections [164,165]. Strings may also be embedded in other space-times,
including FRW [166,167]. All that is required is that the space-time have an axis of
symmetry: then the string space-time can be created by removing a wedge and then
gluing together the resulting edges.
    As mentioned above, the form of the string metric was dictated by Lorentz
invariance along the string. As we have seen, there are string solutions which break

                                              53
this symmetry: superconducting strings and wiggly strings (see sections 2 and 3).
Their energy-momentum tensors have the approximate form

                           T µν = diag(µ, 0, 0, −T )δ(x)δ(y),                       (4.5)

where T is the string tension. (There are also radial and azimuthal stresses, dictated by
energy-momentum conservation, but they are O(Gµ(µ − T )) and therefore negligible
to first order [168,165].) The linearized metric becomes, after a redefinition of the
radial coordinate,


    ds2 = [1 + 2ψ(R)]dt2 − [1 − 2ψ(R)]dz 2 − dR2 − [1 − 2G(µ + T )]2 R2 dϕ2 ,       (4.6)

where ψ(R) = 4G(µ − T ) ln(R/R0 ). This can also be matched to a static, cylindrically
symmetric exact solution [168,165]. It is conical perpendicular to the string, with angle
deficit 4πG(µ + T ), but there is also a non-zero Newtonian potential due to the h00
term, which results in an attractive force

                                          2G(µ − T )
                                    F =                                             (4.7)
                                             R

toward the string.
   Around a global string, the energy-momentum tensor does not vanish. As we saw
in section 2.1, there is a contribution from the Goldstone mode (the phase of the
field) which decreases as r −2 away from the string core, and leads to a logarithmically
divergent mass per unit length. Near the string, however, a weak field solution to the
metric exists, which is [169]


   ds2 = [1 − 4Gµ ln(R/R0 )](dt2 − dz 2 ) − dR2 + [1 − 8Gµ ln(R/R0 )]R2 dϕ2 .       (4.8)

Remarkably, the straight global string has a repulsive gravitational force 2Gµ/R.
The angle deficit δ increases with distance, which causes problems at δ = 2π, or
R = R0 exp(1/8Gµ). Unlike the gauge string, this is not just a problem with the
coordinates: there is a genuine singularity at large R [170,171]. However, this is at
such a large distance that the singularity will not occur in physically realistic string
configurations — we do not expect to find a completely isolated, straight string in the
early universe.

                                             54
4.2. Gravitational radiation from loops

An oscillating string radiates gravity waves. The power in gravitational radiation
produced by an isolated loop of length L can be estimated using the quadrupole
formula [172]
                                                      ···
                                           P ∝ G(I ij )2 ,                                   (4.9)

where Iij is the quadrupole moment. On dimensional grounds, if L is the only length
scale on the loop, Iij ∼ µL3 , while each time derivative brings in a factor of L−1 .
Thus we find that
                                            P = ΓGµ2 ,                                      (4.10)

where Γ is a constant for each loop. That is, the power is independent of its size. In
order to calculate Γ, we have to go to a full weak-field calculation. The average flux
in radiation of frequency ω and momentum k is [172]

                     dP   Gωn2 ∗
                        =     [Tµν (ωn , k)T µν (ωn , k) − 12 |T νν (ωn , k)|2 ],           (4.11)
                     dΩ    π

where T µν (ωn , k) is the Fourier transform of the energy momentum tensor. The string
has a period L/2, so the frequencies ω are multiples of this fundamental: ωn = 4πn/L.
In the conformal temporal gauge

                             2
                               Z
              µν
             T (ωn , k) = −µ     dudv(∂u X µ ∂v X ν + ∂v X µ ∂u X ν )eik·X                  (4.12)
                             L

where u = σ − t and v = σ + t. Resolving the string into left and right-movers,
       µ
X µ = XR (u) + XLµ (v), we find that the Fourier transform can be written

                                 T µν = −2µL(U µ V ν + V µ U ν ),                           (4.13)

where
                Z L                                              Z L
                      du                                               dv
   µ
 U (ωn , k) =            ∂u X µ (u)eik·XR ,            µ
                                                  V (ωn , k) =            ∂v X µ (v)eik·XL . (4.14)
                 0    L                                            0   L

Thus the source of the gravitational radiation is the interaction of left and right-movers
on the string. A loop has to be constructed from both, so a loop must always radiate.
   Besides energy, the gravity waves also take away momentum and angular
momentum [173–175]. Again, dimensional arguments indicate that the rate of loss of
each must go as ΓP Gµ2 and ΓL Gµ2 L respectively, where ΓP and ΓL are dimensionless

                                                 55
constants. The radiation of momentum is particularly interesting, since it means
that the loop will be accelerated in the opposite direction — the so-called ‘rocket’
effect [173]. Although each impulse is small, of order Gµ2 L, the net effect over many
oscillations can build up so that the loop is moving with speeds comparable to c
towards the end of its life.
   The constants Γ, ΓP and ΓL can be worked out exactly for simple trajectories
[174,132,175], for which it is found that Γ is in the range 50–100, while ΓP and ΓL are
somewhat smaller, around 5 [175]. For some special cases, the total power actually
diverges, due to the presence of persistent cusps.
   Cusps, we recall, are points on the string where the tangent vector vanishes and
the string formally reaches the velocity of light, usually just for an instant. In the weak
field approximation this results in the metric diverging along a null line originating at
the cusp, and pointing in the direction of the 3-velocity of the string at the cusp [133].
This divergence is not very strong [176], and for loops with isolated cusps the power
is still finite. The only sign of it is that the power falls very slowly with the mode
number n: Pn ∝ n−4/3 [174]. However, if the cusp persists throughout the loop’s
period, the power becomes infinite.
   One should take into account the back-reaction of the gravitational field on the
string [177,178]. What happens is entirely analogous to Dirac’s computation of the
self-force of the electron. There is a logarithmically divergent self-energy which can be
absorbed into a renormalization of the string tension, while the finite parts contribute
corrections to the Nambu-Goto equations of motion at third and higher order in the
derivatives. For trajectories with isolated cusps, the weak-field self-force equations
can be solved numerically. This involves computing the impulse on each point of the
string due to the force exerted over one period by all the others, which is finite and
O(Gµ). Quashnock and Spergel [178] have followed the trajectories of several cuspy
and kinky loops, finding that the kinks seem to be rounded off, while cusps change
their shape and arrive later, but do not disappear, in accordance with the arguments
of Thompson [137].
   An intriguingly different tack was taken by Mitchell et al. [179], who went to the
first quantized string theory in order to compute the decay rate of highly excited string
states, which are in some sense quasi-classical. They found that in four dimensions,
string states with level number N , which in the classical limit corresponded to rotating

                                            56
                    √
rods of length  N , decayed primarily into states at level N − 1 and 1, with a finite
                     √
rate proportional to N . This is a nice result for three reasons: the level 1 states
correspond to the massless graviton, dilaton and antisymmetric tensor fields; the
                                                √
energy in the emitted massless states goes as 1/ N so, as in the classical process,
the total power is independent of the length; and the classical power from the rotating
rod is infinite, whereas Mitchell et al. obtain

                                             P ≃ 360Gµ2 .                                      (4.15)

It is not entirely clear, however, that this can be regarded as the solution to the back-
reaction problem for a gauge string, since the connection between the semi-classical
gauge string and the quantized fundamental string is obscure.


4.3. Gravitational radiation from infinite strings

   Small amplitude waves on infinite strings are also the source of gravitational waves
[180,181]. Cosmic string simulations indicate that there is a substantial amount of this
small-scale structure on the string network (see section 5), and it cannot be neglected
as a source of radiation. For a string on the z axis with small perturbations we can
write
                                          X µ = (t, X ⊥ , X 3 ).                               (4.16)

The flux per unit length in waves with frequency ω and z component of momentum k
through a large cylinder enclosing the string is then [181,182]

            dP                                                         ∗
               (ω, k) = 32πGµ2 ω(|U ⊥ |2 |V ⊥ |2 + |U ⊥ · V ⊥ |2 − |U ⊥ · V ⊥ |2 ),            (4.17)
            dz

where U ⊥ and V ⊥ are ordinary Fourier transforms of the right and left-moving
derivatives of the perturbations:
                     Z L                                                Z L
        ⊥                   du                                                dv
   U (ω, k) =                  ∂u X ⊥ e−i(ω+k)u/2 ,         ⊥
                                                           V (ω, k) =            ∂v X ⊥ ei(ω−k)v/2 .
                        0   L                                            0    L
                                                                                                (4.18)
Here, L is a large repeat length, needed to render integrals finite. Again we see that it is
the interaction of right and left-movers which provides the radiation. Note that, in this
small-amplitude approximation, perturbations of frequency ω also produce waves of
frequency ω. In loops, the interactions also produce higher harmonics, which decrease

                                                      57
only as a power law. On the straight string the higher harmonics are exponentially
damped and are usually negligible, unless some special symmetry forbids the lowest
harmonic [182]. A further difference from loops is that there can be waves travelling
in one direction only, which do not radiate, for the gravitational wave moves along
with the perturbation [183]. In fact, there are exact travelling wave solutions [184],
which can be thought of as ordinary gravitational plane wave solutions with a wedge
cut out of the space around the direction of propagation.
   The gravity waves remove energy from the string, which must result in the decrease
in the amplitude of the perturbations. We see from (4.17) that the power radiated is
proportional to the frequency: thus high frequency modes decay more quickly. This
has implications for the small scale structure, which is made up of many small-angle
kinks, for the high frequencies in the kinks will disappear first, rounding them off (see
section 5).



4.4. Pseudoscalar and electromagnetic radiation

In section 2 we found that strings may be the sources of other massless fields. If
the string is a global one, such as an axion string, it is surrounded by the field of
the pseudoscalar Goldstone boson associated with the symmetry breaking. If it is
superconducting, it can produce a long-range electromagnetic field. When in motion
the string then radiates coherent Goldstone bosons [185] and electromagnetic waves
as well as gravitational radiation. As we saw in section 3.6, we can treat global strings
as sources for an antisymmetric tensor field Bµν , which is equivalent to the Goldstone
boson. In this representation one can derive the equations for the emitted power per
unit solid angle in much the same way as for gravitational radiation, to obtain [152]

                           dP
                              (ω, k) = 2ω 2 Jµν
                                             ∗
                                                (ω, k)J µν (ω, k)                 (4.19)
                           dΩ

where ω is quantized in units of 4π/L, and J µν is the Fourier transform of the source
distribution for the antisymmetric tensor field, or

                           η
                             Z
                µν
              J (ω, k) =       dudv (∂u X µ ∂v X ν − pav X µ ∂u X ν ) eik·X .     (4.20)
                           L

An analogous formula exists for infinite strings [186]. On dimensional grounds, the
total power from a loop is independent of size and proportional to η 2 , where the

                                            58
constant of proportionality tends to be about 50–100 for the trajectories for which it
can be computed (which are the same as those for which the gravitational power is
known) [152].
   Compared to the gravitational case, the coupling between the string and the field
is very strong, so it is legitimate to ask whether the power calculated in this way really
represents the true radiation. Indeed, it has been argued that the string is overdamped,
and should dissipate its energy without oscillating at all [110,187]. However, a careful
investigation by Battye and Shellard [182] has compared the antisymmetric tensor
formulation with the radiation in a full numerical simulation of the complex scalar field
theory represented by the Lagrangian (2.1), and found them to be in good agreement.
The string is heavily damped — for example, kinks are very quickly smoothed out —
but not overdamped, for trajectories oscillate several times before losing their energy.
Settling this question is extremely important for axion strings, for a very strong bound
on the symmetry-breaking scale comes from cosmological limits on the energy density
in coherent axion modes (see section 5.10).
   A string carrying a current will also produce electromagnetic radiation, with
luminosity
                          dP
                             (ω, k) = −2ω 2 Jµ∗ (ω, k)J µ (ω, k),                  (4.21)
                          dΩ
where
                                2
                                   Z
                    µ
                   J (ω, k) = e      dudv (ju ∂v X µ + jv ∂u X ν )eik·X ,        (4.22)
                                L
which is the Fourier transform of the current distribution on the string. The power of a
string with constant current I can be estimated with the formula for dipole radiation:
the average power emitted by an oscillating magnetic dipole m is roughly hm̈2 i. If
the string has length L, the dipole moment is ∼ eIL2 , and since the period is 2/L, we
find
                                     P = Γem e2 I 2 .                              (4.23)

Γem is a constant for each trajectory, and as for the gravitational radiation can be
computed in special cases [131,149]. Again, typical values are 50–100.


4.5. Particle emission

A vibrating string can also be the source of other fields besides the massless ones
considered above. For example, it is likely that the scalar field which makes the string

                                            59
will also couple to the conventional Higgs of the Standard Model. However, it has been
shown by Srednicki and Theisen [188] that the power radiated in massive particles is
generally not significant compared to gravitational radiation. The essential point is
that particles of total energy E are produced only in regions of the string where the
fields are changing very rapidly compared with the scale E, which turn out to be small
regions near cusps.
   For simplicity let us consider only a single real field h, which is coupled to the string
field φ through terms in the Lagrangian such as 12 λ′ |φ|2 h2 . Let φ have expectation
         √
value η/ 2 in the vacuum. It can be shown that, if back-reaction on the string state
|Si is neglected, then the amplitude for the emission of two particles with momenta
k1 and k2 is
                                      Z
                      ′           ′
                 hS ; k1 k2 |Si = λ       d4 x ei(k1 +k2 )·x hS|(|φ|2 − 21 η 2 )|Si.   (4.24)

The expectation value of |φ|2 − 21 η 2 in the string state |Si can be evaluated by changing
to string-centred coordinates, much as we did in section 3 to calculate the string
effective action, and we find (in the conformal temporal gauge)
                                        1
                                          Z
                                                    2
                         2  1 2
                  hS|(|φ| − 2 η )|Si ≃      dt dσ X́ δ (3) (x − X(σ, t)),              (4.25)
                                       λ
                                                                                 √
where λ is the self-coupling of the field φ, so that the string width is M −1 ≃ ( λη)−1 .
   Using this approach, Srednicki and Theisen [188] found that ultrarelativistic
particles are emitted in a narrow cone around the cusp velocity of angle (ωL)−1/3 ,
where L is the length of the loop. The sum over modes is apparently divergent, but
in fact the neglect of back-reaction must fail when ω ∼ M , so M acts as a cutoff. The
emitted power is found to be
                                                 λ′2 µ
                                           P ∼         .                               (4.26)
                                                 λM L
Comparing with the gravitational power PG ∼ Gµ2 , we see that (for λ′ = λ) loops
larger than about (Gµ)−1 M −1 emit an insignificant fraction of the energy in 2-particle
decays. Equally, loops smaller than this critical value quickly end their lives in a burst
of particle emission. The reason for graviton emission being much more likely is the
dimensionful coupling and the 1-particle final state, which yields a convergent mode
sum
                                                  X
                                  PG ∼ Gµ2                n−4/3 .                      (4.27)
                                                      n


                                                 60
Note that the fall-off with n is just that advertized for loops with cusps in section 4.2.
   These methods are unable to give much insight into the emission of particles with
the same mass scale as the string, especially those which actually make up the string.
For particles of mass ∼ M the back-reaction is not negligible, and the replacement
of |S ′ i by |Si is no longer valid. The prime site for particle emission is the cusp,
because the fields are changing very rapidly there. The cusp is also a region where
the string changes direction, and oppositely oriented segments get very close. In fact,
they overlap in a region of length σ ∼ (M |X́´´ |)−1/3 , where the subscript 0 indicates
                                      c            0

the value at the cusp. Thus there is the possibility of a classical annihilation of this
region, with the energy being transferred into propagating modes of the scalar and
gauge fields which make up the string [189]. This ‘cusp annihilation’ can result in
the emission of energy µσc ∼ µL(M L)−1/3 . If this happened every period, the power
would be (M L)−1/3 µ, which dominates light particle emission and also gravitational
radiation for loops smaller than ∼ (Gµ)−3 M −1 . However, it is not clear that the cusp
does recur: the replacement of a segment of string of length ∆σ ∼ L(M L)−1/3 with
one of length ∆σ ∼ M −1 could also result in |X̋ 0 | becoming very large. The centre
of the string now takes a short cut of physical distance M −1 , so |X̋ 0 | is now of order
M , and the new overlap region contains energy M — much less than the original
µL(M L)−1/3 .
   Small amounts of energy are also available for conversion into particles when strings
self-intersect and reconnect, especially at high relative velocities, where the scalar
field can be seen to be highly excited in the intersection region after the strings have
moved away [154–158]. However, none of these particle emission processes challenge
gravitational radiation as the dominant decay mode of the gauge string; or coherent
Goldstone boson radiation for the global string, except when the loops are smaller
than (Gµ)−1 times their width.



4.6. Particle scattering

A perturbative calculation of the scattering cross-section per unit length for a scalar
particle coupled as in the last section reveals that it takes the form
                                             ′ 2
                                     dσ        λ     1
                                            ∼          ,                           (4.28)
                                     dl   b    λ     E

                                              61
where E is the energy of the incident particle. The cross-section is therefore determined
by the Compton wavelength of the incident boson. A nice physical argument for this
behaviour has been given by Brandenberger, Davis and Matheson [190]. The string
effectively consists of a chain of scatterers of size M −1 , with geometric cross-sections
M −2 . A boson of energy E will scatter coherently off M/E of them, thus amplifying
the cross-section of a length E −1 by a factor (M/E)2 . The final cross-section per unit
length is therefore M −2 (M/E)2 E ∼ E −1 .
   Fermions have different couplings and a different phase space. With a coupling
  ∗ ¯c
gφ ψ ψ, the cross-section per unit length goes as [190]

                                                      2
                                               gη 2
                                                              g 2 E
                              dσ
                                       ∼                   E∼            .                  (4.29)
                              dl   f           M2                 λ M2

This is again explicable in terms of our chain of scatterers: fermion wavefunctions do
not add coherently, so in the length E −1 the fermion scatters from only one point with
cross-section M −2 . Thus (dσ/dl)f ∼ M −2 E.
   These estimates are perturbative estimates, and are only good if they represent
small corrections to the probability of the particle being unaffected.                 Hence the
coupling of the scattering particle to the string must be small compared with the
string self-coupling. Otherwise, one must take into account the distortion of the
wave functions of the scattering particles by the string core. This in general leads to
amplification of the scattering amplitude by a factor A ∼ |ψ(M −1 )|/|ψ0 (M −1 )|, where
ψ0 is the free wave function [190]. The amplification occurs because the expansion in
angular momentum eigenstates of the exterior part of the true wave function can
contain modes which diverge at small radius.                    In the free case, the condition of
regularity at the origin means that they cannot be present, but when the string is
there they can match onto the solution in the core. Precisely which divergent modes
are excited determines the amplification.
   A crucial factor in the calculation of the cross-section for gauge strings is the charge
of the scattering particle under the generator of the broken U (1), say q. If the charge
of the string field is e, then the cross-section depends very strongly on the ratio q/e.
If it is an integer, then it is found (for both bosons [139] and fermions [191]) that
                                           
                                       dσ                  4
                                                =          2      ,                         (4.30)
                                       dl             k ln (k/M )

                                                      62
where k is the transverse momentum of the incident particle. If, however, q/e is
fractional, the particle experiences an Aharonov-Bohm effect [50]. The wave function
of a particle passing the string picks up a relative phase factor ei2π(q/e) between the
parts which pass on either side of the string, and so they can interfere very strongly.
In that case it is found that the cross-section is just the usual Aharonov-Bohm form

                                            1 sin2 (πq/e)
                                    
                                 dσ
                                        =                  .                   (4.31)
                                dθdl       2πk cos2 θ/2

The cross-section does in fact have some dependence on the details of the fields in the
core of the string [192]. It can depart from the Aharonov-Bohm form if, for example,
the flux in the core changes direction with radius (which might happen in strings in
theories with several stages of symmetry breaking).
   There is another effect, gravitational in origin, which contributes to particle
scattering. We recall that the space-time around a straight string has an angle deficit
δ = 8πGµ, so if we place a charge in this background, we must satisfy the boundary
condition that the electric field is the same at θ = π + δ/2 and θ = π − δ/2. By solving
the Poisson equation with these modified periodicity requirements, it can be shown
[193] that there is a repulsive force

                                              Gµq 2
                                        F =         r̂                             (4.32)
                                              16r 2

where r̂ is the unit vector from the nearest point on the string to the particle. This
results in a Coulomb-like scattering cross-section [194].


4.7. Baryon number violation

In the interior of a string formed after the breaking of a Grand Unified symmetry are
fields which carry both baryon and lepton number. Thus if a quark gets to the core
of the string it can interact with the background core fields and emerge a lepton, and
vice versa. Strings therefore have the potential for mediating baryon number violating
processes. This is very reminiscent of the Rubakov-Callan effect [195], where quarks
and leptons change into each other in the interior of a monopole. The cross-section
for this process is not the geometric cross-section: rather, it depends on the Compton
wavelength of the scattering particle, going as E −2 . For strings, we have seen how the
elastic scattering cross-section depends crucially on the ratio q/e, since it controls the

                                              63
amplification of the scattering wave-function at the core of the string. Since any B-
violating processes happen in the string core, the same is also true of the B-violating
cross-section [196,191]. The cross-section also depends on the type of interaction: that
is, whether it is mediated by a scalar or by a vector field. A vector field produces its
greatest effect for integer q/e, when the B-violating cross-section per unit length can
reach the scattering cross-section ∼ E −1 [191]. The B-violating cross-section from a
core scalar field is greatest for half-integer q/e, when it can also reach ∼ E −1 [196,191].

    There have also been suggestions that there can be B-violation produced by a kind
of Aharonov-Bohm effect [197,198]. If the generator of the gauge field of the string does
not commute with the generator of B or L, then the adiabatic transport of a particle
around the string can result in its returning with different B or L quantum numbers:
this is then apparently a B- or L-violating process. In a scattering experiment, the
outgoing wavefunction resulting from an incident beam of pure quarks could contain
a mixture of quarks and leptons, in different proportions depending on the scattering
angle θ. However, it has been shown that this mixture is an illusion [199]. While it is
true that the quark and lepton fields in the original basis at θ = 0 are apparently mixed
as we move around the string, the definition of what mixture actually constitutes a
quark or lepton field also changes. The worst that can happen is that the definition at
θ = 2π differs by a phase from that at θ = 0: but this is just the original Aharonov-
Bohm effect, without any peculiar baryon number violation.

    The physical consequences of B-violation are greatest when the string density is
greatest, soon after the phase transition which forms them. Any existing B-asymmetry
in the universe can relax to zero via scattering off strings [200]. If ξ(t) is the correlation
length of the string network, and σ6B is the B-violating cross-section per unit length,
then

                                    dnB          1
                                        ≃ −v̄σ6B 2 nB ,                                (4.33)
                                     dt         ξ

where nB is the baryon number density and v̄ is the thermally averaged relative
velocity of the particles and the strings, which is of order 1. The cross-section per unit
length goes as c/T (t), where T is the temperature and c a dimensionless constant,
while the correlation length increases at tp . When the network is scaling (see section
5.3) p = 12 , but just after the phase transition it has the value 5/4. Using the relation

                                             64
T ∼ (tMPl )−1/2 , we find
                                           h                 i
                     nB (t) ≃ nB (t0 ) exp C (t0 /t)2p+1/2 − 1 ,                  (4.34)

where                                                          
                                          c             t0
                               C∼              1                    .             (4.35)
                                     (t0 MPl ) 2       ξ(t0 )
Thus if the baryon number is generated when the string is scaling, that is ξ ∼ t, the
reduction factor exp(−C) is insignificant. However, if it is generated at or before the
string-forming phase transition, when ξ(t0 )/t0 ∼ Tc /λMPl , there is potentially a very
large suppression.
   Where there is scattering there is also emission, so strings may also be a source
of baryon number. As Sakharov pointed out [201], generating a baryon asymmetry
in the early universe requires not only B-violation but also CP -violation, as well
as a departure from thermal equilibrium. If quarks and leptons have CP -violating
couplings to the strings, or to a string decay product, then emission from strings
constitutes an injection of baryon number into the equilibrium distribution of particles
in the early universe [202–205]. This requires a high string density, in order to produce
a sufficient asymmetry. However, the tendency of the strings to reduce the baryon
number density by scattering has not been taken into account in existing estimates.




5. Strings in the Early Universe

   If cosmic strings exist, they were formed in the first fraction of a second after the
Big Bang. Any effects they have on observable cosmological features occur at much
later epochs. To follow the causal chain from one to the other, we have to study how
they were formed and how the network of strings evolves over this immense span of
time.



5.1. High-temperature field theory

   To study the formation of strings, since the early Universe was very hot, we need
to consider the effects of high temperature on a field theory.

                                              65
   The most important effect is to replace the potential V (φ) in the Lagrangian by a
high-temperature effective potential, VT (φ) [206,207,4]. This is the free energy density
in a state with the prescribed value of φ. When T is much larger than all the masses
involved (i.e., T ≫ m(T ), the temperature-dependent mass), the leading correction
terms are easily identifiable with the free energy density of an ideal relativistic gas:

                                          g∗ π 2 4 M 2 (φ) 2
                       VT (φ) = V (φ) −         T +       T + O(T ).                 (5.1)
                                           90       24

Here g∗ is the effective number of spin states of relativistic particles (with a factor
of 7/8 for fermions) and M 2 (φ) is the sum of squared masses of particle excitations
about the chosen state (with a factor of 1/2 for fermions). The T 4 term is independent
of φ, and hence does not affect the symmetry breaking. The important correction is
the T 2 term, which yields symmetry restoration at high temperature.
   Consider for example the model with Lagrangian (2.6) and V (φ) = 12 λ(|φ|2 − 12 η 2 )2 .
The zero-temperature symmetry-breaking is signalled by the fact that V has a
maximum at φ = 0. Here we find g∗ = 4 and M 2 (φ) = 3e2 |φ|2 + λ(2|φ|2 − η 2 ) +
 1
12
   (2λ + 3e2 )T 2 .   Thus at high temperature, the coefficient of |φ|2 in VT becomes
positive. Then VT takes its minimum value at φ = 0. In this approximation, we have
a second-order phase transition. The critical temperature above which the symmetry
is restored is given by
                                               6λη 2
                                     Tc2 =            .                              (5.2)
                                             2λ + 3e2
                                                                               3
                                                                          P
The O(T ) term in (5.1) can change this analysis: formally, it is −T        j mj (φ)/12π,
where j labels the particle species. However, it turns out that this term can only be
trusted if λ ≪ e2 . Its effect is to give the potential a shallow minimum at φ = 0, which
suggests that for heavy vector particles there should be a first-order phase transition.
   For the electroweak transition, the high-temperature approximation appears to
be reasonable provided that λ, or equivalently the Higgs mass mH , is not too large
[208]. In practice, values of the Higgs mass below about 65 GeV can probably now be
ruled out. For reasonable values of mH , the critical temperature is around 200 GeV,
substantially larger than mW and mZ . However, the conclusion concerning the order
of the transition is still far from certain. There are infrared divergences in higher-
order correction terms which invalidate the perturbation calculation in the immediate
neighbourhood of the critical point, the effects of which are not wholly understood

                                              66
[4]. It has been argued that non-perturbative effects may yield a first-order transition
even in the case of large Higgs mass [209].
   In grand unified theories, there is a phase transition (or transitions) at a critical
temperature of 1015 or 1016 GeV. In this case, the estimated critical temperature is
roughly comparable with the induced particle masses, so a first-order transition is
rather more likely. This is mainly because the number of contributing light particles
is much larger.
   There is still much work to be done before it can be said that we have a completely
reliable understanding of the high-temperature phase transitions in field theory.
   It should be mentioned that there is probably another important transition in the
early Universe, considerably later than those mentioned so far. This is the quark-
hadron transition, at which the dense gas of free quarks and gluons condenses into
individual hadrons. It occurs at a temperature of perhaps 200 MeV, and may be
associated with the breaking of chiral symmetry. This transition, while not generating
cosmic strings itself, is an important stage in the evolution of axion strings, as we shall
describe in section 5.10.


5.2. Formation of Strings

   Because the scales of interest are mostly very large compared to the thickness of
a cosmic string, the long-term evolution of a string network is almost independent of
the details of the field-theory model in which the strings appear — though we have to
distinguish local from global strings and superconducting from non-superconducting
ones, and of course we have to know the symmetry-breaking scale. So, for simplicity, let
us consider the simplest model, the Abelian Higgs model described by the Lagrangian
(2.6), which predicts non-superconducting, local strings, with tension µ ≈ η 2 . We shall
also concentrate on thermal phase transitions, which happen as a result of the cooling
of the Universe in a conventional radiation-dominated FRW Universe, reserving a brief
discussion of the formation of defects during inflation for the end of this section.
   Initially, when the Universe is very hot, it is in the symmetric phase and no strings
are present. When it cools to below the critical temperature Tc , the Higgs field φ(x)
will tend to settle down into the valley containing the circle of minima of the potential
VT . Eventually, as T → 0, the system will tend towards one of the vacuum states
described by the points on this circle.

                                            67
    Of course, this is a quantum system, so it might also be in a superposition of these
states. If we were dealing with a single particle then, as every student of quantum
mechanics knows, the true ground state would be a symmetric superposition; there
would be no symmetry breaking. However, a field theory is different, because it
involves an infinite number of degrees of freedom. To get from one to another of the
degenerate vacua, one must rotate the phase of the Higgs field at an infinite number
of points. Thus a quantum superposition of states with different values of the phase is
for all practical purposes equivalent to a classical superposition. No local observable
has matrix elements between the degenerate states. Because of gauge invariance, the
different vacuum states are physically indistinguishable; the overall phase of φ is not
an observable.
    In fact, even the relative phase of φ between different points is not an observable,
unless we have chosen a gauge. For example, we might work in the Coulomb gauge.
Then, provided the remaining gauge ambiguity is removed by imposing a suitable
boundary condition, the relative phase between the φ values at different points is an
observable.
    Now what happens when the temperature in the expanding Universe falls below
the critical temperature? Once it has fallen well below Tc , the Higgs field in most
regions will have acquired a non-zero average value, but for causality reasons the
phases in widely separated regions will be uncorrelated. This must be true even in
a gauge theory, once the gauge ambiguity has been removed. We should of course
also consider the coupling to the gauge field. However, the currents that generate
such fields arise from phase fluctuations only once the magnitude of φ has become
significantly non-zero. It therefore seems unlikely that this effect would make a major
difference to the probability of string formation. (However, for a different view, see
[210]).
    The phase transition may be first-order, in which case it will proceed by bubble
nucleation [211–213] or by spinodal decomposition [214]; alternatively it may be a
continuous, second-order process. The order depends, as we have seen, on details such
as the ratios of coupling constants. The net effect is much the same in both cases,
though one may perhaps expect a rather different initial scale for the resulting string
network.
    In the bubble-nucleation case, we should expect the phase in each bubble to be

                                          68
a more or less independent random variable, although if the phase is determined
by the random values of other fields, one might expect the phases in neighbouring
bubbles to have some correlation. When two bubbles meet, the values of φ across
the boundary will tend to interpolate between those in the two bubbles [215]. When
three bubbles meet, a string may or may not be trapped along their mutual boundary,
depending on whether or not the net phase change around it is 2π or zero [6]. The
scale size of the resulting network is related to the separation of nucleation centres,
and to the probability of trapping a string at a boundary, which is typically of order
0.3 [216,217]. The scale would be larger if there were indeed a correlation between
the phases of neighbouring bubbles — the separation of nucleation centres would be
replaced by the overall phase correlation length.
   In the alternative case of a second-order transition, or of a first-order transition
proceeding by spinodal decomposition, the Higgs field everywhere will tend to move
away from zero — the peak of the potential hump — at about the same time. It is of
course characteristic of a second-order transition that the values of φ will be correlated
over long distances, though the correlation length will never actually become infinite if
the rate of change of temperature is finite. Immediately after the transition, when the
hump is still small, fluctuations taking φ over it will be quite probable, so the phase is
not really fixed. However, as the temperature falls further, such fluctuations become
increasingly improbable. When one reaches the Ginzburg temperature TG [218], at
which the energy of a fluctuation over the hump on the scale of a correlation volume is
equal to T , these fluctuations effectively cease and the phase is ‘frozen in’. (Remember
that in our units kB = 1.) In this case too, string defects will be trapped in places
where the phase change around a loop is 2π. The initial length scale of the resulting
network will be determined, as before, by the probability of string trapping and by
the correlation length at the Ginzburg temperature.
   In either case the net result is a random network of strings with some characteristic
scale, which we shall call ξ; ξ is certainly < t and probably ≪ t. The strings cannot
have free ends and must either form closed loops or be infinitely long. Numerical
simulations of string formation on a cubic lattice performed by Vachaspati and
Vilenkin [216] suggest that initially about 20% would be in the form of loops with the
remaining 80% in ‘long’ strings, defined as strings which crossed the periodic box of
the simulation. This figure, however, depends on the choice of lattice. A tetrahedral

                                           69
lattice (which is preferable because it avoids the ambiguity associated with having
more than one string passing through a cubic cell) gives 37% in loops [219]. It is
interesting that for Z2 strings on a cubic lattice the proportion in loops appears to be
much less, about 6% [220].
   The precise details of this structure are not important, because the subsequent
evolution leads, as we shall see, to a final state which is more or less independent of
this early structure.
   As we mentioned in the introduction, there are models in which strings or other
defects can be formed during the late stages of inflation [15,221,222]. This can be
achieved by using an appropriate type of coupling between the inflaton field σ and the
field φ responsible for string formation. For example [222], if there is a term in the
potential of the form λ(|φ|2 + v 2 − ασ 2 )2 , where λ, v and α are constants, then when
σ is small, φ will remain near zero, but as it evolves it will eventually reach the point
             √
where σ > αv, and it is then energetically favourable for φ to acquire a non-zero
average value. Thus the string-forming phase transition occurs during inflation. Many
variations on this theme are possible.
   A notable example is that of Yokoyama [223], who pointed out that there would
in general be a coupling between φ and the scalar curvature R, of the form 21 ξR|φ|2 .
Thus R behaves exactly like the square of the temperature in the effective potential
(5.1), and as it decreases towards the end of inflation, a phase transition in the φ field
can happen, if ξ is positive and V (φ) possesses the usual symmetry-breaking form of
equation (2.1).



5.3. Early Evolution

After a thermal phase transition, the string tension µ acquires its zero-temperature
value of order η 2 once the temperature becomes small compared to Tc . Immediately
after their formation, however, the strings have smaller tension (in the simple
approximation used in section 5.1, it is reduced by a factor [1 − (T 2 /Tc2 )]). At that
time, the strings are moving in a very dense environment, causing their motion to be
heavily damped.
   As we saw in section 3.4, there is a length scale lf = µσ/ρ associated with friction,
where ρ is the energy density of the surrounding matter and σ the average linear

                                           70
cross-section for particle scattering (strictly speaking, the momentum-transfer cross
section). According to (1.14), ρ ∼ T 4 while, as we saw in section 4.6, σ is (in very
rough terms, neglecting logarithmic factors) of order 1/k for particles of momentum k.
Since typically k ∼ T , we may set σ ∼ 1/T . Thus lf ∼ µ/T 3 . Recall also that µ ∼ Tc2 .
Initially, therefore, when T is close to Tc , lf ∼ 1/T . We then expect lf < ξ < t. The
question is: how fast does this length scale ξ of the string network grow in response
to the effect of friction?
     Think of a segment of string with radius of curvature r, initially at rest. Because of
the string tension µ, it experiences a transverse accelerating force µ/r per unit length.
When moving with velocity v it suffers a damping force equal to ρσv per unit length,
so the expected limiting velocity of our string segment is µ/rρσ ∼ lf /r. Typically,
r ∼ ξ, so the expected time scale for straightening kinks is td ∼ ξ 2 /lf .
                                                            ˙ ∼ 1/td ∼ lf /ξ 2 . Since
   This is also the time scale on which ξ increases, i.e., ξ/ξ
we are in the radiation-dominated era, lf ∼ µ/T 3 ∝ t3/2 . Thus (apart from an
initial transient) the correlation length behaves like ξ ∝ t5/4 , increasing faster than
the horizon distance. This process continues [224] until all three lengths, lf , ξ and
t, are of the same order. This happens when the temperature of the Universe is
T = T∗ ∼ Tc2 /MPl . For example, if Tc corresponds to the temperature of the supposed
grand unification transition, namely Tc ∼ 1015 GeV, then T∗ ∼ 1012 GeV, which still
of course occurs at a very early time, in fact when t ∼ 10−31 s.
     As T falls further, the damping becomes less and less important. Once T ≪ T∗ , it
is negligible, and the motion of the strings can be considered essentially independently
of anything else in the Universe. They soon acquire relativistic speeds.
     What happens thereafter to the characteristic length scale ξ of the string network?
As a matter of fact there may be several different length scales, so in order to answer
the question we have to define it more precisely. One way of defining ξ is simply in
terms of the overall string density (excluding small loops, for reasons to be explained
later) — essentially, ξ is the length such that within any volume ξ 3 we expect to find
on average a length ξ of string. This is equivalent to saying that the string density ρs
is
                                                 µ
                                         ρs =       .                                 (5.3)
                                                 ξ2
     For causality reasons, ξ can never grow larger than t, so there are two logical
possibilities: either the network approaches a ‘scaling’ regime in which ξ remains a

                                            71
fixed fraction of t, or it grows more slowly, in which case the ratio t/ξ increases.
   Now in the radiation-dominated era, the total density ρtot of the Universe, given
by (1.13), scales like 1/t2 . Thus in the scaling regime, the strings constitute a fixed
fraction of the total energy; in fact, if we define γ to be the ratio of the Hubble distance
to ξ, then in the radiation era

                                        2t
                                   γ=      → constant.                                 (5.4)
                                        ξ

The fraction of the total density in the form of strings then becomes

                                      ρs    8π 2
                                          =    γ Gµ,                                   (5.5)
                                     ρtot    3

so the strings constitute an interesting though small fraction.
   On the other hand, if ξ grows more slowly than t, it is inevitable that the strings
will eventually come to dominate the total energy density. Such a Universe would
be very different from ours, at any rate if the strings are heavy, with a characteristic
scale anywhere near that associated with grand unification. It is just possible that
the Universe might be string-dominated if the strings were very much lighter and so
formed at a much later stage in the history of the Universe [225,226]; however, this
does not seem very likely.



5.4. The role of loops

   There are, then, these two quite different final states. What determines the choice?
Fundamentally, the answer is: the efficiency of the energy-loss mechanism.
   Suppose for a moment that the string configuration simply stretches with the
Hubble expansion. Then, of course, the total length of string in any comoving volume
would grow in proportion to the cosmic scale factor a, so the string density would go
like 1/a2 . In other words, ξ ∝ a ∝ t1/2 . Then the strings would quite rapidly come to
dominate the energy density.
   So clearly, if this is not to happen, there must be some efficient mechanism for
transferring energy from the strings to other forms of matter and radiation. Strings of
course lose energy by radiating particles of all kinds. But non-superconducting strings
generally do not carry non-zero charges of any type, so their interaction with most
fields is rather weak (see section 4). On the other hand, for grand unified strings, their

                                            72
characteristic energy scale is not many orders of magnitude below the Planck scale,
so their gravitational interactions, at least over a long time, are non-negligible.
    Strings do lose a significant amount of energy in gravitational radiation, but that
in itself would not be enough. An important feature of the energy loss mechanism is
the formation of small closed loops [228]. As we discussed in section 3.6, whenever
two strings intersect, they reconnect or intercommute (see figures 3.3, 3.4). When
a string intersects itself, it breaks off a closed loop. Once formed, such a loop will
oscillate quasi-periodically, gradually losing energy by gravitational radiation. This is
a very slow process; a loop of length l has a lifetime of l/ΓGµ, which for grand unified
strings is about 104 l. But this is irrelevant to the fate of the long-string network; once
formed, the loop is effectively lost — unless it rejoins the long string network by a
second intercommuting event.
    Large loops quite often rejoin the main network. Smaller loops, however, usually
survive without again encountering any long strings. It is not too difficult to estimate
what ‘long’ and ‘short’ must mean here. The probability that any particular segment
of string, of length l say, intersects another piece of string in a short time interval δt is
clearly proportional to l, to δt, and to the overall density of long strings, i.e., to 1/ξ 2 .
Hence it is χlδt/ξ 2 , where χ is a dimensionless constant [229], now estimated to be
about 0.1 [230]. The probability of intercommuting is a rapidly decreasing function
of time, because the string density is falling. Assuming that ξ at least approximately
scales, i.e., that ξ ∝ t, we find that the probability that a loop of length l formed at
time t will survive without reconnection is
                              Z ∞                 
                                       ′ χl      χlt
                         exp −       dt 2 ∼ exp − 2 .                                   (5.6)
                                  t      ξ       ξ
Note that the assumption about scaling is a very weak one: if ξ decreases like some
other power of t, the only difference will be an additional numerical factor in the
exponent. We may conclude therefore that strings longer than ξ 2 /χt are very likely
to reconnect, while much shorter strings are unlikely to do so.


5.5. Simulations of string evolution

    Given that strings do have this energy loss mechanism, how can we establish
whether it is adequate to ensure that the string network does indeed approach a
scaling regime?

                                             73
   Much of the evidence we have bearing on this question comes from computer
simulations of an evolving string network (in a spatially flat Friedmann–Robertson–
Walker universe) performed by three different groups, referred to here as AT [231,232],
BB [233–235] and AS [236,237]. There are some disagreements of detail between the
groups, but all three find evidence for scaling of the long string network; in other
words, they find that the density of long strings eventually behaves like 1/t2 , as scaling
predicts. However, this is very far from a conclusive answer to the question, for several
reasons.
   Firstly, the simulations can only be run for relatively limited times, perhaps twenty
Hubble times. So if there were, for example, logarithmic departures from scaling, they
would certainly not show up.
   Secondly, there certainly are features of the network that have not yet reached a
scaling limit. One feature that has shown up very clearly in the work of BB and AS,
as well as in the more recent simulations of AT, is that on small scales the strings
are extremely wiggly. This comes about because of the intercommuting process:
every intercommuting event introduces four new kinks, two on each of the strings,
propagating away from each other at the speed of light. The kink angles do decrease,
due to the Universal expansion, but only very slowly, typically like t−0.1 [235,229],
and the kinks are slowly rounded by the back-reaction of gravitational radiation.
But because these processes are so slow, the number of kinks on the strings grows
throughout the period covered by any of the simulations. Whether this small-scale
structure does eventually scale is a crucial unsolved problem, to which we shall return
below.
   Finally, there is an unresolved disagreement about the actual density at which
strings scale, i.e., the value of the constant γ introduced above. In the radiation-
dominated era, AT find γ ≈ 14, while both BB and AS predict a value of γ ≈ 7. This
indicates a difference in the predicted scaling density of a factor of 4.
   The origin of this disagreement appears to lie in the treatment of the very small-
scale structure. Sharp-angled kinks are very hard to treat in numerical simulations. All
the simulations use cut-offs or smoothing of one kind or another and the way in which
this is done affects the results. In particular, there is also a significant disagreement
about the typical size of the loops that are formed. The initial naive guess which
formed the basis of early work on the cosmic string scenario, was that loops should

                                            74
typically have a size comparable with the scale length ξ. This is the prediction of
what has been described as a ‘one-scale model’ [130]. It is now agreed by all authors
that that initial guess was quite wrong: typically loops are much smaller; the length
satisfies l ≪ ξ. But the various simulations do not agree about how much smaller
they are: typical loops in the simulations of BB and AS are smaller than those of AT
(even though AT’s value of ξ is less).
   It is obviously important to resolve these issues, and one alternative approach
to studying the dynamics of string networks is to do the numerical simulations in
Minkowski space [238,239]. This has the advantage that there is an exact algorithm
for evolving the string [238], and so there is no problem with kinks — they remain
sharp, being evolved in accordance with the true equations of motion. However, the
damping from the expansion of the Universe is neglected, and it is unclear how good an
approximation that is. Ultimately, though, what is needed to complement numerical
simulations is an analytic treatment.



5.6. Analytic treatment of string evolution

   The first attempts at an analytic treatment, by Kibble [130] and by Bennett
[240,241], were founded, as mentioned, on a ‘one-scale model’ of string evolution, based
on assumptions about how the rates of various processes depended on the scale length
ξ. These processes are stretching (due to the Hubble expansion), intercommuting, and
loop production. (Gravitational radiation was assumed to have a negligible effect on
the evolution of the long-string network itself, though being crucial in the decay of
loops.)
   It soon became apparent, however, that this was a very crude description of the
behaviour revealed by the simulations. In particular, the recognition that the typical
loop size is much smaller than ξ called in question the whole idea of a one-scale model.
  Kibble and Copeland, later with Austin, [242, 229] then developed a ‘two-scale
                                                                       ¯ was defined
model’ intended to accommodate this extra structure. The second scale, ξ,
essentially as the persistence length along a string — more precisely, along the left-
moving string. Recall that the motion of a string can be resolved into ‘left-moving’ and
‘right-moving’ modes (see equation (3.13)), with tangent vectors p = a′ and q = b′
respectively. In an expanding Universe (see equation (3.29)), there is a small coupling

                                          75
between p and q — negligibly small for wavelengths much shorter than the Hubble
radius. The definition of ξ¯ is
                                     Z ∞
                                ξ̄ =     dshp(0)·p(s)i,                    (5.7)
                                        0
where the angle brackets denote averaging over an ensemble of string distributions and
s is the length along the string. (Thus if the angular correlation function hp(0)·p(s)i
is assumed to have an exponential dependence on s, then it would be e−s/ξ̄ .) Of
course, one could equally use q rather than p in the definition.
    The approach adopted was to try to derive equations for the rates of change of the
length scales ξ and ξ̄ due to the processes of stretching, intercommuting and of loop
formation. A rather different, but in some ways complementary, treatment has been
developed by Embacher [243].
    As an illustration of the approach let us consider for example the effect of
intercommuting. The probability that a small segment of string of length l undergoes
an intercommuting event during a time interval δt is χlδt/ξ 2 , where χ is the
dimensionless parameter introduced above.
    Now, what is the effect of intercommuting on ξ and ξ̄? In this particular case, the
answer is rather simple. Intercommuting does not change the total length of string,
so ξ is unaffected. On the other hand, intercommuting introduces new kinks onto
the string, so its effect would be to decrease ξ̄. If one thinks of ξ̄ very roughly as
representing the mean distance between large-angle kinks on the string, one can see
that the result should be to increase 1/ξ̄ by an amount χδt/ξ 2 . Thus the expected
contribution to dξ̄/dt due to this effect is in fact −χξ̄ 2 /ξ 2 . (A more detailed calculation
suggests that there should be a numerical factor, of order unity [230].)
   Using similar arguments, one can derive expressions for the rates of change of ξ
and ξ¯ due to stretching and loop formation. To look for scaling, it is convenient to
introduce new variables, γ (already defined above) and γ̄:
                                     2t          2t
                                 γ= ,        γ̄ = .                                      (5.8)
                                     ξ            ξ̄
(We consider only the radiation-dominated era for simplicity.)
    The equations obtained [242] (written in a slightly modified notation) were
                           dγ    1+α     c
                         t     =     γ − γγ̄
                           dt    4     4                                               (5.9)
                           dγ̄       3α       q−1 2 χ 2
                         t     = 1−      γ̄ −    cγ̄ + γ .
                           dt         2        2      2

                                              76
There are three new dimensionless parameters here: α is defined by α = −hp(0)·q(0)i,
or equivalently in terms of the mean square transverse velocity of the strings,
α = 1 − 2hv 2 i; c is a measure of the efficiency of loop formation; while q corresponds
to a more subtle effect, relating to the expected ‘kinkiness’ of excised loops. (Regions
of string with more than the usual number of kinks are more likely to produce loops
than smoother regions; consequently loops will tend to have more than the average
number of kinks on them.)
   ‘Scaling’ is achieved if γ and γ̄ approach definite finite limits as t → ∞, i.e., if the
equations (5.9) have a stable fixed point. In the most naive version of the model, the
three dimensionless parameters were taken to be constants. Then it is easy to see that
scaling will be achieved provided that q exceeds a critical value, in fact

                                           3 − 2α
                                      q>          .
                                            1+α
                                                                > 2.4. In general terms,
According to BB [235], α ≈ 0.14, so the required condition is q ∼
this conclusion has been confirmed in a more sophisticated version of the model [229],
in which the fact that α and c actually depend on the ratio of the length scales is
taken into account.



5.7. Inclusion of small-scale structure

   There are two major problems, however, with the model just described. Firstly,
there seems to be no obvious way of reliably estimating the magnitude of the most
important parameter, q.      Even more critically, though the model was originally
intended to provide some understanding of the small-scale structure seen in the
simulations, it does nothing of the sort. For reasonable values of the parameters, the
two length scales ξ and ξ̄ obstinately turn out to be of the same order of magnitude.
   The trouble here is that the definition (5.7) of ξ¯ is dominated by long-range
correlations and has rather little to do with the small-scale structure. What the
simulations reveal is a very complex structure. Viewed on a sufficiently coarse scale,
the strings are roughly straight on a scale (ξ̄) quite comparable with the typical inter-
string distance (ξ); but looking at the finer detail, one sees many wiggles on each of
these ‘straight’ segments. The typical inter-kink distance (ζ, say) is very much less
      ¯
than ξ.

                                           77
    To deal with this problem, the model has been further refined [230], now becoming
a three-scale model. The definition of the third scale must involve the short-distance
behaviour of the angular correlation function. It can be taken to be
                                1    ∂
                                  = − hp(0)·p(s)i     .                              (5.10)
                                ζ    ∂s           s=0

    The full set of equations describing the evolution of all three length scales is too
complicated to quote here. The conclusions of the analysis, however, are fairly easy
to describe.
    If we include only the effects discussed so far, the equations do not scale (unless one
of the parameters is larger than seems at all probable). Initially, if all the length scales
start out roughly comparable, ξ and ξ̄ start to grow, approximately proportionally to
t as scaling would require. However, ζ does not grow, but remains roughly constant.
So as their overall dimensions grow, the strings would become more and more kinky.
To put this another way, let us define another scaling parameter ǫ, by analogy with
(5.8), by
                                               2t
                                          ǫ=      .
                                               ζ
We then find that while γ and γ̄ approach constant scaling values, ǫ continues to grow
throughout the evolution.
    But there is another effect which we must include, namely gravitational radiation.
It is actually relatively straightforward to do so, using results derived by Hindmarsh
[181]. Several authors [244–246] have already argued that it is the back-reaction of
gravitational radiation that will eventually cause the small-scale structure on strings
to scale.
    This hypothesis is confirmed by the analysis of the evolution equations [230]. Under
reasonable conditions, the string network does eventually reach a full scaling regime
in which all three length scales grow in proportion to the time, but with a large
ratio between ξ and ξ̄ on the one hand and ζ on the other: in fact, one expects
ζ/ξ̄ ∼ Γls Gµ. Here, Γls is a numerical constant, analogous to our earlier constant Γ,
which characterizes the rate of energy loss by gravitational radiation from long strings,
rather than from loops. We expect Γls to be of order 10.
    This conclusion still rests on the values of some undetermined constants, and
in particular on a parameter Ĉ that governs the effectiveness of gravitational back-
reaction in smoothing small-scale kinkiness on the strings. This must exceed a critical

                                            78
value if scaling is to be achieved. Various physical arguments suggest that it is likely
that this condition is fulfilled (if it were not, the amount of small-scale structure would
continue to grow, apparently without limit).
   One important conclusion from this work is that when the gravitational-radiation
effect switches on and the full scaling regime is reached, the value of γ̄ will drop, as
will that of γ, though by a smaller factor. This means that the final scaling values of
these parameters are likely to be smaller than those found in the simulations, where
gravitational radiation has not yet been taken into account.



5.8. Scaling configuration

   In terms of observational consequences, the most important questions concern the
likely scales of the string structures.
   Assuming that scaling has been achieved, the mean inter-string distance, ξ, at the
present time is likely to be a sizable fraction of the horizon distance, determined by
the parameter γ above. The simulation of Bennett and Bouchet, for example, [234]
predicts that in the matter-dominated era, γ ≈ 2.8 ± 0.7. As remarked above, it is
likely that the simulations have if anything over-estimated γ, so a reasonable guess
is that γ is today of order 2. This would mean that the typical interstring distance
now is perhaps 1500 h−1 Mpc; the nearest long string to us might have a redshift of
perhaps 0.3.
   The persistence length ξ̄ along the strings is of similar order of magnitude, but the
scale ζ characteristic of the small-scale structure is much less, perhaps a few hundred
kiloparsecs.
   For many purposes, it is not the strings present today that are important, but those
that were present around the time of decoupling of matter and radiation. Decoupling
occurs not very long after the time of equal matter and radiation densities, so γ was
probably still somewhat above its final matter-era scaling value. (The string density
in the radiation-dominated era was proportionately much larger than it is now: a
reasonable estimate of γ in the radiation-dominated universe, based on the value of
7 from the simulations, might be around 5.) Allowing for subsequent expansion by
a factor of 103 , the comoving size of the inter-string distance at decoupling could be
about 25 h−1 Mpc, comparable with the scales of the large-scale structures.

                                            79
   String loops also play a very significant role. At one time, it was thought that loops
might act as seeds on which galaxies could grow. However, the relatively small size of
the loops now envisaged means that that is no longer a viable scenario. Nevertheless,
loops may still have very important effects.
   Typically, the lengths of the loops produced at any given time are probably a few
times the small-scale length ζ, which is itself of order Γls Gµt. We write the mean size
of a loop born at tb as (κ − 1)ΓGµtb . This parametrization is convenient because the
size of this loop at a later time t is then given by

                                     l = ΓGµ(κtb − t).

The loop finally disappears when t = κtb . The parameter κ is not at present well
determined, but is expected to lie between 2 and 10. So any loops we see today were
probably born in the fairly recent past.
   The total number density of loops in the matter dominated era is [247]

                                                    ν
                                   nloops (t) =         ,                         (5.11)
                                                  ΓGµt3

where ν can be expressed in terms of the various scaling parameters, and is probably of
order 0.1. (In the radiation era, the expression is slightly more complicated, involving
also a function of κ.)
   The typical separation between loops would then be
                                                1/3
                           −1/3           Γ µ6
                          nloops ≈                      90h−1 Mpc,
                                         100 ν

where as before µ6 = 106 Gµ. The nearest loop to us is probably at about half this
distance. Thus the expected number of loops with redshift less than 0.3, say, would
be a few hundred, so it is quite likely that some loops could be detectable. A typical
size for a loop might be hundreds of kiloparsecs; if so by (1.17), their masses would
be comparable with those of large galaxies.



5.9. Superconducting strings

   In several important ways superconducting strings behave quite differently. In
particular, as we saw in section 3.4, the string tension, T say, and the energy per unit

                                             80
length, µ, are no longer constants — they depend on the current in the string. Even
more significantly, they are no longer equal.
    The fact that T 6= µ means of course that the invariance under local Lorentz
transformations along the direction of the string is broken. The string can have
a longitudinal momentum; a distinguished rest frame is defined, in which the
longitudinal momentum vanishes. By definition, µ is the energy per unit length,
and T the tension, in that frame.
    In terms of the effect on the evolution of a string network the most significant
effect is that loops of string may be dynamically stabilized. Even nonrotating loops
might be stable; they have been called springs [142]. However, there is some doubt
about whether this can occur at currents less than the critical current, beyond which
superconductivity disappears. On the other hand, when the angular momentum is
non-zero, there are definitely configurations, termed vortons [65], which are classically
stable, although susceptible to decay by quantum tunnelling. A stable vorton is
a circular loop rotating in its own plane, a configuration which would not radiate
gravitationally. Therefore, if vortons can be formed, they are likely to be very long-
lived; they will then come to dominate the energy density of the Universe.
    In the case of grand unified strings, where the characteristic energy scale is large,
the result would be catastrophic: at a relatively early stage in its history the Universe
becomes dominated by stable vorton loops. This effectively rules out theories in which
high-energy superconducting strings are formed, unless quantum tunnelling is rapid
[64].
    On the other hand, if the energy scale is much lower, say the electroweak scale,
things are very different. Very light non-superconducting strings are not of much
cosmological interest; their contribution to the energy density would be so small as to
be negligible. However, light superconducting strings would have several interesting
effects. The vortons they generate could eventually come to dominate the energy
density, but only at a rather late epoch. They could indeed constitute the dark
matter [248]. Superconducting strings interact strongly with magnetic fields, which
exist both within and between galaxies.         A segment of string moving through a
galactic magnetic field gains an induced current, and could become a strong source of
synchrotron radiation [96]. Very light strings would still be evolving towards scaling,
and so their density could be quite high. For example, electroweak scale strings would

                                           81
have a correlation length ξ ∼ (t0 /tew )5/4 ξ(TG ). Depending on the self-coupling of the
relevant scalar field, this could be as low as 10 kpc. In fact, it has been argued [249]
that the density of these lightest strings could be even higher, because of their strong
coupling to the cosmic plasma. The coupling might even be so strong that the strings
are frozen in to the plasma. Turbulence in the plasma would then actually stretch
them and increase the total length of string. In this way the interstellar medium could
be filled with very light (µ6 ∼ 10−28 ) strings. Even the centres of stars could become
sites for the generation of string through turbulence.
   A theory of structure formation in the Universe involving GUT scale supercon-
ducting strings was proposed some years ago by Ostriker, Thomson and Witten
[97]. It required a primordial magnetic field to induce very large currents on the
strings, which could then move matter around with the pressure of the resulting low-
frequency electromagnetic radiation. This is essentially a variant of the explosive
galaxy formation scenario [250], using strings instead of supernovae as a power
source.   However, it is thought that this class of theories would induce large
microwave background fluctuations, and so they have fallen from favour [251]. Massive
superconducting strings were also proposed as power sources for quasars [99], although
once again a primordial magnetic field is required to induce sufficiently large currents.



5.10. Axion strings

Axion strings are formed at the Peccei-Quinn phase transition, which, if it happens
at all, is quite tightly constrained to take place at around 1010−11 GeV. Axion strings
are global strings, which are thought to evolve towards a scaling solution in much the
same way as gauge strings. The efficiency of the energy-loss mechanism for global
strings is if anything higher because of the strong coupling between the strings and
the axion field. Early on in the evolution of the axion string network the axions are
essentially massless, and redshift as radiation. However, axions are in fact pseudo-
Goldstone bosons: they have a small temperature-dependent mass ma (t), supplied by
QCD instanton effects, which ensures that they become non-relativistic shortly before
the QCD phase transition. The energy density in axions, ρa , then redshifts more
slowly, and may eventually come to dominate the total energy density. The critical
density forms an approximate upper bound on the total energy density in the Universe,

                                           82
and so from this an upper bound can be derived on the PQ symmetry-breaking scale
fa , through the dependence of the mass and the density of the axions on fa [109].
   Let us outline the history of the axion field. The axion string network is formed
at around ta ∼ (Gfa2 )−1 tPl , when the temperature is ∼ fa . As for gauge strings, the
network is thought initially to lose energy mostly by friction, until t∗ ∼ (Gfa2 )−1 ta ,
when the strings can all move freely and radiate axions. Thus the energy density in
the string network is gradually transferred into axion radiation. However, although
the axion is very light, its mass is increasing as the temperature decreases, while the
characteristic radiation frequency ξ̄ −1 decreases as the network coarsens. Eventually,
the Compton wavelength becomes smaller than ξ̄, and the network can no longer
radiate. This happens at a time t̃ defined by ma (t̃) = 1/ξ̄(t̃). If ξ¯ ∼ t, this turns out
to be at a temperature of around 1 GeV [109].
   We recall from section 2.9 that the QCD instanton effects introduce a potential
into the Lagrangian for the axion field a, of the form Ω(T )[1 − cos(N a/fa )], where
Ω(T ) ∝ T −8 ln6 (πT /Λ) [105,252] and Λ ∼ 200 MeV is the QCD scale. One can
think of the growth of Ω(T ) as a ‘buckling’ of the circle of minima of the potential
of the underlying complex scalar field. At temperatures high compared to the QCD
scale, all points on the circle have equal free energy. However, as QCD effects become
important, only the points at a = 2πfa /N remain unaffected [253]. If N = 1 there is
only one minimum left, at a = 0, and we can imagine the potential ‘tilting’. Since a/fa
is identified with the CP-violating θ-parameter [1] of QCD, we have an explanation
(originally due to Peccei and Quinn [102]) of why that parameter is so small.
   The tilt or buckling of the axion potential greatly changes the evolution of the
string network, for each string becomes attached to N domain walls. The domain
walls appear as a result of the energy density at a/fa = π/N , for it is energetically
favourable to concentrate the change in the axion field a in N sheets rather than having
is spread around the string (this is essentially the same argument as in section 2.5). If
N = 1, then every string forms the boundary of a wall, and the walls’ surface tension
acts to draw the strings together so that they can annihilate [14,254]. If N > 1, then
disaster ensues, for annihilation cannot take place. Thus, if the Universe was ever as
hot as fa , any viable axion model must have N = 1 [18].
   Following the disappearance of the string/wall system, its energy lives on in the
form of axions, most of which are non-relativistic. They are very weakly interacting, for

                                            83
their self-coupling is O(Λ4 /fa4 ), and their couplings to fermions are O(mf /fa ). Hence
they cannot annihilate, and the comoving axion number density a3 na is conserved.
The energy density in axions is therefore a3 ma na , which grows relative to the energy
density in the rest of the particle species in the Universe. This is required to be not
much greater than the critical density today. Both ma and na depend on fa , and as
                                                  < 1011 GeV [109,111,182].
a result one can derive an upper bound on fa : fa ∼
   It should be mentioned that Sikivie and coworkers [110,187] arrive at a higher
          < 1012 GeV. This is essentially the same as that obtained if the axion
bound, fa ∼
field is homogeneous [255–257], which would be the case after a period of inflation.
The difference arises through an argument that an axion string releases its energy
very quickly, and without any oscillation at all. This results in the energy density of
the network being transferred into fewer, higher momentum axions, and hence in a
decrease in the axion energy density at late times. The careful numerical simulations
of Battye and Shellard [182], however, do not bear out this contention.




6. Observational consequences

   The concept of cosmic strings, like any scientific hypothesis, must ultimately be
tested by examining its observational implications. In this section we shall examine
the various way in which the notion of cosmic strings might be tested. We confine our
attention to the case of non-superconducting gauge strings with a large characteristic
energy scale, around 1015 or 1016 GeV, so that the dimensionless parameter Gµ is
roughly of order 10−6 or 10−7 .



6.1. Gravitational lensing

   The most important interactions of ordinary strings are the gravitational ones.
The gravitational field of a string is quite remarkable: around a straight, static string,
the gravitational acceleration vanishes. This is a consequence of the exact equality of
the energy per unit length, µ, and the tension, T . In linearized gravitation theory,
tension acts as a negative source of the gravitational field and, when T = µ, the two
effects exactly cancel.

                                           84
   As we saw in section 4, the space-time near a string is locally, but not globally,
flat. The space around the string is cone-shaped, as though a wedge of angle δ had
been removed and the faces stuck together [160]. The curvature is entirely localized
within the string. The deficit angle δ is related to the string tension:

                                  δ = 8πGµ = 5.18µ6 ′′ ,                            (6.1)

where µ6 = 106 Gµ.
   The most immediate observational prediction from the conical space-time around
a string is of gravitational lensing [160,258,161,259]. If we look at a distant quasar,
for example, (see figure 6.1) we may see two images, one on either side of the string.
   Suppose the comoving distances to the string and the galaxy are xs and xg
respectively. Let n be the unit vector along the line of sight from us to the string,
and suppose the string is moving with transverse peculiar velocity v.
   It is best to transform to the rest frame of the string, in which both the observer and
         the galaxy are moving with velocity −v. If we work in terms of the angular
         coordinate ϕ̄ defined after (4.4 ) , then light will propagate along straight
         lines, but there is a missing wedge of space of angle δ around the string (see
         figure 6.1). It is then easy to show [260] that the angular separation between
         the two images of the galaxy, to first order in δ, is
                                              δ sin θ xg − xs
                                     ψ=                       ,                     (6.2)
                                          γv (1 − v·n) xg

         where of course γv = (1 − v 2 )−1/2 .
         The probability that a randomly chosen galaxy with redshift zg will be lensed
by a long string is then found to be
                                            p                         !
                             64π 2           1 + zg + 1 p
               probability =    γ Gµ        p           ln 1 + zg − 2
                              3              1 + zg − 1                             (6.3)
                               8π 2
                           =      γ Gµ(zg2 − zg3 + . . .).
                                9
Including the effects of loops is straightforward; this does not change the result very
much, because the total energy in loops is almost certainly substantially less than that
in long strings in the matter era.
         As we have seen, a reasonable value for γ in the matter-dominated era is
around 2, so for say zg = 0.4 and Gµ = 10−6 , only about one galaxy in 106 is lensed.

                                             85
         There are of course many other cosmological objects that act as gravitational
lenses, such as giant galaxies and rich clusters (see e.g. [262]). What is special about
strings is the linear nature of the lens. A long string stretched across our field of view
would be likely to induce many lensed pairs [258] arranged in a roughly linear array.
A loop would give several lensed pairs within a small region of the sky. There has in
fact been one report of a small field (less than one arcminute across) containing seven
apparent lensed pairs [263,264], but it is unclear whether all these are in fact genuine
double images, rather than merely accidental pairs of similar galaxies. Neither is the
signal of a line of lensed pairs likely to be obvious, because the density of string is too
low to make them stand out clearly above the ‘noise’ consisting of line-of-sight galaxy
pairs [261]. The alignment of the position angles of the pairs could help in filtering out
the noise, but the small-scale structure on the string tends to reduce the correlations
between them. It remains an open question as to whether it is possible to search for
string this way.


         An important feature is that because strings are so narrow and fast moving,
their effects can change rapidly with time.        Patterns of magnification produced
by gravitational lenses generically exhibit caustics along which the magnification is
formally infinite. Pairs of images coalesce and disappear as one crosses a caustic. (In
reality the magnification never becomes actually infinite because of the finite size of
the objects being imaged.) Hogan and Narayan [265] pointed out that in the case of
lensing by very small loops, objects may cross these caustics in a relatively short space
of time, of the order of months or less. Unfortunately, most loops are probably not
small enough to produce significant magnification of images. Nevertheless, pairs of
images may appear or disappear within a time scale comparable with the light travel
time across the source.


         Another special feature that, if found, would be a very clear signal of cosmic
strings is the appearance of sharp edges on images [266]. One of the images of an
extended object seen behind a cosmic string might well exhibit such sharp edges.
Even if the object is too far away for its size to be resolved, this effect would lead to
a pair of images of different magnitude, and even of different colour if, for example,
only the arms of a spiral galaxy were lensed.

                                            86
6.2. Effect on microwave background

         Possibly the most definitive test of the idea of cosmic strings with GUT
energy scale will come from observations of the predicted discontinuities in the
temperature of the cosmic microwave background [267].
         Returning to figure 6.1, let us suppose that in the absence of the string, the
light would have an observed angular frequency ω. The effect of the moving string is
that the light is redshifted in the beam ahead of the string and blue-shifted behind it.
The difference in frequency is given by [260,183]

                            ∆ω
                               = n·t ∧ vδ = vδ sin θ sin α,                          (6.4)
                             ω

where t is the unit tangent vector on the string, and α is the azimuth angle of v. Clearly
there will be a discontinuity in the observed microwave background temperature, with
∆T /T = ∆ω/ω.
         To compare with observation, one needs to calculate the expected pattern
of temperature fluctuations generated by the string distribution.         Typically, the
observations compare the temperature in two directions in the sky separated by a given
angle. To distinguish cosmic strings from other sources of perturbation, observations
on small angular scales are particularly important, because it is only on small scales
that the stringy nature of the perturbing source will be visible.
         Fortunately, calculating the temperature fluctuations on angular scales that
are small compared to the horizon at decoupling is simpler than one might expect,
because it turns out that a Minkowski-space treatment is sufficient [268,269]. Consider
an initially parallel beam of photons, propagating towards us with unperturbed
momentum pµ = (E, 0, 0, E).        In the presence of a weak gravitational field the
perturbation in momentum is given to first order by
                                         Z 0
                                     1
                         ∆pµ (x) = −           dλ hνρ,µ (x(λ))pν pρ ,                (6.5)
                                     2    λ1

where the unperturbed trajectory of the photon arriving at our position xµ is
xµ (λ) = xµ + λpµ . It is convenient to choose the harmonic gauge for the perturbation
hµν around the Minkowski metric, i.e., hµ ν ,ν − 21 hν ν ,µ = 0. Then by applying a
transverse two-dimensional Laplacian ∇2⊥ and dropping an unimportant surface term,
one finds a direct relation between ∆pµ and the perturbing stress-energy-momentum

                                               87
tensor, namely
                                              Z 0
                         ∇2⊥ ∆pµ = −8πG∂µ           dλ Tνρ (x(λ))pν pρ .           (6.6)
                                               λ1

         This formula can readily be applied to the case where Tµν is the stress tensor
of a cosmic string, (eEMTen). The calculation is simplified by using the conformal
light-front gauge, in which

                                X + (τ, σ) ≡ X 0 + X 3 = τ,                        (6.7)

and as usual
                               Ẋ·X́ = 0,      Ẋ 2 + X́ 2 = 0.                    (6.8)

Then, using the fact that ∆T /T = ∆E/E one easily finds

                     ∆T
                                     Z
                 ∇2⊥      = −8πGµ        dσ Ẋ·∇⊥ δ (2) (x⊥ − X ⊥ (x+ , σ)).       (6.9)
                     T

         This result means that, in Minkowski space, the temperature distortion
depends only on the apparent positions of the strings and their apparent velocities, not
on the entire history of the world sheet. From here one can go on to calculate the power
spectrum h|∆k |2 i of the temperature perturbation, where ∆k is the two-dimensional
Fourier transform of ∆T /T .
         This same problem must be tackled numerically in an expanding Universe,
using the string distributions obtained from numerical simulations. Comparison with
observation yields information on the magnitude of the string parameter Gµ. Bouchet
et al [270] have used equation (6.9) (expressed in the temporal gauge) to compute the
fluctuations from a set of numerically generated string configurations. From this they
obtained an upper bound on Gµ from the small angular scale (∼ 10′ ) OVRO NCP
data [271]. However, it turns out that the temporal gauge formula was incorrect [272].
A recent reanalysis [269] yields the 95% confidence limit

                                    γGµ < 6 × 10−6 .                             (6.10)

The bound is expressed on γGµ because of the systematic and statistical uncertainties
in the string density parameter γ, which we defined in section 5.3.
         Deriving bounds on larger angular scales is more problematic, because one
must take the rest of the matter in the Universe into account. Scales of around 1◦ are

                                             88
particularly complicated: one must incorporate gravitational potential fluctuations at
recombination, as well as the motions of the coupled electron-photon fluid. On larger
angular scales one only has to worry about the general relativistic equations for the
gravitational field and the density field of the dark matter.
            Bennett et al [273] argued that the dark matter perturbations could be
neglected on large angular scales, and found that the COBE 1st year results [274,275]
gave
                                 Gµ = (1.5 ± 0.5) × 10−6 .                          (6.11)

However, this used the old, incorrect, formula, which underestimates the string-
induced CMB perturbations. Coulson et al [276], using a Minkowski space approxi-
mation for the string network, but otherwise incorporating general relativistic effects
in their code, quote
                                 Gµ = (2.0 ± 0.5) × 10−6 .                          (6.12)

They were also able to incorporate the effect of the electron motion at last scattering,
by assuming that the electrons were subject to the same perturbations as the dark
matter. This is appropriate for a reionized Universe in which last scattering was at
z ∼ 102 .
            Useful information can be obtained from other statistical measures besides
the power spectrum. On small scales, strings are expected to generate distinctly
non-Gaussian perturbations. In particular, because of the localized nature of the
source, the phases of the various Fourier components ∆k are not independent random
variables. It has been argued [277] that a sensitive test of the cosmic string picture will
be to measure the kurtosis of the distribution of the gradient of ∆T /T (the ratio of
the fourth moment to the square of the second moment). The distribution predicted
by strings has higher peaks and a longer tail than a purely random distribution.


6.3. Density perturbations

            One of the great unresolved problems of cosmology is the determination of the
origin of the initial density perturbations from which galaxies eventually condensed.
There are two main contenders at present: quantum fluctuations during an early epoch
of inflation, and perturbations due to topological defects of one kind or another, such
as strings or textures.

                                            89
          The cosmic string scenario in its original form placed the main emphasis on
the role of loops. It was supposed that loops would be formed with a characteristic
size equal to a substantial fraction of the horizon size. Such large loops would live for
a long time, so that there would always be a large population of loops present. The
idea was that these loops would form seeds on which galaxies would start to condense.
Much of the early excitement generated by the idea of cosmic strings was due to the
apparent success of the scenario in predicting the correlation function of Abell clusters
[278].
          More recent results from the simulations have shown that loops are born with
much smaller size and therefore live a much shorter time than was originally supposed.
It now seems that they are too small and do not survive long enough to perform the
function of seeding condensations. Strings may still have a very important role to play
in generating density perturbations, but the centre of attention has shifted from the
loops to the long strings. This is not to say that the loops are unimportant; although
they probably represent a smaller fraction of the total density of the Universe, they
are far more uniformly distributed than the long strings, so their effects may well be
significant.
          The first indication of the role of long strings in creating density perturbations
was due to Silk and Vilenkin [279], who pointed out that moving strings will leave
behind them an over-dense wake. This is another consequence of the conical structure
of the space around a cosmic string. Consider a straight string moving through the
matter in the Universe with transverse velocity v. In the rest-frame of the string, other
matter is streaming past it with velocity −v. Let us suppose the matter is collision-
free, so that it will follow geodesics around the string. In terms of the coordinate
ϕ̄, these are straight lines, so in terms of the original coordinate ϕ, every particle is
deviated inwards as it passes the string by an angle δ/2 = 4πGµ. In other words,
every particle acquires an inward velocity component, of magnitude vγv δ/2. Note
that this is independent of the impact parameter. The result is (see figure 6.2) that in
the region behind the string matter from both sides converges, leaving an over-dense
wake.
          In fact, however, as we have seen, the strings are by no means straight.
There is a great deal of small-scale structure, so that viewed from a large scale
the effective energy per unit length, µ, is increased, while the effective tension T

                                            90
is decreased by the same factor. This means that it is no longer true that space-
time around a string is locally flat. In linear gravitation theory, there is no longer
a cancellation between the effects of T 00 and T 33 . A kinky string, therefore, acts as
an ordinary gravitational attractor (equation 4.7), so that even a string at rest will
generate a density perturbation. In fact, a particle moving past a kinky string will be
deviated from its path by two separate effects, the conical defect angle and the normal
gravitational attraction. The resulting velocity perturbation is given by []

                                                2πG(µ − T )
                             ∆v = 4πGµvγv +                 .                     (6.13)
                                                   vγv
         Clearly, the first of these two terms is more important for fast-moving strings,
while the second is relevant for slower-moving ones. Fast-moving string will generate
planar structures in the surrounding matter, whereas with slower strings the shape
will be more nearly linear. We might expect to see a combination of these planar and
linear features in the Universe, but there is an important question, to which we shall
return shortly, about the extent to which such ‘stringy’ features will be visible above
the general stochastic background.
         The simulations suggest [237] that the r.m.s. velocity of strings on a small
scale is large (about 0.6c), but that the coherent velocity of long, roughly straight,
sections of string is much less, no more than 0.1 or 0.2c. For this reason, the second
term in (6.13) is usually more important than the first. On the whole, linear features
should predominate over planar ones.
         Quantitative predictions are hard to come by in the cosmic string scenario.
In particular, we would like to know the power spectrum of the density perturbations
in the dominant matter component,

                                     P (k) = |δk |2 ,                             (6.14)

where δk = (8π 3 V )−1       d3 k δ(x)eik·x , the (comoving) Fourier transform of the
                         R

fractional density perturbation δ(x) ≡ δρ(x)/ρ.
         A comprehensive account of cosmological perturbations in the presence of
strings and other ‘stiff’ sources has been given by Veeraraghavan and Stebbins
[281], who derived the linearized Einstein equations in a flat FRW model for the
perturbations in the metric and in the matter, given a string energy-momentum
        s
tensor Tµν (η, x). A flavour of their analysis can be gained from considering a universe

                                           91
consisting of nothing but cold dark matter and strings. Then the density perturbation
obeys the equation
                                        2
                             ȧ    3    ȧ           s
                         δ̈ + δ̇ −          δ = 4πG(T00 + Tiis ),                (6.15)
                             a     2    a
in the synchronous gauge. This is a coordinate choice, which is defined by setting the
time-time and the time-space components of the metric perturbation to zero [172,8].
         Equation (6.15) is an inhomogeneous second order ordinary differential
equation, subject to boundary conditions on δ and δ̇ at some initial time ηi . It
is thus solvable by a Green’s function method. One finds that the solution splits
into two parts: δ I (η), which depends on the boundary conditions, and δ S (η), which
depends only on T+s = T00
                       s
                          + Tiis . Veeraraghavan and Stebbins termed these the
‘initial compensation’ and the ‘subsequent compensation’. The combined energy-
momentum of the matter and the strings cannot be affected on scales greater than the
horizon: the large-scale (kη ≪ 1) density perturbations in the strings are compensated
by perturbations in the matter. On these large scales the compensation obeys a
conservation law [281]
                                                       
                                  2     s              ȧ
                           8πG(a ρ δ + T00 )+2            δ̇ = 0.                (6.16)
                                                       a

The initial compensation apparently contributes a white noise term proportional to k 0
to the power spectrum, since energy density has been taken from the matter in order
to create the string network. This is partly cancelled by the subsequent compensation,
because the strings preferentially seed overdensities where the underdensities are. This
cancellation fails when the strings move away from their original locations. Since the
strings move relativistically, inhomogeneities are generated on a scale k ∼ η −1 . The
net effect is to produce density perturbations whose behaviour at late times (η ≫ k −1 )
is
                                         P (k) ∼ k.                              (6.17)

This is the Harrison–Zel’dovich form of the power spectrum, which is scale invariant:
that is, the r.m.s. mass fluctuation in spheres the size of the horizon is constant
[8]. The power spectrum of galaxy number density fluctuations is consistent with
an approximately scale-invariant spectrum, so this is a prerequisite for any successful
theory of structure formation. The scale-invariance of the spectrum is in fact a direct
consequence of the scaling behaviour of the network. If the total length of string

                                             92
per horizon volume is proportional to the horizon length, then the string density
goes as µt−2 , which, as we saw in section 5.3, is a constant fraction of the total
density, 1/(6πGt2 ) in the matter era. The amplitude of the density perturbations is
proportional to the amount of string, and so δ ∼ Gµ.
         The full cold dark matter (CDM) power spectrum has been studied by
Albrecht and Stebbins [283], using the AT simulations, who also incorporated
theoretical uncertainties about network evolution by modelling strings with different
amounts of small-scale structure. The resulting power spectra for one of their models
are displayed in figure 6.3, along with the same authors’ calculation of the string-seeded
hot dark matter (HDM) spectrum [284]. For comparison, the standard inflationary
spectra are also displayed [285]. All are conventionally normalized so that σ8 , the
variance of the mass fluctuations in spheres of 8h−1 Mpc, is 1. We shall say more
about this below.
         Albrecht and Stebbins also looked for specifically ‘stringy’, planar or linear,
features. They concluded that they would not show up clearly in CDM; they would be
swamped by the general background of perturbations generated by strings on smaller
scales. The situation is very different, however, in the case of an HDM Universe
[284]. There they found that stringy features would indeed stand out rather clearly,
essentially due to the ‘free streaming’ of the neutrinos on scales less than 20h−1 Mpc.
         The parameter σ8 is a common measure of the density fluctuations on galactic
scales. This is the scale on which the density perturbations are just now going non-
linear; that is to say, the observed value σ8,gal based on measurements of the galaxy
correlation function is unity. However, this is not a direct measurement of σ8 per
se. It seems likely that galaxy formation will occur preferentially near the highest
peaks of the density distribution, in which case the galaxy distribution will be more
correlated that the mass distribution. In other words, the observed fluctuation in the
galaxy distribution is expected to be larger than that in the (mainly dark matter)
mass distribution. It is usual to define a bias parameter b by

                                      σ8,gal = bσ8 .                               (6.18)

Using the COBE normalization to calculate σ8 then gives an estimate of the required
bias, namely
                                        b = σ8−1 .                                 (6.19)

                                           93
         The value of the dimensionless parameter Gµ required to yield the right
magnitude of the fluctuations depends on the assumptions made about string
evolution. But assuming reasonable values for the parameters, Albrecht and Stebbins
found in the cold dark matter case,

                      µ6 ≈ 1.8 (h = 1),        µ6 ≈ 2.8 (h = 0.5),               (6.20)

where µ6 = 106 Gµ, in reasonable agreement with the COBE normalizations quoted
above (6.11,6.12). (These figures come from one of three possible scenarios analysed
by Albrecht and Stebbins.) In the case of hot dark matter, the corresponding values
were
                      µ6 ≈ 2.0 (h = 1),        µ6 ≈ 4.0 (h = 0.5).               (6.21)

Thus at h = 1 the bias parameter at 8h−1 Mpc is approximately 1 for both CDM and
HDM, but at h = 0.5 CDM requires a bias in the range 1–2, while HDM needs 2–4.
However, these figures should be treated with caution, for there is still considerable
uncertainty about the correct basis of the calculations of the power spectrum.


6.4. Gravitational waves

         As we have seen, the primary mechanism for energy loss from loops is
gravitational radiation. Long strings also radiate significantly. Although gravitational
waves cannot as yet be detected directly, this radiation may have measurable indirect
effects. Consideration of the known limits on the intensity of gravitational radiation
in the Universe has yielded an important bound on the string parameter Gµ.
         There are in fact two distinct ways of bounding Gµ by considering the emitted
gravitational radiation — from Big Bang nucleosynthesis and from studies of the
millisecond pulsar.
         The primordial abundance of helium in the Universe, observed to be around
23%, is a key datum in the Big Bang nucleosynthesis scenario. The amount of helium
produced depends on a balance between the rates of the various processes involved
and the rate of the Hubble expansion, which in turn depends on the energy density.
If for example there were one extra species of neutrino, that would increase the rate
of expansion and so increase the helium abundance, to an unacceptably high value —
this is the cosmological evidence for the limit on the number of neutrino species [13].

                                          94
         Energy in the form of gravitational waves would have exactly the same effect.
The validity of the nucleosynthesis scenario thus places a limit on the total energy
density of gravitational radiation present in the Universe at the time of nucleosythesis.
This may be expressed as a fraction of the critical density [286],


                                    Ωgr,nuc < 0.05.                                (6.22)


More recent estimates [287,288] give


                               Ωgr,nuc < 0.016 or 0.007,                           (6.23)


respectively.
         If the gravitational radiation is generated by cosmic strings, this translates
into a limit on Gµ. Bennett and Bouchet [289] obtained the limit Gµ < 6 × 10−6 ,
or a weaker bound if the QCD transition is inhomogeneous. Caldwell and Allen [286]
have done a careful numerical study and shown that the limit may be reduced if the
typical loops size parameter is large (in our notation, if κ ≫ 1). For κ > 10, say,
the bound could be significant. On the other hand, the recent conclusions about the
expected scaling configuration [230], in particular the fact that the parameters γ and γ̄
are likely to be smaller in the final scaling regime than the simulations would suggest,
imply some weakening of the constraint.
         It is easy to find an approximate expression for the gravitational wave energy
density. Let us consider first the contribution of loops. We saw in section 4.2 that
each individual loop contributes the same power, ΓGµ2 , throughout its lifetime. Thus
what we have to calculate is the total number of loops present at any given time.
         During the radiation-dominated era, energy in the form of gravitational
radiation scales in exactly the same way as the total density (except for a small
numerical factor due to the change in the total number of massless particle states).
Thus the total gravitational-wave energy gradually builds up throughout this era,
giving a logarithmic time-dependence.      The power radiated depends on the total
number density of loops, given by (5.11). The total energy emitted into graviational
radiation per unit volume between times t1 and t1 + dt1 is then ΓGµ2 nloops (t1 )dt1 .
The gravitational radiation emitted at time t1 is then redshifted by the expansion of
the Universe, so that its density at a later time t is reduced by the factor (t1 /t)2 .

                                           95
Integrating over t1 yields
                                                           1/3
                              64π                 g∗,nuc                anuc
                    Ωgr,nuc ≈     GµνA(κ)                          ln         ,    (6.24)
                               3                  g∗,form               aform

where
                                            2 κ3/2 − 1
                                   A(κ) =              ;                           (6.25)
                                            3 κ−1
anuc and aform are the values of the scale factor at nucleosynthesis and at the
epoch of formation of cosmic strings, respectively; while g∗,nuc , g∗,form are the
corresponding values of the effective number of spin states of relativistic particles.
Since ln(anuc /aform ) ≈ 40, and g∗,nuc /g∗,form ≈ 0.1, this yields the bound

                                 GµνA(κ) < 4 × 10−5 ,                              (6.26)

or, using the bounds (6.23),

                          GµνA(κ) < 1.4 × 10−5 or 6 × 10−6 ,                       (6.27)

respectively. In general, even the latter bound is not very restrictive, though if ν and
κ are both fairly large, say ν ≈ 2 and κ ≈ 10, it becomes significant. It may become
much tighter in the near future as further results on nucleosynthesis become available.
         In principle, we should also include the gravitational waves emitted by the
long strings. However, in the radiation era, the loops emit proportionately much more
gravitational radiation, except perhaps when κ is small, in which case the bound is in
any case very weak. At the very most, this could not change the bound by more than
a factor of two.
         The second bound imposed by the consideration of gravitational waves
[173,235, 289,286] derives from the astonishing precision of timing measurements of the
millisecond pulsars, believed to be extremely rapidly spinning neutron stars. The first
of these pulsars has now been followed for over 10 years [290]. The rate of emission of
pulses is extremely regular, though gradually slowing. Now, any gravitational waves
propagating in the space between us and the pulsar would cause fluctuations in the
timing of the observed pulses, called timing residuals.
         The experiment is complicated by the fact that there are other sources of
fluctuations, such as intrinsic noise in the pulsar, interstellar propagation effects, and
even instabilities in the clock used to time the pulsar. However, the observed residuals

                                            96
do place an important upper bound on the total amount of gravitational radiation that
can be present in the Universe today.
          Unlike the previous case, this is not a limit on the total gravitational-
wave energy density, but rather a limit on the waves within a particular wavelength
interval near λ ≈ T where T is the period of observation. Let the energy density in
gravitational waves with wavelength between λ and λ + dλ be ρgr (λ)dλ/λ. We also
write, as usual, Ωgr (λ) = ρgr (λ)/ρc . Gravitational waves of cosmological origin are
expected to have a scale invariant spectrum, that is constant Ωgr . In this case the
limit is [290]
                              Ωgr (7.1 yrs) < 4 × 10−7 h−2 .                       (6.28)

More recent unpublished data quoted in reference [286] give

                              Ωgr (8.2 yrs) < 1 × 10−7 h−2 .                       (6.29)

          With reasonable assumptions about the spectrum, this yields a much lower
bound on the total energy density in gravitational radiation than the one at the time
of nucleosynthesis. The reason is that once we enter the era of matter domination, the
energy density of gravitational radiation, like that of electromagnetic radiation, rapidly
becomes a small fraction of the total. Since the epoch, teq , of equal radiation and
matter densities, the contribution to Ωgr of radiation generated during the radiation-
dominated era has been decreasing like a−1 , giving an overall reduction by a factor of
7.5 × 10−5 h−2 .
          To calculate the expected power in the relevant wavelength interval, one
needs to know how loops radiate. A small loop of length L oscillates quasi-periodically,
with period L/2.      It therefore radiates gravitational waves at the fundamental
frequency 2/L and at all the harmonics 2n/L. In the early studies it was assumed that
essentially all the power is radiated at the fundamental. But studies by Vachaspati
and Vilenkin [174,291] showed that in fact a lot of power goes into high harmonics;
the power Pn dies off with n like n−q where q ≈ 4/3. This implies that the dominant
contribution to the Ωgr (T ) comes from radiation emitted in the fairly recent past and,
for q < 2, at rather high values of n.
          From (6.28), Bennett and Bouchet [289], assuming that all the power was
radiated in the lowest mode, derived the bound Gµ < 4 × 10−5 . Caldwell and Allen
[286] found that allowing for the dependence of Pn on n has a large effect. For h = 1,

                                           97
they derived a much tighter bound Gµ < 2 × 10−6 , or a lower figure for large values
of κ. Using the more recent value (6.29), they obtained an even lower bound,

                                  Gµ < 7 × 10−7 .              (h = 1)                                (6.30)

However, for h = 0.5 their limits are less stringent by a factor of 10.
           As in the case of the previous bound, however, the recent reassessment of the
scaling parameters [230] will significantly weaken the bound. For q = 4/3, the revised
limit is                             3/2          1/2                  1/2
                    < 0.2
                                0.1             Γ             10        κ−1           1
                 µ6 ∼                                                                       .         (6.31)
                                 ν             100            κ          κ           h7/2
If h ≈ 0.5, this is quite easy to satisfy, but for h ≈ 1 it could become a significant
bound.
           All these limits are derived assuming a scaling solution back to the earliest
time that gravitational waves with period 1–10 yr today could have been emitted.
This would have been between redshifts of approximately 104−5 h−2 .                             In models
where strings form at the end of inflation, such as those discussed in section 5.2,
it is conceivable that the strings re-enter the horizon at around that time, or even
afterwards, and still have a small enough correlation length to seed the galaxy-scale
perturbations [292]. This means that the amount of gravitational radiation at these
periods is reduced, and so the pulsar bound is relaxed or even eliminated.


6.5. Cosmic rays

           Another of the outstanding mysteries of astrophysics is the origin of the most
energetic cosmic rays, with energies in excess of 1020 eV. The known mechanisms for
accelerating particles, for example by shock-wave acceleration in active galactic nuclei,
do not seem capable of generating such large energies [293].
           Some years ago it was suggested [294] that ‘evaporation’ of particles from
cusps on cosmic strings might provide the explanation. As mentioned in section 3.2,
                                                                                                2
cusps occur where X́ vanishes instantaneously and, correspondingly, Ẋ                              = 1; the
string momentarily reaches the speed of light. Near a cusp, there are two overlapping,
oppositely oriented segments. It seems likely that the interactions of the underlying
fields would convert some of the energy of the string into quanta of these gauge or
scalar fields. Such particles are of course unstable and would eventually decay into

                                                      98
quarks and leptons. The quarks in turn undergo the usual QCD fragmentation process,
ending up as jets of hadrons, mostly pions with a few nucleons. Since the decaying
particles have masses in excess of 1024 eV, and are moving with relativistic speeds,
some of the decay products may easily have energies well in excess of 1020 eV.
          The processes involved are extremely complex and it is difficult to calculate
the expected high-energy particle flux with any precision, but estimates [294,295]
suggest that the mechanism could at least be a signficant contributor to the cosmic
ray spectrum above 1019 eV, though this has recently been questioned [296]. (It has
also been suggested [297] that superconducting strings could be responsible for the
puzzling gamma-ray bursters.)
          The key question is: what is the fraction fcr of the initial energy of a cosmic
string loop that is converted in this way into high-energy particles? Comparison with
the observed limits yields an upper bound,
                                         < 1.7 × 10−9 .
                                  Gµνfcr ∼                                          (6.32)

If cosmic strings are the explanation, then this should be an equality. Recalling that
for GUT strings, Gµ ∼ 10−6 and ν ∼ 0.1, this means fcr ≈ 10−2 .
          This seems a rather large fraction. Firstly, it obviously requires that the
actual energy emitted in the form of energetic particles by each cusp should scale in
the same way as the total length of string. For a string of fixed width, this is not
what one would expect [296]. It also requires cusp evaporation to be a repeated event.
Ignoring energy loss mechanisms, the motion of a small loop is periodic and any cusp
will recur once every period. It is not clear, however, what effect the energy loss by
evaporation will have on the cusp. If it causes it to disappear permanently, so that the
loop evaporation process occurs only once or a few times, then it is hardly conceivable
that fcr could be as large as 10−2 . On the other hand, it is possible that the effect is
only to shift the position of the cusp, in which case each oscillation produces a new
cusp; the cusp gradually eats into the string. Even so, a fraction 10−2 is hard to
attain.




7. Conclusions

          In this final section, we aim to assess the current state of the theory of cosmic

                                            99
strings.
           Cosmic strings come in many different guises. As we discussed in section 2,
they are a feature of many unified theories of fundamental forces. They may appear at
a thermal phase transition with critical temperature Tc anywhere between the grand
unfication scale, a few orders of magnitude below the Planck mass, and the electroweak
transition at a few hundred GeV. They may even appear in the late stages of an
inflationary epoch. The tension T and the energy per unit length µ are both of order
Tc2 , and in simple cases T = µ. Thus the possible values of µ range over nearly thirty
orders of magnitude. As yet, there is no firm indication that cosmic strings of any type
do actually exist, but equally they are far from being ruled out and in some contexts
they provide a very natural explanation for the observations.


7.1. GUT-scale strings

           The cosmic strings which have attracted the most attention are those
produced at a grand-unification transition, for which the dimensionless parameter Gµ
is of order 10−6 (i.e., µ6 ∼ 1). Such strings naturally generate density perturbations
and fluctuations in the microwave background temperature of roughly the observed
order of magnitude. As we emphasized in section 1, this is one of the great attractions
of the cosmic-string scenario.    In the most popular alternative theory, based on
inflation, the density perturbations are generated by quantum fluctuations during
the inflationary era. In that case, to achieve the right order of magnitude requires
fine tuning of a coupling constant. The simplest inflationary models with a single
scalar inflaton field require that the self-coupling λ of the inflaton satisfy typically
λ ≤ 10−10 [298–300]. It is possible to avoid this requirement in extended theories
involving two scalar fields [301–304], but even then there is a fine-tuning requirement
for the coupling-constant ratios [305].
           The cosmic-string scenario is thus a very attractive one. The question is:
does it stand up to more detailed scrutiny? Can it provide a quantitative as well
as a qualitative understanding of structure formation in the Universe? How do its
predictions compare with those of alternative models, particularly the inflationary
model?
           In their simplest forms, both the inflationary and cosmic-string models have
essentially a single adjustable parameter, the inflaton coupling λ or Gµ, respectively.

                                          100
One important test is whether it is possible to fit both the COBE results [274,306] on
the fluctuations in the microwave background and the density fluctuations on galactic
scales as determined by observations of the galaxy distribution.
         Both models predict essentially the Harrison–Zel’dovich spectrum of pertur-
bations: the power spectrum P (k) of fluctuations behaves as P (k) ∝ k for small k.
This is a consequence of the scale-invariance of the physics responsible for generation
of the perturbations. In the inflationary model, the magnitude δρ/ρ of the density
perturbations on each scale is the same at the epoch when the appropriate wavelength
is equal to the horizon distance. Similarly, in the cosmic string scenario, the magnitude
of the perturbations generated on each scale, once it has come inside the horizon, is
the same. Once inside, the behaviour of peturbations depends on how the Universe is
expanding. Before teq , the time of equal densities of matter and radiation, their
amplitude remains constant.       After teq , the perturbations grow in proportion to
the scale factor. This introduces a characteristic scale in the problem, namely the
comoving size of the universe at the time teq . This corresponds to a wavelength
λ ∼ 40h−1 Mpc. On scales less than this, where the wavelength was equal to the
horizon distance at some time before matter-radiation equality, the perturbations
cannot grow. Thus for larger values of k, the power spectrum P (k) starts to bend,
eventually reaching P (k) ∝ k −3 . This happens in both the inflationary and cosmic-
string models, but for cosmic strings the characteristic scale is related to the scale size
of the string network at teq , rather than the horizon distance, and is thus somewhat
smaller. The curvature of P (k) does not then become significant until we reach lower
scales. For a given value of σ8 , the perturbation on very large scales is a little smaller,
while there is quite a lot more power on small scales, especially with HDM.
         It is becoming common to normalize the perturbation spectrum not by σ8 ,
but by fitting the COBE r.m.s. at angular scales of 10◦ . In principle this fixes the
inflaton coupling or, in the cosmic string case, the magnitude of Gµ. The calculations
still have rather large errors, but the range of values predicted is generally from 1 to
3 × 10−6 . For example, [307] gives a value

                                Gµ = (1.7 ± 0.7) × 10−6 ,                             (7.1)

while [273] give
                                Gµ = (1.5 ± 0.5) × 10−6 ;                             (7.2)

                                            101
The most recent and thorough calculations, albeit based on a Minkowksi space string
simulation [276], give
                                Gµ = (2.0 ± 0.5) × 10−6 .                            (7.3)

On the large scales probed by COBE, the main contribution to the microwave
background perturbations, both from strings and inflation, comes from the Sachs-
Wolfe effect.   In this case, there are simple relations between the temperature
fluctuation δT /T and the perturbation in the Newtonian potential Φ, or equivalently
the density perturbation, on the same scale. In the inflationary scenario, the density
perturbations are generated at very early times and are of ‘adiabatic’ type (so called
because there is no perturbation in the entropy per baryon). This means that there
is a fixed relation between the density perturbations in radiation and matter, namely
(δρ/ρ)rad = 34 (δρ/ρ)mat. Thus, once the matter component comes to dominate the
energy density, we have
                                       δT   1 δρ
                                          =      .                                   (7.4)
                                        T   3 ρ
For strings, the perturbations are generated while the CMB radiation is travelling
through them, and the relation is [282]

                                       δT   1 δρ
                                          =      ,                                   (7.5)
                                        T   γ ρ

where, we recall, γ is the ratio between the Hubble radius and the scale size of the string
network. Thus, if the scale size were the horizon distance, strings (and other defects)
could give as much as 6 times the temperature fluctuation for a given amplitude of
δρ/ρ. However, for strings γ seems to be between 1.5 and 2.5, so the relation between
the temperature and density fluctuations is much the same for strings and for inflation.
         This rough equivalence shows up in the calculations of the bias for the two
scenarios. We recall that the bias b was defined as the ratio between the r.m.s.
fluctuations in the number of galaxies in 8h−1 Mpc spheres, or σ8,gal , and the mass
fluctuations σ8 in the same volume. The COBE normalized inflationary cold dark
matter (CDM) theory predicts

                                   b = (0.5 ± 0.1)h−1 .                              (7.6)

For a Hubble constant of 50 km s−1 Mpc−1 (h = 0.5), this is approximately 1. The
values predicted by the cosmic string scenario are slightly larger, but also subject

                                           102
to relatively large errors because of the shakiness of the calculations. For the case
h = 0.5, [307] quotes,
                                   b = 1.1 to 2.9   (CDM),
                                                                                    (7.7)
                                   b = 1.4 to 4     (HDM).
         More stringent tests are set by studying CMB perturbations on a range of
angular scales. Although inflation and cosmic strings both predict an approximately
scale-invariant spectrum of density perturbations, their CMB spectra are different.
For example, the standard inflationary CDM model predicts a flat spectrum of CMB
perturbations on scales above about 2◦ , whereas the string spectrum is expected
to fall slightly, corresponding to a tilted model with power spectrum P (k) ∼ k 1.4
[273,307]. The quadrupole term is expected to be very much lower than the r.m.s.
prediction from inflation, as the density fluctuation responsible for it has not yet been
fully generated. The COBE data is unfortunately not good enough to distinguish
between n = 1 and n = 1.4. The measured quadrupole [308], at 6 ± 3 µK is
however rather lower than can be comfortably accounted for by cosmic variance around
the prediction from an inflationary Harrison–Zel’dovich spectrum normalized at 10◦ ,
Qrms−PS = 19.9 ± 1.6 µK [309]. However, the measurement of the quadrupole is
subject to severe contamination by galactic emission and so this discrepancy may not
be significant.
         Measurements have been reported of δT /T on the 1◦ angular scale. The
most accurate of these is the MAX experiment, who report [310]

                               δT
                                      ≃ (3.6 ± 0.2) × 10−5 .                        (7.8)
                                T 1 ◦



This is in good accord with COBE normalized inflationary CDM, with the standard
HZ scale-invariant power spectrum. The only calculation on these scales for the string
scenario [276] assumed that the universe was reionized some time after td , for example
by an early generation of very massive stars. This has the effect of smoothing the
perturbations on 1◦ scales, so direct comparison between strings and inflation over
this result is not yet possible.
         In terms of distinguishing between inflation and cosmic strings, it is currently
more useful to look at the spectrum of density perturbations. If both models are
normalized to the same value of σ8 , the cosmic-string model will predict substantially
more power on small scales and less on large scales. In the case of a CDM universe, the

                                              103
power on large scales predicted by inflation is already somewhat too low, particularly
for matching the observations of large-scale structure [311]. Clearly the cosmic-string
model is worse. Similarly, because of the excess power on small scales, it would
predict random small-scale velocities larger than those observed. It seems clear that
the combination of cosmic strings and CDM is not a viable model. The standard
inflationary CDM model is itself in some difficulty, which has led to various proposed
alternatives, such as mixed hot and cold dark matter [312–314], or more complex
inflationary models with tilted spectra [315]; it is in any case certain that cosmic
strings and CDM do not offer an improvement here.
         The situation is very different however in the case of hot dark matter (HDM),
where the addition of cosmic strings definitely does improve the agreement with
observation [284]. Cosmic strings and HDM seem to provide a promising alternative to
inflation and CDM, although there are potential problems with the high bias required
and a deficit of very small scale power. Unfortunately the uncertainties involved in
the calculations are still too large to allow definitive predictions, primarily because of
the difficulty of tying down the parameters of an evolving string network.



7.2. Lighter strings

         Once we get below the grand unification scale, it is really misleading to talk
of the cosmic string scenario: there are many different possible scenarios depending on
the type of string — global or local, superconducting or not, Abelian or non-Abelian
— and on the symmetry-breaking scale.
         One of the most attractive ideas, in the sense that it does least violence to
the Standard Model, is the axion string scenario. This is rather tightly constrained,
in that the relevant symmetry, the Peccei-Quinn global U(1) symmetry, has to be
broken at a scale in the range 1010 –1011 GeV. The strings would have all annihilated
by today, having been joined by domain walls at the QCD phase transition, but they
would have left an important relic in the form of a population of non-relativistic axions,
possibly with critical density. Thus the axion strings could have generated the dark
matter. Experiments to detect dark matter axions are in progress [106]. However, the
difficulty of detecting such weakly interacting particles suggestions that confirmation
or otherwise will be some time coming.

                                           104
         Another set of models are those involving relatively light, superconducting
strings, formed at a transition not far above the electroweak scale. Peter [316] has
emphasized that superconductivity is a rather generic feature of cosmic string models.
Such strings are probably not relevant to large-scale structure formation, but may have
significant astrophysical effects [96,249]. Massive cosmic strings (superconducting or
not) may have important roles to play in the generation of large-scale magnetic fields
[317,318] and perhaps in creating the net baryon number in the universe, i.e., the
matter-antimatter asymmetry [204,205].
         There are many exciting possibilities in this area, but as yet it is difficult
to point to definitive tests of the models. Much more theoretical work is needed, in
particular on the evolution of a network of superconducting or global strings, where
the dynamics is influenced by the long-range forces between strings.


7.3. Summary

         Cosmic strings are predicted by many unified theories of fundamental forces.
If they exist, they provide one of the few direct links between the observational features
of our present universe and the dramatic events of the immediate aftermath of the Big
Bang.
         They can be formed at a phase transition anywhere between the GUT and
electroweak scales. Light cosmic strings would only be observable if superconducting,
since their gravitational interactions are so weak.       Axion strings, formed at an
intermediate scale, have the exciting possibility of generating a substantial density
of cold dark matter in the form of axions.
         The best developed of the many cosmic-string scenarios concerns GUT-scale
strings, which generate both density perturbations and perturbations in the microwave
background of roughly the observed order of magnitude. In a CDM universe, they
do not seem very attractive, but the combination of strings and HDM is a very
promising alternative to the popular inflationary models. The idea of combining both
hot and cold dark matter has been put forward to improve inflationary models with a
Harrison–Zel’dovich spectrum, but this type of mixed dark matter (MDM) has yet to
be tried with strings. If the predictions can be tied down more accurately by improved
theoretical understanding of the problem of network evolution, then definitive tests of
this model should be possible soon.

                                           105
Acknowledgments

         We are grateful to Mark Bowick for sending us a copy of Figure 1.1, to
Michael Goodband for providing Figures 2.1 and to Paul Shellard for Figures 5.2.
We thank Albert Stebbins for helpful comments, and Catherine Wolfe for reading the
manuscript. We also wish to acknowledge the hospitality of the Isaac Newton Institute
where this review was completed.




                                        106
References


 [1] Itzykson C and Zuber J-B 1980 Quantum Field Theory (New York: McGraw-
         Hill); Ramond P 1981 Quantum Field Theory: a Modern Primer (Reading
         MA: Benjamin-Cummings); Cheng T-P and Li L-F 1984 Gauge Theories and
         Elementary Particle Physics (Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press)
 [2] Bailin D and Love A 1994 Supersymmetric gauge theory and string theory
         (Bristol: Institute of Physics)
 [3] de Gennes P 1974 The Physics of Liquid Crystals (Oxford: Clarendon); Kléman
         M 1989 Rep. Prog. Phys. 52 555
 [4] Kapusta J 1989 Finite Temperature Field Theory (Cambridge: Cambridge
         Univ. Press)
 [5] Mermin N D 1979 Rev. Mod. Phys. 51 591
 [6] Kibble T W B 1976 J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 9 1387
 [7] Bowick M J, Chandar L, Schiff E A and Srivastava A M 1994 Science 264 943
 [8] Kolb E W and Turner M S 1990 The Early Universe (Redwood City: Addison-
         Wesley)
 [9] Penzias A A and Wilson R W 1965 Ap. J. 142 419
[10] Mather J P et al 1994 Ap. J. 420 439
[11] Efstathiou G, Sutherland W J and Maddox S J 1990 Nature 348 705
[12] Bahcall J, Piran T and Weinberg S 1987 Dark Matter in the Universe (Singapore:
         World Scientific)
[13] Olive K, Schramm D, Steigman G and Walker T 1990 Phys. Lett. 236B 454
[14] Vilenkin A and Everett A E 1982 Phys. Rev. Lett. 48 1867
[15] Shafi Q and Vilenkin A 1984 Phys. Rev. D29 1870
[16] Donnelly R J 1991 Quantized Vortices in Helium II (Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press)
[17] Davis R L and Shellard E P S 1989 Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 2021
[18] Lazarides G and Shafi Q 1982 Phys. Lett. 115B 21
[19] Higgs P W 1966 Phys. Rev. 145 1156
[20] Nielsen H B and Olesen P 1973 Nucl. Phys. B61 45
[21] Jacobs L and Rebbi C 1979 Phys. Rev. B19 4486

                                           107
[22] Bogomol’nyi E B and Vainshtein A I 1976 Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 23 588 [Yad. Fiz.
         23 1111 (1976)]
[23] Abrikosov A A 1957 Sov. Phys. JETP 5 1174 [Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 32 1442
         (1957)]
[24] Davis R L 1990 Mod. Phys. Lett. A5 853
[25] Davis R L 1991 Mod. Phys. Lett. A6 73
[26] Bogomol’nyi E B 1976 Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 24 449 [Yad. Fiz. 24 861 (1976)]
[27] Hill C T, Hodges H M and Turner M S 1988 Phys. Rev. D37 263
[28] Tyupkin Y S, Fateev V A and Schwarz A S 1975 Sov. Phys. JETP Lett. 21 42
         [Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. Pis’ma Red. 21 91 (1975)]
[29] Arafune J, Freund P G O and Goebel C J 1975 J. Math. Phys. 16 433
[30] Coleman S 1988 Aspects of Symmetry (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
[31] Preskill J 1987 Architecture of Fundamental Interactions at Short Distances eds.
         Ramond P and Stora R (Amsterdam: North-Holland) pp 235–338
[32] Goddard P and Mansfield P 1986 Rep. Prog. Phys. 49 725
[33] Nash C and Sen S 1983 Topology and Geometry for Physicists (New York:
         Academic Press)
[34] Steenrod N 1957 Topology of Fibre Bundles (Princeton: Princeton University
         Press)
[35] Hindmarsh M and Kibble T W B 1985 Phys. Rev. Lett. 55 2398
[36] Hindmarsh M 1986 Cosmic Strings and Beads (PhD thesis, Univ. of London)
[37] Aryal M and Everett A E 1987 Phys. Rev. D35 3105
[38] Vachaspati T and Achúcarro A 1991 Phys. Rev. D44 3067
[39] Vachaspati T 1992 Phys. Rev. Lett. 68 1977
[40] Preskill J 1992 Phys. Rev. D46 4218
[41] Hindmarsh M 1992 Phys. Rev. Lett. 68 1263
[42] Hindmarsh M 1993 Nucl. Phys. B392 461
[43] Achúcarro A, Kujken K, Perivolaropoulos L and Vachaspati T 1992 Nucl. Phys.
         B388 435
[44] Gibbons G, Ortiz M E, Ruiz Ruiz F and Samols T M 1992 Nucl. Phys. B385
         127
[45] James M, Perivolaropoulos L and Vachaspati T 1993 Phys. Rev. D46 R5232
[46] James M, Perivolaropoulos L and Vachaspati T 1994 Nucl. Phys. B395 534

                                        108
[47] Hindmarsh M and James M 1994 Phys. Rev. D49 6109
[48] Barriola M, Vachaspati T and Bucher M 1994 Phys. Rev. D50 2819
[49] Hill C T, Kagan A L and Widrow L M 1988 Phys. Rev. D38 1100
[50] M G Alford and F Wilczek 1989 Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 1071
[51] Hindmarsh M 1989 Phys. Lett. 225B 127
[52] Zel’dovich Ya B, Kobzarev I Yu and Okun’ L B 1975 Sov. Phys. JETP 40 1
        [Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 67 3 (1974)]
[53] Kibble T W B, Lazarides G and Shafi G 1982 Phys. Rev. D26 435
[54] Bais F A 1981 Phys. Lett. 98B 437
[55] Vilenkin A 1982 Nucl. Phys. B196 240
[56] Goddard P and Olive D I 1978 Rep. Prog. Phys. 41 1357
[57] Barriola M and Vilenkin A 1989 Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 341
[58] Lazarides G, Shafi Q and Walsh T F 1982 Nucl. Phys. B195 157
[59] Preskill J and Vilenkin A 1993 Phys. Rev. D47 2324
[60] Rajaraman R 1982 Solitons and Instantons (Amsterdam: North Holland)
[61] Aryal M, Everett A E, Vilenkin A and Vachaspati T 1986 Phys. Rev. D34 434
[62] Vachaspati T and Vilenkin A 1987 Phys. Rev. D35 1131
[63] Witten E 1984 Nucl. Phys. B249 557
[64] Haws D, Hindmarsh M and Turok N 1988 Phys. Lett. 209B 255
[65] Davis R L and Shellard E P S 1988 Phys. Lett. 207B 404; —— 1988 Phys. Lett.
        209B 485
[66] Tinkham M 1975 Introduction to Superconductivity (New York: McGraw-Hill)
[67] Babul A, Piran T and Spergel D N 1988 Nucl. Phys. B202 307
[68] Amsterdamski P and Laguna-Castillo P 1988 Phys. Rev. D37 877
[69] Peter P 1992 Phys. Rev. D45 1091
[70] Peter P 1993 Phys. Rev. D47 3169
[71] Zhang S 1987 Phys. Rev. Lett. 59 2111
[72] Everett A E 1988 Phys. Rev. Lett. 61 1807
[73] Schwarz A S 1982 Nucl. Phys. B208 141
[74] Schwarz A S and Tyupkin Y S 1982 Nucl. Phys. B209 427
[75] Alford M, Benson K, Coleman S and March Russell J 1991 Nucl. Phys. B349
        439
[76] Everett A E 1993 Phys. Rev. D47 R1277

                                       109
 [77] Bucher M, Lo Hoi-Kwong and Preskill J 1992 Nucl. Phys. B386 3
 [78] Chuang I, Dürrer R, Turok N and Yurke B 1991 Science 251 1336
 [79] Caroli C, de Gennes P and Matricon J 1963 Phys. Lett. 9 307
 [80] Jackiw R and Rossi P 1981 Nucl. Phys. B190 681
 [81] Weinberg E 1981 Phys. Rev. D24 2669
 [82] Bell J S and Jackiw R 1969 Nuovo Cim. 60A 47; Adler S 1969 Phys. Rev. 177
         2426; Bardeen W A 1969 Phys. Rev. 184 1848
 [83] Widrow L M 1988 Phys. Rev. D38 1684
 [84] Hill C T and Lee K 1988 Nucl. Phys. B297 765
 [85] Callan C G and Harvey J 1985 Nucl. Phys. B250 427
 [86] Lazarides G and Shafi Q 1985 Phys. Lett. 157 123
 [87] Barr S M and Matheson A 1987 Phys. Lett. 198B 146; —— 1987 Phys. Rev.
         D36 2905
 [88] Hill C T and Widrow L M 1987 Phys. Lett. 189B 17
 [89] Davis R L Phys. Rev. D36 2267
 [90] Hindmarsh M 1988 Phys. Lett. 200B 429
 [91] Georgi H and Glashow S L 1974 Phys. Rev. Lett. 32 438; Pati J and Salam A
         1974 Phys. Rev. D10 275; Ross G G 1981 Rep. Prog. Phys. 44 655
 [92] Georgi H and Glashow S 1974 Phys. Rev. Lett. 32 438
 [93] Georgi H 1974 Particles and Fields 1974 ed. Carlson C (New York: American
         Institute of Physics) pp 575–582; Fritzsch H and Minkowski P 1975 Ann.
         Phys., NY 93 193
 [94] Gell-Mann M, Ramond P and Slansky R 1979 Supergravity eds. van Nieuwen-
         huisen P and Freedman D (Amsterdam: North-Holland)
 [95] Amaldi U, de Boer W and Furstenau 1991 Phys. Lett. 260 447
 [96] Chudnovsky E M, Field G, Spergel D N and Vilenkin A 1986 Phys. Rev. D34
         944
 [97] Ostriker J, Thompson C and Witten E 1986 Phys. Lett. 180B 231
 [98] Hill C T, Schramm D N and Walker T 1987 Phys. Rev. D36 1007
 [99] Field G and Vilenkin A 1987 Nature 326 772
[100] Malaney R A and Butler M N 1989 Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 117
[101] Yajnik U 1987 Phys. Lett. 184B 229

                                       110
[102] Peccei R D and Quinn H 1977 Phys. Rev. Lett. 38 1440; ——1977 Phys. Rev.
         D16 1791
[103] Weinberg S 1978 Phys. Rev. Lett. 40 223
[104] Wilczek F 1978 Phys. Rev. Lett. 40 279
[105] Gross D J, Pisarski R D and Yaffe L G 1981 Rev. Mod. Phys. 53 43
[106] Sikivie P 1991 TASI 91 (Proceedings of the Theoretical Advanced Study
         Institute, Boulder, CO) pp 399–420
[107] Dicus D A, Kolb E W, Teplitz V L and Wagoner R V 1978 Phys. Rev. D18 1829
[108] Ellis J and Olive K 1987 Phys. Lett. 193B 525
[109] Davis R L 1986 Phys. Lett. 180B 225
[110] Harari D and Sikivie P 1987 Phys. Lett. 195B 361
[111] Davis R L and Shellard E P S 1989 Nucl. Phys. B234 167
[112] Wilczek F 1982 Phys. Rev. Lett. 49 1549
[113] Joyce M and Turok N 1994 Nucl. Phys. B416 389
[114] Bibilashvili T M and Dvali G R 1990 Phys. Lett. 248B 259
[115] Dvali G R and Senjanović G 1994 Phys. Rev. Lett. 72 9
[116] Förster D 1974 Nucl. Phys. B81 84
[117] Goddard P, Goldstone J, Rebbi C and Thorne C 1973 Nucl. Phys. B56 109
[118] Nambu Y 1970 Symmetries and Quark Models ed. Chand R (New York: Gordon
         and Breach)
[119] Green M B, Schwartz J and Witten E 1987 Superstring Theory (Cambridge:
         Cambridge University Press)
[120] Eisenhart L P 1925 Riemannian Geometry (Princeton: Princeton University
         Press); Spivak M 1979 A Comprehensive Introduction to Differential Geo-
         metry (Berkeley: Publish or Perish)
[121] Maeda K and Turok N 1988 Phys. Lett. 202B 376
[122] Gregory R 1988 Phys. Lett. 206B 199
[123] Barr S M and Hochberg D 1989 Phys. Rev. D39 2308
[124] Gregory R, Haws D and Garfinkle D 1990 Phys. Rev. D42 343
[125] Morikawa M 1989 Effective Action and Radiative Reaction of Cosmic Strings
         (Vancouver: UBC preprint)
[126] Gregory R 1991 Phys. Rev. D43 520
[127] Silveira V and Maia M D 1993 Phys. Lett. 174A 280

                                        111
[128] Larsen A L 1993 Phys. Lett. 181A 369
[129] Kibble T W B and Turok N 1982 Phys. Lett. 116B 141
[130] Kibble T W B 1985 Nucl. Phys. B252 227 [E B261 461]
[131] Garfinkle D and Vachaspati T 1987 Phys. Rev. D36 2229
[132] Burden C 1985 Phys. Lett. 164B 277
[133] Turok N 1983 Phys. Lett. 123B 387
[134] Vilenkin A 1990 Phys. Rev. D41 3038
[135] Carter B 1990 Phys. Rev. D41 3869
[136] Turok N and Bhattacharjee P 1984 Phys. Rev. D29 1557
[137] Thompson C 1988 Phys. Rev. D37 283
[138] Vilenkin A 1981 Phys. Rev. D24 2082
[139] Everett A E 1981 Phys. Rev. D24 858
[140] Vilenkin A 1991 Phys. Rev. D43 1060
[141] Vilenkin A and Vachaspati T 1987 Phys. Rev. Lett. 58 1041
[142] Copeland E, Hindmarsh M and Turok N 1987 Phys. Rev. Lett. 58 1910
[143] Spergel D N, Piran T and Goodman J 1987 Nucl. Phys. B291 647
[144] Carter B 1989 Phys. Lett. 224B 61; —— 1989 Phys. Lett. 228B 466
[145] Davis R L and Shellard E P S 1989 Nucl. Phys. B323 209
[146] Nielsen N K 1980 Nucl. Phys. B167 249
[147] Nielsen N K and Olesen P 1987 Nucl. Phys. B291 829
[148] Duff M J 1987 Architecture of Fundamental Interactions at Short Distances eds.
          Ramond P and Stora R (Amsterdam: North-Holland) pp 819–903
[149] Copeland E, Haws D, Hindmarsh M and Turok N 1988 Nucl. Phys. B304 908
[150] Kalb M and Ramond P 1974 Phys. Rev. D9 2273
[151] Lund F and Regge T 1976 Phys. Rev. D14 1524
[152] Vilenkin A and Vachaspati T 1987 Phys. Rev. D35 1138
[153] Davis R L and Shellard E P S 1988 Phys. Lett. 214B 219
[154] Shellard E P S 1988 Nucl. Phys. B283 264
[155] Moriarty K, Myers E and Rebbi C 1988 Phys. Lett. 207B 411
[156] Moriarty K, Myers E and Rebbi C 1988 Cosmic Strings: the Current Status eds.
          Accetta F S and Krauss L M (Singapore: World Scientific) pp 11–24
[157] Matzner R and McCracken J 1988 Cosmic Strings: the Current Status eds.
          Accetta F S and Krauss L M (Singapore: World Scientific) pp 32–41

                                        112
[158] Laguna P and Matzner R 1990 Phys. Rev. D41 1751
[159] Shellard E P S 1988 Cosmic Strings: the Current Status eds. Accetta F S and
         Krauss L M (Singapore: World Scientific) pp 25–31
[160] Vilenkin A 1981 Phys. Rev. D23 852
[161] Gott J R 1985 Ap. J. 288 422
[162] Hiscock W A 1985 Phys. Rev. D31 3288
[163] Linet B 1985 Gen. Rel. Grav. 17 1109
[164] Futamase T and Garfinkle D 1988 Phys. Rev. D37 2086
[165] Hindmarsh M and Wray A 1990 Phys. Lett. 251B 498
[166] Vickers J A G 1987 Classical Quantum Grav. 4 1
[167] Gregory R 1989 Phys. Rev. D39 2108
[168] Moss I G and Poletti S 1987 Phys. Lett. 199B 34
[169] Harari D and Sikivie P 1988 Phys. Rev. D37 3438
[170] Cohen A G and Kaplan D B 1988 Phys. Lett. 215B 67
[171] Gregory R 1988 Phys. Lett. 215B 663
[172] Weinberg S 1972 Gravitation and Cosmology (New York: Wiley)
[173] Hogan C and Rees M 1984 Nature 311 109
[174] Vachaspati T and Vilenkin A 1985 Phys. Rev. D31 3052
[175] Dürrer R 1989 Nucl. Phys. B328 238
[176] Vachaspati T 1987 Phys. Rev. D35 1767
[177] Copeland E, Haws D and Hindmarsh M 1990 Phys. Rev. D42 726
[178] Quashnock J and Spergel D N 1990 Phys. Rev. D42 2505
[179] Mitchell D, Turok N, Wilkinson R B and Jetzer P 1989 Nucl. Phys. B315 1;
         Wilkinson R B, Mitchell D and Turok N 1990 Nucl. Phys. B332 131
[180] Sakellariadou M 1990 Phys. Rev. D42 354
[181] Hindmarsh M 1990 Phys. Lett. 251B 28
[182] Battye R A and Shellard E P S 1994 Nucl. Phys. B423 260
[183] Vachaspati T 1986 Nucl. Phys. B277 593
[184] Frolov V P and Garfinkle D 1990 Phys. Rev. D42 3980
[185] Davis R L 1985 Phys. Rev. D32 3172
[186] Sakellariadou M 1991 Phys. Rev. D44 3767
[187] Hagmann C and Sikivie P 1991 Nucl. Phys. B363 247
[188] Srednicki M and Theisen S 1987 Phys. Lett. 189B 397

                                       113
[189] Brandenberger R H 1987 Nucl. Phys. B293 812
[190] Brandenberger R, Davis A-C and Matheson A 1988 Nucl. Phys. B307 909
[191] Perkins W, Perivolaropoulos L, Davis A-C, Brandenberger R and Matheson A
         1991 Nucl. Phys. B353 237
[192] Fewster C and Kay B 1993 Nucl. Phys. B399 89
[193] Linet B 1986 Phys. Rev. D33 1833
[194] ’t Hooft G 1988 Comm. Math. Phys. 118 685; Deser S and Jackiw R 1988
         Comm. Math. Phys. 118 495; Gibbons G, Ruiz Ruiz F, and Vachaspati T
         1990 Comm. Math. Phys. 127 295
[195] Rubakov V 1981 Sov. Phys. JETP Lett. 33 644 [Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. Pis’ma
         Red. 33 658 (1981)]; —— 1982 Nucl. Phys. B203 311; Callan C G 1982
         Phys. Rev. D25 2141; —— 1982 Phys. Rev. D26 2158
[196] Alford M, March Russell J and Wilczek F 1989 Nucl. Phys. B328 140
[197] Perivolaropoulos L, Matheson A, Davis A-C and Brandenberger R 1990 Phys.
         Lett. 245B 556
[198] Ma C P 1993 Phys. Rev. D48 530
[199] Bucher M and Goldhaber A 1993 Phys. Rev. D49 4167
[200] Brandenberger R, Davis A-C and Matheson A 1989 Phys. Lett. 218B 304
[201] Sakharov A 1967 Sov. Phys. JETP Lett. 5 24 [Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. Pis’ma Red.
         5 32 (1967)]
[202] Bhattarcharjee P, Turok N and Kibble T W B 1982 Phys. Lett. 119B 95
[203] Kawasaki M and Maeda K 1988 Phys. Lett. 208B 84
[204] Brandenberger R, Davis A-C and Hindmarsh M 1991 Phys. Lett. 263B 239
[205] Davis A-C and Earnshaw M 1993 Nucl. Phys. B394 21
[206] Dolan L and Jackiw R 1974 Phys. Rev. D9 3320
[207] Weinberg S 1974 Phys. Rev. D9 3357
[208] Arnold P and Yaffe L G 1994 PR D49 3003
[209] Shaposhnikov M 1993 Phys. Lett. 316B 112
[210] Rudaz S and Srivastava A M 1993 Mod. Phys. Lett. A8 1443
[211] Coleman S 1977 Phys. Rev. D15 2927
[212] Callan C and Coleman S 1977 Phys. Rev. D16 1762
[213] Linde A D 1983 Nucl. Phys. B216 421

                                       114
[214] Langer 1992 Solids Far from Equilibrium ed. Godrèche C (Cambridge: Cam-
          bridge University Press) pp 297–363
[215] Hindmarsh M, Davis A-C and Brandenberger R 1994 Phys. Rev. D49 1944
[216] Vachaspati T and Vilenkin A 1984 Phys. Rev. D30 2036
[217] Leese R and Prokopec T 1991 Phys. Lett. 260B 27
[218] Ginzburg V L 1960 Sov. Phys. Sol. State 2 1824 [Fiz. Tverd. Tela 2 2031 (1960)]
[219] Hindmarsh M and Strobl K 1994 Statistical Properties of Strings Cambridge/
          Sussex preprint DAMTP–94–56, SUSX–TP–94/72, hep–th/9410094
[220] Kibble T W B 1986 Phys. Lett. 166B 311
[221] Lazarides G and Shafi Q 1984 Phys. Lett. 148B 35
[222] Vishniac E T, Olive K A and Seckel D 1987 Nucl. Phys. B289 717
[223] Yokoyama J 1988 Phys. Lett. 212B 273
[224] Kibble T W B 1987 Cosmology and Particle Physics, Lectures at GIFT XVIIth
          International Seminar on Theoretical Physics eds. Alvarez E, Dominguez
          Tenreiro R, Ibáñez Cabanell J M and Quirós M (Singapore: World Scientific),
          pp 171–208
[225] Vilenkin A 1984 Phys. Rev. Lett. 53 1016
[226] Kibble T W B 1986 Phys. Rev. D33 328
[227] Vachaspati T, Everett A and Vilenkin A 1984 Phys. Rev. D30 2046
[228] Vilenkin A 1981 Phys. Rev. Lett. 46 1169 [E 461496]
[229] Copeland E, Kibble T W B and Austin D 1992 Phys. Rev. D45 R1000
[230] Austin D, Copeland E and Kibble T W B 1993 Phys. Rev. D48 5594
[231] Albrecht A and Turok N 1985 Phys. Rev. Lett. 54 1868
[232] Albrecht A and Turok N 1989 Phys. Rev. D40 973
[233] Bennett D P and Bouchet F R 1988 Phys. Rev. Lett. 60 257
[234] Bennett D P and Bouchet F R 1989 Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 2776
[235] Bennett D P and Bouchet F R 1990 Phys. Rev. D41 2408
[236] Allen B and Shellard E P S 1990 Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 119
[237] Shellard E P S and Allen B 1990 The Formation and Evolution of Cosmic Strings
          eds. Gibbons G W, Hawking S W and Vachaspati T (Cambridge: Cambridge
          University Press) pp 421–448
[238] Smith A G and Vilenkin A 1987 Phys. Rev. D36 990
[239] Sakellariadou M and Vilenkin A 1990 Phys. Rev. D42 349

                                          115
[240] Bennett D P 1986 Phys. Rev. D33 872
[241] Bennett D P 1986 Phys. Rev. D34 3592
[242] Kibble T W B and Copeland E 1991 Physica Scripta T36 153
[243] Embacher F 1992 Nucl. Phys. B387 129; 163; —— 1994 Phys. Rev. D49 5030
[244] Allen B and Caldwell R 1991 Phys. Rev. D43 2457
[245] Quashnock J and Piran T 1991 Phys. Rev. D43 2497
[246] Austin D 1993 Small Scale Structure on Cosmic Strings University of Sussex
          preprint SUSX–TP–93/3–2, hep-th/9305028
[247] Austin D, Copeland E and Kibble T W B 1994 Characteristics of Cosmic String
          Configurations University of Sussex/Imperial College preprint SUSX–TH–
          93/3/6, IMPERIAL/TP/93–94/45, hep-ph/9406379
[248] Carter B 1990 The Early Universe and Cosmic Structure Proc. Xth Moriond
          Astrophysics Meeting, eds. Blanchard A and Tran Thanh Van J (Gif sur
          Yvette: Editions Frontières)
[249] Chudnovsky E and Vilenkin A 1988 Phys. Rev. Lett. 61 1043
[250] Ostriker J A and Cowie L L 1981 Ap. J. 243 L127; Carr B J and Ikeuchi S Mon.
          Not. R. Ast. Soc. 213 497; Vishniac E T, Ostriker J A and Bertschinger E
          1985 Ap. J. 291 399
[251] Levin J J, Freese K and Spergel D N 1992 Ap. J. 389 464
[252] Kim J E 1987 Phys. Rep. 150 1
[253] Sikivie P 1982 Phys. Rev. Lett. 48 1156
[254] Shellard P 1990 The Formation and Evolution of Cosmic Strings eds. Gibbons
          G W, Hawking S W and Vachaspati T (Cambridge: Cambridge University
          Press) pp 107–115
[255] Abbott L F and Sikivie P 1983 Phys. Lett. 120B 133
[256] Dine M and Fischler W 1983 Phys. Lett. 120B 137
[257] Preskill J, Wise M B and Wilczek F 1983 Phys. Lett. 120B 127
[258] Vilenkin A 1984 Ap. J. 282 L51
[259] Garfinkle D 1985 Phys. Rev. D32 1323
[260] Vilenkin A 1986 Nature 322 613
[261] Hindmarsh M B 1990 The Formation and Evolution of Cosmic Strings eds.
          Gibbons G W, Hawking S W and Vachaspati T (Cambridge: Cambridge
          University Press) pp 527–542

                                          116
[262] Schneider P, Ehlers J and Falco E E 1992 Gravitational Lensing (Berlin: Springer
          Verlag)
[263] Cowie L L and Hu E M 1987 Ap. J. 318 L33
[264] Hu E M 1990 Ap. J. 360 L7
[265] Hogan C and Narayan R 1984 Mon. Not. R. Ast. Soc. 211 575
[266] Paczyński B 1986 Nature 319 567
[267] Kaiser N and Stebbins A 1984 Nature 310 391
[268] Stebbins A 1988 Ap. J. 327 584
[269] Hindmarsh M B 1994 Ap. J. 431 534
[270] Bouchet F R, Bennett D P and Stebbins A 1988 Nature 335 410
[271] Readhead A C S et al 1988 Ap. J. 346 566
[272] Stebbins A and Veeraraghavan S 1994 Beyond the Small-Angle Approximation
          for MBR Perturbations from Seeds preprint FERMILAB–PUB–94/047–A,
          astro–ph 9406067 (to appear in Phys. Rev. D)
[273] Bennett D P, Stebbins A and Bouchet F 1992 Ap. J. 399 L5
[274] Smoot G et al 1992 Ap. J. 396 L1
[275] Bennett C L et al 1992 Ap. J. 396 L7
[276] Coulson D, Ferreira P, Graham P and Turok N 1994 Nature 368 27
[277] Moessner R, Perivolaropoulos L and Brandenberger R 1994 Ap. J. 425 365
[278] Turok N 1985 Phys. Rev. Lett. 55 1801
[279] Silk J and Vilenkin A 1984 Phys. Rev. Lett. 53 1700
[280] Vachaspati T and Vilenkin A 1990 Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 1057
[281] Veeraraghavan S and Stebbins A 1990 Ap. J. 365 37
[282] Pen U L, Spergel D N and Turok N 1994 Phys. Rev. D49 692
[283] Albrecht A and Stebbins A 1992 Phys. Rev. Lett. 68 2121
[284] Albrecht A and Stebbins A 1992 Phys. Rev. Lett. 69 2615
[285] Lyth D H and Liddle A R 1993 Phys. Rep. 231 1
[286] Caldwell R R and Allen B 1992 Phys. Rev. D45 3447
[287] Olive K and Steigman G 1994 On the Abundance of Primordial Helium Ohio
          State Univ. preprint OSU–TA–6/94, astro–ph 9406067
[288] Kernan PJ and Krauss LM 1994 Phys. Rev. Lett. 72 3309
[289] Bennett D P and Bouchet F R 1991 Phys. Rev. D43 2733

                                         117
[290] Stinebring D R, Ryba M F, Taylor J H and Romani R W 1990 Phys. Rev. Lett.
         65 285
[291] Allen B and Shellard E P S 1992 Phys. Rev. D45 1898
[292] Yokoyama J 1989 Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 712
[293] Quenby J J and Naidu K 1992 Nucl. Phys. (Proc. Supp.) B1 1
[294] Bhattacharjee P 1989 Phys. Rev. D40 3968
[295] Bhattacharjee P and Rana N C 1990 Phys. Lett. 246B 365
[296] Gill A J and Kibble T W B 1994 Phys. Rev. D50 3660
[297] Babul A, Paczyński B and Spergel D 1987 Ap. J. 316 L49; Paczyński B 1988
         Ap. J. 335 L49
[298] Starobinsky A A 1982 Phys. Lett. 117B 175
[299] Hawking S W 1982 Phys. Lett. 115B 295
[300] Guth A H and Pi S-Y 1982 Phys. Rev. Lett. 49 1110
[301] La D and Steinhardt P 1989 Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 3760
[302] Lucchin F and Matarrese S 1985 Phys. Rev. D32 1316
[303] Steinhardt P and Accetta F S 1990 Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 2740
[304] Adams F C and Freese K 1991 Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 2740
[305] Adams F C, Freese K and Guth A H 1991 Phys. Rev. D43 965
[306] Wright E L et al 1992 Ap. J. 396 L13
[307] Perivolaropoulos L 1993 Phys. Lett. 298B 305
[308] Bennett C et al 1994 Cosmic Temperature Fluctuations from Two Years of
         COBE DMR Observations COBE preprint, astro-ph/9401012
[309] Górski K M et al 1994 Ap. J. 430 L89
[310] Meinhold P et al 1993 Ap. J. 409 L1; Gunderson J O et al 1993 Ap. J. 413 L1
[311] Davis M, Efstathiou G, Frenk C S and White S D M 1992 Nature 356 489
[312] van Dalen A and Schaefer R K 1992 Ap. J. 398 33
[313] Davis M, Summers F J and Schlegel D 1992 Nature 359 393
[314] Taylor A N and Rowan-Robinson M 1992 Nature 359 396
[315] Cen R, Gnedin N Y, Kofman L A and Ostriker J P 1992 Ap. J. 399 L11
[316] Peter P 1994 Phys. Rev. D49 5052
[317] Vachaspati T 1991 Phys. Lett. 265B 258
[318] Brandenberger R H, Davis A-C, Matheson A M and Trodden M 1992 Phys. Lett.
         293B 287


                                       118
Figure captions


Figure 1.1. Defect formation at the isotropic-nematic phase transition in a liquid
       crystal. As the sample cools, bubbles of the ordered, nematic, phase nucleate
       (a), grow (b), and merge (c), resulting in the formation of a network of
       line disclinations at the bubble boundaries (d).      The scale of the network
       then increases as strings straighten and loops collapse (e). (Reproduced by
       permission of the authors and publisher from Bowick M J, Chandar L, Schiff
       E A and Srivastava A M 1994 Science 264 943.)


Figure 2.1. Field (a) and energy density (b) profiles of the global string. The shading
       in (a) shows the phase of the complex scalar field changing from 0 (lightest)
       to 2π (darkest) around the string. The sharp point in the energy density is an
       artefact of the discretization.


Figure 2.2. A multiply-connected vacuum manifold M. Two paths with base point
       φ0 are shown. The dashed line represents the identity class, for it is contractible
       to the base point, while the solid line is not.


Figure 2.3. A disconnected isotropy group, consisting of two parts H0 and H1
       contained in G. The path shown begins and ends at the same point in G/H,
       and thus forms a non-contractible loop in M.


Figure 2.4. The field configurations of the two SO(3) → {1} string solutions. The
       arrows indicate the magnitudes and directions in internal space of each field,
       relative to the axes shown. Type (ii) has lower energy.


Figure 2.5. Monopoles joined by strings. Monopoles exist if G is multiply connected:
       the diagram shows the gauge transformations on a large sphere around the
       monopole. If H is disconnected, as here, the monopoles may get joined by
       more than one string.


Figure 3.1. A simple loop trajectory over one period of oscillation. Note the cusps
       at t = 0 and t = 8.

                                           119
Figure 3.2. The generic behaviour of the effective mass per unit length µ and the
      tension T of a superconducting string with current I. At the critical current Ic ,
      dT /dµ becomes positive and the current-carrying condensate becomes unstable.

Figure 3.3. Intercommuting strings. Two segments travelling in opposite directions
      have just crossed. The total winding number in planes A and B is 2 and 0
      respectively, allowing the strings to reconnect the other way.

Figure 3.4. The formation of kinks after intercommuting.

Figure 5.1. The formation of global strings. Bubbles of the low temperature phase
      nucleate (a), collide (b) and merge (c). As this happens, the field is pulled out
      of the central minimum, in a direction determined by the initial values of the
      field inside the bubbles. If the initial phases are widely distributed around the
      vacuum manifold, as here, a string forms.

Figure 5.2. Two boxes of string taken from the radiation (a) and the matter (b)
      era simulations of Allen and Shellard. Both are horizon-sized cubes taken from
      near the end of the simulation.

Figure 6.1. Gravitational lensing by cosmic string. The space-time is conical: a
      wedge AO1 O2 A′ O1′ O2′ is cut out and the sides identified. The observer at
      O1 O2 can see two images of a quasar beyond the string, separated by an angle
      ψ, given in equation (6.2).

Figure 6.2. The formation of a wake by a string. In the string rest frame, matter
      (assumed collisionless) approaches with velocity −v. In the conical coordinate
      system, the particles move in straight lines. When projected onto a plane, the
      particle trajectories are bent behind the string into a wake with opening angle
      8πGµ.

Figure 6.3.    The power spectra of density perturbations from strings (dashed)
      compared to inflation (solid), for both cold and hot dark matter, normalized to
      unity at 8 Mpc (h = 1). The lines with the most power on small scales are for
      CDM. (Reproduced by permission of the authors and publisher from Albrecht
      A and Stebbins A 1992 Phys. Rev. Lett. 69 2615.)


                                         120
        1


       0.8


       0.6
f(r)
       0.4


       0.2


        0

             5
                                       5
                 0
                                   0
                     -5   -5
                 y             x
                 2.5


                  2




Energy density
                 1.5


                  1


                 0.5


                  0

                       5
                                             5
                           0
                                         0
                               -5   -5
t=0      t=1      t=2      t=3




t=4      t=5      t=6      t=7




t=8      t=9      t = 10   t = 11




t = 12   t = 13   t = 14   t = 15
φ


    V (φ)
φ


    V (φ)
φ


    V (φ)
      O2
                     A            B
O1
                             C

                      S

           O2’
                         θ
             8πG µ           Q    B’
O1’
                     A’
                             C’
 M




φ0
µ




         T



    Ic       I
8πG µ   -v




        -v
     G

H0

         H1
            1’
2   B



                 2’

        A
    1
 3             φ1
       2
               φ2
           1
(i)




(ii)
 G’        G


  1   H0       H1




           N
g’(θ,φ)
