PHYSICAL REVIEW

7, NUMBER

VOLUME

D

15 A PRI L 1973

8

Black Holes and Entropy*
Jacob D. Bekensteing

Joseph Henry Laboratories, Princeton University, Princeton, Neu Jersey OS540
and Center for Relativity Theory, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712|:
P, eceived 2 November 1972)

There are a number of similarities between black-hole physics and thermodynamics.
Most striking is the similarity in the behaviors of black-hole area and of entropy: Both
quantities tend to increase irreversibly. In this paper we make this similarity the basis of
a thermodynamic approach to black-hole physics. After a brief review of the elements of
the theory of information, we discuss black-hole physics from the point of view of information theory. We show that it is natural to introduce the concept of black-hole entropy as the
measure of information about a black-hole interior which is inaccessible to an exterior
observer. Considerations of simplicity and consistency, and dimensional arguments indicate that the black-hole entropy is equal to the ratio of the black-hole area to the square of
the Planck length times a dimensionless constant of order unity. A different approach
making use of the specific properties of Kerr black holes and of concepts from information
theory leads to the same conclusion, and suggests a definite value for the constant. The
physical content of the concept of black-hole entropy derives from the following generalized
version of the second law: When common entropy goes down a black hole, the common
entropy in the black-hole exterior plus the black-hole entropy never decreases. The validity
of this version of the second law is supported by an argument from information theory as
well as by several examples.

I. INTRODUCTION
A black hole' exhibits a remarkable tendency to
increase its horizon surface area when under-

This was first noticed
going any transformation.
by Floyd and Penrose' in an example of the extraction of energy from a Kerr black hole by means of
what has come to be known as a Penrose process.
They suggested that an increase in area might be

'

a general feature of black-hole transformations.
Christodoulou" had shown that no
Independently,
process whose ultimate outcome is the capture of
a particle by a Kerr black hole can result in the
decrease of a certain quantity which he named the
irreducible mass of the black hole, M. . In fact,
most processes result in an increase in M„. with
the exception of a very special class of limiting
processes, called reversible processes, which
leave Af unchanged. It turns out that M,. is proportional to the square root of the black hole's
area' [see (1)]. Thus Christodoulou's result
implies that the area increases in most processes,
and thus it supports the conjecture of Floyd and
Penrose. Christodoulou's conclusion is also valid

'

for charged Kerr black holes.
By an approach radically different from Christodoulou's, Hawking' has given a general proof that
the black-hole surface area cannot decrease in
any process. For a system of several black holes
Hawking's theorem implies that the area of each
individual black hole cannot decrease, and more-

over that when two black holes merge, the area of
the resulting black hole {provided, of course, that
one forms) cannot be smaller than the sum of initial areas.
It is clear that changes of a black hole generally
take place in the direction of increasing area.
This is reminiscent of the second law of thermodynamics which states that changes of a closed
thermodynamic system take place in the direction
of increasing entropy. The above comparison
suggests that it might be useful to consider blackhole physics from a thermodynamic viewpoint: We
already have the concept of energy in black-hole
physics, and the above observation suggests that
something like entropy may also play a role in it.
Thus, one can hope to develop a thermodynamics
for black holes -at least a rudimentary one. In
this paper we show that it is possible to give a
precise definition of black-hole entropy. Based
on it we construct some elements of a thermodynamics for black holes.
There are some precedents to our considerations.
The idea of making use of thermodynamic methods
in black-hole physics appears to have been first
considered by Greif. He examined the possibility
of defining the entropy of a black hole, but lacking
many of the recent results in black-hole physics,
he did not make a concrete proposal. More recently, Carter' has rederived the result of
Christodoulou
that the irreducible mass of a
Kerr black hole is unchanged in a reversible trans-

'

2333

2334

JACOB D. B EKE NSTEIN

formation by applying to the black hole the critereversible transrion for a thermodynamically
formation of a rigidly rotating star. ' Carter's
example shows the possibilities inherent in the
use of thermodynamic arguments in black-hole
physics.
In this paper we attempt a unification of blackIn Sec. II we
hole physics with thermodynamics.
point out a number of analogies between black-hole
all of which bring
physics and thermodynamics,
out the parallelism between black-hole area and
entropy. In Sec. III, after a short review of elements of the theory of information, we discuss
some features of black-hole physics from the point
of view of information theory. We take the area of
a black hole as a measure of its entropy-entropy
in the sense of inaccessibility of information about
its internal configuration. We go further in Sec. IV
and propose a specific expression for black-hole
entropy in terms of black-hole area. Earlier"'
we had proposed this same expression on different
grounds; here we find the value of a previously unknown constant by means of an argument based on
information theory. In Sec. V we propose a generalization of the second law of thermodynamics
applicable to black-hole physics: When some common entropy goes down a black hole, the blackhole entropy plus the common entropy in the blackhole exterior never decreases
In Secs. VI and VII we construct several exp. mples
which provide support for the generalized second
law. In addition, we analyze in Sec. VII a thought
experiment proposed by Geroch" in which, with
the help of a black hole, heat is apparently converted entirely into work in violation of the second
law. We show that, in fact, due to fundamental
physical limitations the conversion efficiency is
somewhat smaller than unity. Moreover, the efficiency is no greater than the maximum efficiency
allowed by thermodynamics for the heat engine
which is equivalent to the Geroch process, so that
this process cannot be regarded as violating the
second law.
II. ANALOGIES BETWEEN BLACK-HOLE
PHYSICS AND THERMODYNAMICS

We have already mentioned the resemblance between the tendency of black-hole area to increase,
and the tendency of entropy to increase. Changes
of a black hole or of a system of black holes select
a preferred direction in time: that in which the
black-hole area increases. Likewise, changes of
a closed thermodynamic system select a preferred
direction in time: that in which the entropy
increases. This parallelism between black-hole
area and entropy goes even deeper.

Black-hole area turns out to be as intimately
related to the degradation of energy as is entropy.
the statement "the entropy has
In thermodynamics
increased" implies that a certain quantity of energy has been degraded, i.e. , that it can no longer
arear'
transformed into work. Now, as Christodoulou
be
has emphasized,
the irreducible mass M of a
Kerr black hole, which is related to the surface
of the black hole by'

"

represents energy which cannot be extracted by
means of Penrose processes. ' In this sense it is
inert energy which cannot be transfcrmed into
work. Thus, an increase in A, and hence in
,
corresponds to the degradation (in the thermodynamic sense) of some of the energy of the black
hole.
The irreducible mass of a Schwarzschild black
hole is just equal to its total mass. Thus, no energy can be extracted from such a black hole by
means of Penrose processes. However, the merger of two Schwarzschild black holes can yield energy in the form of gravitational waves. The only
restriction on the process is that the total blackhole area must not decrease as a result of the
merger. ' However, the sum of the irreducible
masses of individual black holes may (in fact,
does) decrease. We see that for a system of several black holes the degraded energy E„ is more
appropriately given by

I,

'

than by PM. . According to this formula the degraded energy of a system of black holes is smaller than the sum of degraded energies of the black
holes considered separately. Thus by combining
Schwarzschild black holes which are already
"dead, one can still obtain energy. Analogously,
by allowing two thermodynamic
systems which are
separately in equilibrium to interact, one can
obtain work, whereas each system by itself could
have done no work. From the above observations
the parallelism between black-hole area and
entropy is again evident.
We shall now construct the black-hole analog of
the thermodynamic expression

"

'

dE = TdS -PdV

For convenience we shall from now on write all
our equations in terms of the "rationalized area"
of a black hole e defined by
(4)

BLACK HOLES AND ENTROPY
Consider a Kerr black hole of mass M, charge Q,
and angular momentum L. (3-vectors here refer
to components with respect to the Euclidean frame
at infinity. ) Its rationalized area is given by' '

at black-hole physics from the point of view of the
theory of information.
III. INFORMATION

=2Mr, —Q,

a = L/M,

r, =M +(M~-Q -a )'
Differentiating

(7)

"'"

The connection between entropy and information
The entropy of a system measures one's uncertainty or lack of information
about the actual internal configuration of the system. Suppose that all that is known about the internal configuration of a system is that it may be
found in any of a number of states with probability
p„ for the nth state. Then the entropy associated
with the system is given by Shannon's formula"'"

is well known.

where

AND BLACK-HOLE ENTROPY

(5) and solving for dM we obtain
S = -PP„ inP„

dM=8dn+0

~

dL+4dQ,

(8)

where

(9a)
(9b)

4 =—Qr, /a.

(9c)

In (8) we have the black-hole analog of the thermodynamic expression (3): The terms fl dL and
clearly represent the work done on the black
hole by an external agent who increases the black
hole's angular momentum and charge by dL and
dQ, respectively. Thus 0 dL+ 4 d@ is the analog
of -PdV, the work done on a thermodynamic system. Comparing our expression for work with the
expressions for work done on rotating" and
charged~ bodies, we see that 0 and 4 play the
roles of rotational angular frequency and electric
potential of the black hole, respectively. ''9 The
a in (8) resembles the entropy S in (3) as we have
noted before: For any change of the black hole
du ~ 0, ' while for any change of a closed thermodynamic system dS~ 0. Moreover, it is clear
from (7) and (9a) that
the black-hole analog of
temperature T, is non-negative just as T is. From
the above observations the formal correspondence
between (3) and (8) is evident.
All the analogies we have mentioned are suggestive of a connection between thermodynamics and
black-hole physics in general, and between entropy
and black-hole area in particular.
But so far the
analogies have been of a purely formal nature,
primarily because entropy and area have different
dimensions. We shall remedy this deficiency in
Sec. IV by constructing out of black-hole area an
expression for black-hole entropy with the correct
dimensions. Preparatory to this we shall now look

4'

'

e,

(10)

This formula is uniquely determined by a few very
general requirements which are imposed in order
that S have the properties expected of a measure
of uncertainty.
It should be noticed that the above entropy is
dimensionless.
This simply means that we choose
to measure temperature in units of energy. Boltzmann's constant is then dimensionless.
Whenever new information about the system becomes available, it may be regarded as imposing
some constraints on the probabilities P„. For example, the information may be that several of the
P„are, in fact, zero. Such constraints on the p„
always result in a decrease in the entropy function.
This property is formalized by the rela-

"

"'

tion"

where AI is the new information which corresponds
to a decrease bS in one's uncertainty about the internal state of the system. Equation (11) is the
basis for Brillouin's identification of information
with negative entropy.
All the above comments
apply to such divers systems as a quantity of gas
in a box or a telegram. A familiar example of the
relation between a gain of information and a decrease in entropy is the following. Some ideal gas
in a container is compressed isothermally.
It is
well known that its entropy decreases. On the
other hand, one's information about the internal
configuration of the gas increases: After the compression the molecules of the gas are more localized, so that their positions are known with more
accuracy than before the compression.
The second law of thermodynamics
is easily
understood in the context of information theory.
The entropy of a thermodynamic system which is
not in equilibrium increases because information

"

SAC QB D. BEKENSTEIN
about the internal configuration of the system is
being lost during its evolution as a result of the
washing out of the effects of the initial conditions.
It is possible for an exterior agent to cause a decrease in the entropy of a system by first acquiring information about the internal configuration of
the system. The classic example of this is that of
Maxwell's demon.
But information is never free.
In acquiring information AI about the system, the
agent inevitably causes an increase in the entropy
of the rest of the universe which exceeds LI.
Thus, even though the entropy of the system decreases in accordance with (11), the over-all entropy of the universe increases in the process.
The conventional unit of information is the "bit"
which may be defined as the information available
when the answer to a yes-or-no question is precisely known (zero entropy). According to the
scheme (11) a bit is also numerically equal to the
maximum entropy that can be associated with a
yes-or-no question, i.e. , the entropy when no information whatsoever is available about the answer.
One easily finds that the entropy function (10) is
maximized when P„=P„,= ~. Thus, in our units,
one bit is equal to ln2 of information.
Let us now return to our original subject, black
holes. In the context of information a black hole
is very much like a thermodynamic system. The
entropy of a thermodynamic system in equilibrium
measures the uncertainty as to which of all its internal configurations compatible with its macroscopic thermodynamic parameters (temperature,
pressure, etc. ) is actually realized. Now, just as
a thermodynamic system in equilibrium can be
completely described macroscopically by a few
thermodynamic parameters, so a bare black hole
in equilibrium (Kerr black hole) can be completely

entropy inside the black hole. In fact, our blackhole entropy refers to the equivalence class of all
black holes which have the same mass, charge,
and angular momentum, not to one particular black
hole. What are we to take as a measure of this
black-hole entropy' The discussion of Sec. II predisposes us to single out black-hole area. But to
be more general we shall only assume that the entropy of a black hole, Sbj, , is some monotonically
increasing function of its rationalized area:

described (insofar as an exterior observer is concerned) by just three parameters: mass, charge,
and angular momentum. ' Black holes in equilibrium having the same set of three parameters may
still have different "internal configurations. " For
example, one black hole may have been formed by
the collapse of a normal star, a second by the collapse of a neutron star, a third by the collapse of
a geon. These various alternatives may be regarded as different possible internal configurations of one and the same black hole characterized
by their (common) mass, charge, and angular
momentum. It is then natural to introduce the concept of black-hole entropy as the measure of the
inaccessibility of information (to an exterior observer) as to which particular internal configuration of the black hole is actually realized in a

We mentioned earlier that the possibility of
causing a decrease in the entropy of a thermodynamic system goes hand in hand with the possibility of obtaining information about its internal
configuration. By contrast, an exterior agent cannot acquire any information about the interior configuration of a black hole. The one-way membrane
nature of the event horizon prevents him from doing so. ' Therefore, we do not expect an exterior
agent to be able to cause a decrease in the black
hole's entropy. Equation (12) is in agreement with
this expectation; by Hawking's theorem S» never
decreases. Here we have a new piece of evidence
in favor of the choice (12).
One possible choice for
in (12), f(o)cc o. '~'
untenable on various grounds. Consider two black
holes which start off very distant from each other.
Since they interact weakly we can take the total
black-hole entropy to be the sum of the Sbj, of each
black hole. The black holes now fall together,

"

"

given case.
At the outset it should be clear that the blackhole entropy we are speaking of is not the thermal

(12)
Although our motivating discussion for the introduction of the concept of the black-hole entropy
made use of the specific properties of stationary
black holes, we shall take (12) to be valid for any
black hole, including a dynamically evolving one,
since the surface area is well defined for any black
hole. This choice is supported by the following

observations.
As mentioned earlier, the entropy of an evolving
thermodynamic system increases due to the gradual
loss of information which is a consequence of the
washing out of the effects of the initial conditions.
Now, as a black hole approaches equilibrium,
the
effects of the initial conditions are also washed
out (the black hole loses its hair)'; only mass,
charge, and angular momentum are left as determinants of the black hole at late times. We would
thus expect that the loss of information about initial peculiarities of the hole will be reflected in a
gradual increase in Sbb . And indeed Eq. (12) predicts just this; by Hawking's theorem Sb~ increases monotonically as the black hole evolves.
This agreement is evidence in favor of the choice

(12).

f

BLACK HOLES AND ENTROPY
merge, and form a black hole which settles down
In the process no information
to equilibrium.
about the black-hole interior can become available;
on the contrary, much information is lost as the
final black hole "loses its hair. " Thus, we expect
the final black-hole entropy to exceed the initial
one. By our assumption that f(a)~ a'~~, this implies that the irreducible mass [see (1)] of the
final black hole exceeds the sum of irreducible
masses of the initial black holes. Now suppose
that all three black holes are Schwarzschild
(M=M„}. We are then confronted with the prediction that the final black-hole mass exceeds the
initial one. But this is nonsense since the total
black-hole mass can only decrease due to gravitational radiation losses. We thus see that the
choice f(n) ~ a' ' is untenable.
The next simplest choice for is

f

(13)
where y is a constant. Repetition of the above argument for this new
leads to the conclusion that
the final black-hole area must exceed the total initial black-hole area. But we know this to be true
from Hawking's theorem. ' Thus the choice (13)
leads to no contradiction. Therefore, we shall
adopt (13) for the moment; later on we shall exhibit some more positive evidence in its favor.
Comparison of (12} and (13) shows that y must
have the units of (length) . But there is no constant with such units in classical general relativity. If in desperation we appeal to quantum physics
we find only one truly universal constant with the
correct units'4: 5 ', that is, the reciprocal of the
Planck length squared. (Compton wavelengths are
not universal, but peculiar to this or that particle;
they clearly have no bearing on the problem. ) We
are thus compelled to write (12}as

f

Sbh

='0~

(14)

constant which we may
g is a dimensionless
expect to be of order unity. This expression was
first proposed by us earlier"'~ from a different

where

point of view.
We need not be alarmed at the appearance of @
in the expression for black-hole entropy. It is
well known" that 0 also appears in the formulas for
entropy of many thermodynamic systems that are
conventionally regarded as classical, for example,
the Boltzmann ideal gas. This is a reflection of
the fact that entropy is, in a sense, a count of
states of the system, and the underlying states of
any system are always quantum in nature. It is
thus not totally unexpected that 0 appears in (14).
These observations also suggest that it would be

somewhat pretentious

2337
to attempt to calculate the

precise value of the constant qk ' without a full
understanding of the quantum reality which underlies a "classical" black hole. Since there is no
hope at present of obtaining such an understanding,
we bypass the issue, and in the next section we use
a semiclassical argument to arrive at a value for
gS which should be quite close to the correct

'

one.
IV. EXPRESSION FOR BLACK-HOLE ENTROPY

In our attempt to obtain a value for qS ' we shall
employ the following argument. We imagine that
a particle goes down a Kerr black hole. As it disappears some information is lost with it. According to the discussion of Sec. III we expect the blackhole entropy, as the measure of inaccessible information, to reflect the loss of the information
associated with the particle by increasing by an
appropriate amount. How much information is
lost together with the particles The amount clearly depends on how much is known about the internal
state of the particle, on the precise way in which
the particle falls in, etc. But we can be sure that
the absolute minimum of information lost is that
contained in the answer to the question "does the
particle exist or notV" To start with, the answer
is known to be yes. But after the particle falls in,
one has no information whatever about the answer.
This is because from the point of view of this paper,
one knows nothing about the physical conditions inside the black hole, and thus one cannot assess the
likelihood of the particle continuing to exist or
being destroyed. One must, therefore, admit to
the loss of one bit of information (see Sec. IH) at
the very least.
Our plan, therefore, is to compute the minimum
possible increase in the black hole's area which
results from the disappearance of a particle down
the black hole, then to compute the corresponding
minimum possible increase of black-hole entropy
by means of our original formula (12), and finally
to identify this increase in entropy with the loss of
one bit of information in accordanc with the
scheme (11}. If our procedure is reasonable we
should then recover the functional form of given
by (13), together with a definite value for y.
There are many ways in which a particle can go
down a black hole, all leading to varying increases
in black-hole area. We are interested in that
method for inserting the particle which results in
the smallest increase. This method has already
been discussed by Christodoulou'
in connection
with his introduction of the concept of irreducible
mass. The essence of Christodoulou's method is
that if a freely falling point particle is captured by

f

'

JACOB D. BEKENSTEIN

2338

a Kerr black hole from a turning point in its orbit,
then the irreducible mass and, consequently, the
area of the hole are left unchanged. For reasons
that will become clear presently we wish to allow
the particle to have a nonzero radius. As shown
in Appendix A, Christodoulou's method can be
generalized easily so as to allow for this, as well
a, s for the possibility that the particle is brought to
the horizon by some method other than by free fall.
We find in Appendix A that the increase in area for
the generalized Christodoulou process is no longer
precisely zero. But interestingly enough, the
minimum increase in rationalized area, (ha) .
turns out to be independent of the parameters of
the black hole. For a spherical particle of rest

„,

mass

p, ,

and proper radius b,

(n. a) .

=2pb.

(15)

For a point particle (Aa) min =0; this is Christodoulou's result.
Expression (15) gives the minimum possible
increase in black-hole area that results if a given
particle is added to a Kerr black hole. We can try
to make (Aa)
smaller by making 5 smaller.
However, we must remember that b can be no
smaller than the particle's Compton wavelength
, or than its gravitational radius 2p. , whichever is the larger. The Compton wavelength is the
larger for p. ~2 '~'5' ', and the gravitational radius is the larger for p&2 '~')I' (2 ' 'g' ~10 'g)
~, then 2p, b can be as small as
Thus, if p, ~2 '
2php '=2@. But if g&2 ' 'K' ', then 2p. b can be
no smaller than 4g'&2k. We conclude that quantum effects set a lower bound of M on the increase
of the rationalized area of a Kerr black hole when
it captures a particle. Moreover, this limit can
be reached only for a particle whose dimension is
given by its Compton wavelength.
Of course, only
such an "elementary particle" can be regarded as
having no internal structure. Therefore, the loss
of information associated with the loss of such a
particle should be minimum. And indeed we find
that the increase in b1ack-hole entropy is smallest
for just such a, particle. This supports our view
that 2h is the increase in rationalized area associated with the loss of one bit of information.
Following our program we shall equate the minimum increase in black-hole entropy, (AS») .
=2ffdf/da, with ln2, the entropy increase associated with the loss of one bit of information. Integration of the resulting equation gives f(a)
=(—,' In2)A' 'a. Thus, we have arrived again at (13}
by an alternate route, and have obtained the value
of y into the bargain. We now have

'I'

S»=(-,' ln2)A

'a,

'

(16}

is of the same form as (14). Our argument
has determined the dependence of S» on a in a
straightforward manner. However, our value
q = &ln2 might presumably be challenged on the
grounds that it follows from the assumption that
the smallest possible radius of a particle is precisely equal to its Compton wavelength whereas
the actual radius is not so sharply defined. Nevertheless, it should be clear that if g is not exactly
'—, ln2, then it must be very close to this, probably
within a factor of two. This slight uncertainty in
the value of g is the price we pay for not giving our
problem a full quantum treatment. However, in
what follows we shall suppose that g= & ln2. Examples to be given later will show that this value
leads to no contradictions.
How is the entropy of a system of several black
holes defined& It is natural to define it as the sum
of individual black-hole entropies. Then Hawking's
theorem tells us that the total black-hole entropy
of the system cannot decrease. But this is just
what we would expect since the information lost
down the black holes is unrecoverable.
This observation lends support to our choice.
In conventional units (16) takes the form

which

S,„=(-,' In2//4s)kc'g

'G 'A

=(1.46 x 10" erg 'K 'cm ')A
where k is Boltzmann's constant. We see that the
entropy of a black hole is enormous. For exa, mple,
a black hole of one solar mass would have S»=&0
erg'K '. By comparison the entropy of the sun is
S=10~erg'K ', those of a white dwarf or a neutron star of one solar mass even smaller. The
large numerical value of black-hole entropy serves
to dramatize the highly irreversible character of
the process of black-hole formation. We may define a characteristic tempera, ture for a Kerr black
hole by the relation T» ' =(SSb/Shf)~i e which is
the analog of the thermodynamic relation T '
full.
=(BS/sZ}v. By using (8} and (16) we find

T» =2k(ln2)

'e

=(0. 165'Kcm) (r, -r } (r, +a ) ',

(18)

where r, and a are to be given in centimeters. We
introduce this Tb„ in anticipation of our discussion
of an example in Sec. VG. But we emphasize that
one should not regard T» as the temperature of
the black hole; such an identification can easily
lead to all sorts of paradoxes, and is thus not use-

BLACK HOLES AND ENTROPY
V. THE GENERALIZED SECOND LAW

Suppose that a body containing some common
entropy goes down a black hole. The entropy of
the visible universe decreases in the process. It
would seem that the second law of thermodynamics
is transcended here in the sense that an exterior
observer can never verify by direct measurement
that the total entropy of the whole universe does
not decrease in 6e process.
However, we know
that the black-hole area "compensates" for the
disappearance of the body by increasing irreversibly. It is thus natural to conjecture that the second
law is not really transcended provided that it is
expressed in a generalized form: The common
entropy in the black-hole exterior plus the blackhole entropy never decreases. This statement
means that we must regard black-hole entropy as
a genuine contribution to the entropy content of the

"

universe.
Support for the above version of the second law
comes from the following argument. Suppose that
a body carrying entropy S goes down a black hole
(which may have existed previously or may be
formed by the collapse of the body). The S is the
uncertainty in one's knowledge of the internal configuration of the body. So long as the body was
still outside the black hole, one had the option of
removing this uncertainty by carrying out measurements and obtaining information up to the
amount S. But once the body has fallen in, this
option is lost; the information about the internal
configuration of the body becomes truly inaccessible. We thus expect the black-hole entropy, as
the measure of inaccessible information, to increase by an amount S. Actually, the increase in
S» may be even larger because any information
that was available about the body to start with will
also be lost down the black hole. Therefore, if we
denote by b, S, the change in common entropy in the
black-hole exterior (AS, = -S), then we expect that
d. Sb„+AS, = h(Sb„+ S, )

)0.

(19)

This is just the generalized second law which we
proposed above: The generalized entropy S»+S,
never decreases. Examples supporting this law
will be given in Sec. VI-VII.
This is a good place to mention the question of
fluctuations. We know that the common entropy of
a closed thermodynamic system can decrease
spontaneously as a result of statistical fluctuations,
i.e. , the second law, being a statistical law, is
meaningful only if statistical fluctuations are small.
Is black-ho)e entropy also subject to decreases of
a statistical nature 7 Not classically — Hawking's
theorem guarantees that. Quantum mechanically

2339

there are two ways by which the black-hole entropy
can undergo statistical decreases. One of them
depends on the quantum fluctuations of the metric
of the black hole which one has reasons to expect. '
Such fluctuations would be reflected in small random fluctuations in the area, and thus in the entropy of the black hole, and some of these fluctuations would be expected to be decreases in entropy. However, even if one regards a black hole as
a purely classical object, it is still possible for
its area and entropy to undergo small decreases
when the black hole absorbs a single quantum
under certain conditions.
However, the probability of such an event occurring in any given trial
is very small. Therefore, the decrease in area
and entropy is of a statistical nature, and is quite
analogous to the decrease in entropy of a thermodynamic system due to statistical fluctuations.
This discussion serves us warning that the law
(19) is expected to hold only insofar as statistical
fluctuations are negligible.
We noticed earlier (Sec. IV) the very large magnitude of black-hole entropy. In fact, one can say
that the black-hole state is the maximum entropy
state of a given amount of matter. The point is
that in the gravitational collapse of a body into a
black hole, the loss of information down the black
hole is the maximum allowed by the laws of physics.
Thus if the body collapses to form a Kerr black
hole, all information about it is lost with the
exception of mass, charge, and angular momentum. ' These quantities are given in terms of
Gaussian integrals, ~ and so information about them
cannot be lost. But all other information about the
body is eventually lost. Therefore, the resulting
black hole must correspond to the maximum (generalized) entropy which can be associated with ihe

"

given body.
VI. EXAMPLES OF THE GENERALIZED
SECOND LAW AT WORK

In the examples which follow we endeavor to
subject the generalized second law to the most
stringent test possible in each case by maximizing
the entropy going down the black hole with a given
body while minimizing the associated increase in
black -hole entropy.
A. Harmonic Oscillator

As a first example we take an harmonic oscilla-

tor composed of two particles of rest mass yn
each connected by a nearly massless spring of
spring constant K. We imagine the oscillator to
be enclosed in a spherical box and to be maintained at temperature T. %'e assume for simplicity that conditions are such that the oscillator

JACOB D. BEKENSTEIN

2340

(T«m}. Let ru be the vibrational
frequency of the oscillator. Then the (normalized)
probability that the oscillator is in its nth quantum
state is given by the canonical distribution

is nonrelativistic

P„=(1-e *) 'e "*, «=I(g/T.

(20)

The entropy of the oscillator as computed from

(10}is
S=x(e* —1) ' -ln(1-e *),
and the mean vibrational

d(S +S. )& 5 '"(I+()[-'+(e*-I) ']»2

-x(e*-1) '+ ln(1-e *),

(24)

where we have introduced the notation $ =—m(E)
and used Eqs. (21) and (22) for S and (E) . We
now show that 4(Sb„+S, }&0 as required by the
generalized second law. The expression in (24)
regarded as a function of x for given $ has a
single minimum at

(21)
~2

energy,

(E) =—QP„(n+ a)g&u,

(1+ () ln2

which has the value

'x +in[1-exp(-x )] .

is

—,

(22)
We remark that the thermal distribution (20) maximizes the entropy of the oscillator for given (E),
and is thus ideally suited to our plan for subjecting the generalized second law to the most stringent test possible.
Suppose that the box goes down a Kerr black hole.
The corresponding increase in black-hole entropy
cannot be smaller than the lowest limit derived by
the method of Appendix A. From (15) and (16) we
have h, S»- p, bk ' ln2, where 5 is the outer radius
of the box and p. is its total rest mass. Clearly &
must be at least as large as half of the mean value (y) of the separation of the two masses y. And
(y) in turn must clearly be larger than dy, the
root mean square of the thermal oscillation of
=
y [(d, y)' —((y-(y)))], so that y will always be posi-

tive. Now according to the (quantum) virial theorem a(E) is equal to the mean potential energy of
'K(Ey)'. Since the reduced mass of
the oscillator —,
the oscillator is 4m, we heve K=~ n@u . We thus
find from all the above that
h&(E) I/2m-1/2+-1
Remembering that p &m+(E) (because the box itself must have some mass) we obtain

dS „&(E)' m

(k(u)

'(m+(E)) ln2.

(23)

We assume that the entropy given by (21) is the
only contribution to the entropy in the box. This
amounts to neglecting the contribution of the black
body radiation in the box, etc. , a sensible procedure if T is not very high. Then AS, = -S and we

have

Our assumption that the oscillator is nonrelativistic means that f»1, and hence that x»2ln2.
Under these conditions the minimum is positive
(in fact, it is positive for $&1). It follows immediately that 6(Sb„+S,} is positive for all x and all (
which are compatible with the requirement of a
nonrelativistic oscillator. The generalized second
law is obeyed over the entire regime for which our

treatment is valid.
B. Beam of Light

As a second example we consider a beam of light
which is aimed at a Kerr black hole. This example

is particularly interesting because it shall bring
us face to face with the issue of fluctuations as a
limitation on the applicability of the second law.
We shall restrict our attention only to those
cases for which geometrical optics is a valid approximation. We shall thus represent the path of
the beam by a null geodesic in the Kerr background.
We shall take it that the beam is thermalized at
a certain temperature T. This implies that its entropy is a maximum for given energy. The entropy
is easily calculated; in fact, the entropy and energy for each mode in the beam are given by the same
expressions (21) and (22) which apply to a, harmonic oscillator, except that one must omit the zeropoint energy term 2k'. The total entropy S and
mean energy (E) of the beam are obtained by integrating these expressions weighed by the conventional density of states
p=2uP

(2w}

' VdA

over all v. In (25) V is the volume of the beam
and dQ is the solid angle it subtends. Integrating
by parts the expression for S, one easily obtains

BLACK HOLES AND ENTROPY
the relation

2341

turned out to be impossible for ~d, S, to exceed
4S», and so a violation of the second law was
ruled out. But there is a way to circumvent the
restriction on T. One simply selects the temperature T (arbitrarily) to be as small as one pleases,
and arranges for all frequencies e&~,' to be filtered out of the beam. Here ~,'»M ' is a definite
frequency unrelated to T. It should be clear that
geometrical optics will be a valid approximation
for this case also, so that we may take over the
result (28). But the result (27) must be modified
since we are here dealing with a truncated frequency spectrum. We are mostly interested in
the regime T«ke,
Then for all frequencies in
the beam x=k&u/T» 1. It follows from (21) and
(22) that for each mode the entropy to energy ratio
is T ' (S=xe *, (E) =if&ye
Therefore instead
of (27} we have
~

(26)
which, not surprisingly, is identical to that for
radiation inside a black-body cavity of temperature T. [In Ref. 12 (26) was given with an incorrect numerical factor. ]
As the beam nears the black hole, it is deflected by the gravitational field. Insofar as its effects
on electromagnetic radiation are concerned, a
stationary gravitational field can be mocked up by
an appropriate nonabsorbing refractive medium in
flat spacetime.
But the propagation of a beam of
light through such a medium is a reversible process. We infer from this that the entropy of the
beam will remain unchanged as the beam nears the
black hole. Thus the entropy change of the visible
universe when the beam goes down the hole is just

"

"

"

(27)

'.

').

gS, =-(E) T '.
It now appears that if

What is the increase in black-hole entropy associated with the process? From (8) we see that
the increase in n is minimized when the angular
momentum that the hole gains from the beam is
maximized for given (E) . Now, the gain in angular momentum is limited because the beam will
not be captured if it carries too much angular momentum. In Appendix B we take this into account
in calculating (in the geometrical optics limit} the
minimum possible increase in a for given (E) of
the beam. We find that hn&PM(E) where P ranges
from 8 for the case of a Schwarzschild hole to
4(I-v 3/2) for the case of an extreme Kerr hole,
this last value being the smallest possible P. From
(16) it follows that

aS,„& (-', P ln2)M g '(E) .

(28)

Our assumption (Appendix B) that geometrical
optics is always applicable means that the bulk of
wavelengths in the beam are much shor ter than
the characteristic dimension of the hole =M. Thus,
if cu, is some characteristic frequency in the beam,
then we require that
»M '. From the form of
the Planck spectrum (22) we see that II~, ~T;
therefore (27) tells us that

(,

(29)
Comparison of (28) and (29) shows that a violation
of the generalized second law (19) cannot arise in
the regime under consideration.
In the above discussion the condition that geometrical optics be applicable prevented us from
taking T to be arbitrarily small. As a result it

'PM ln2)
T & T, =—K( —

',

then AS»+AS, will be negative in contradiction
with the generalized second law.
The resolution of the above paradox is that in
the regime 7& 7, statistical fluctuations are already dominant so that our entire picture of the
process is invalid. To verify the importance of
fluctuations we calculate the mean number of
quanta N in the beam by integrating the mean number of quanta per mode, (e*-1) ', weighed by the
density of states (25) over all ~&&u, For T = T,
we get (recall that /f&u,'/T,
1 by our assumptions)

»

N

=, —
M

4m

'.

5 '( 6 M &u,' )' exp(- t M u&,'

),

(31)

—2 p ln2 (0.2 -5&2.8). It is clear that for
where 6=
any beam aimed at the black hole dQ/4g«1. Recalling that M~,'»1 by assumption, we see from
(31) that each quantum occupies a mean volume
much larger than M'. But the cross section of the
beam must be smaller than -M2 if the beam is to
go down the black hole. Thus the mean separation
between quanta is much larger than M, the characteristic dimension of the black hole. In case
T& T, the above effect is even more accentuated.
We conclude that in the regime T&T, for which
the second law (19}appears to break down, our
description of the process as a continuous beam
going down the black hole is invalidated by the
large fluctuations in the concentration of energy
in the beam (or equivalently,
the large fluctuations
in the energy of each section of the beam). In this

JACOB D. B EKE NSTEIN
regime (E) is no longer a good measure of the
actual energy. It appears, therefore, that statistical fluctuations are responsible for the breakdown of the second law in the context in which we
have applied it here. But we can demonstrate that
the law has not lost all its meaning by adopting a
point of view more suitable to the circumstances
at hand than the one used above.
We take the point of view that quanta are going
down the black hole one at a time, rather than in
a continuous stream. Thus we must check the
validity of the generalized second law for the infall
of each quantum. The analysis of Appendix B
still leads to formula (28) for the increase in blackhole entropy except that (E) is replaced by Nor,
To compute the
the energy of the quantum.
common entropy going down the black hole we
reason as follows. From our point of view a quantum of definite frequency is going down the black
hole. Thus we are no longer dealing with the probability distribution (20); instead we shall ascribe
probability 2 to each of the two possible polarizations of the quantum. Then according to (10)
the entropy associated with the quantum is ln2.

Therefore,
hS~„+b, S, & (aP ln2)M&u —ln2.

(32)

Since ~P ~ 0.268, and since we are assuming that
Me»1, we see that AS»+AS, is in fact positive:
The generalized second law is upheld for the infall
of each quantum.
VII. A PERPETUAL MOTION MACHINE
USING A BLACK HOLE?

Geroch" has described a procedure using a black
hole which appears to violate the second law of
thermodynamics by converting heat into work with
unit efficiency. He envisages a box filled with
black-body radiation which is slowly lowered by
means of a string from far away down to the horizon of a black hole, at which point its energy as
measured from infinity vanishes. Therefore, if
the box's rest mass is p. , then the agent lowering
the string obtains work equal to p. out of the process. The box is then allowed to emit into the
black-hole radiation of (proper) energy Ap. . Finally, the agent retrieves the box; since its rest
mass is now p, -6p. , he must do work p, -Ap to
accomplish this. Therefore, in the whole process
the agent obtains net work 6p, at the expense of
heat 6 p, —conversion with unit efficiency. We
shall now show that, in fact, due to fundamental
physical limitations, the efficiency of the Geroch
process is slightly smaller than unity, so that no
violation of the second law is entailed here.

The box under consideration must have a nonzero radius (see below). Because of this its energy as measured from infinity is never quite zero
when it is as close to the horizon as it can possibly
be. We shall assume that the box is in the shape
of a sphere of radius b. Then according to the
value of the

analysis of Appendix C the minimum
energy is

E =2pbe,
where 6 is defined by (9a). It follows that in lowering the box from infinity to the horizon, the
agent obtains only work g(l-2b6) rather than p.
After the box has radiated into the black hole, its
rest mass becomes p, —b, p and according to (33)
its energy at the horizon is just 2(p-b. g)b6.
Thus the agent must do work (p, —b, g) (1-2b6) to
retrieve the box to infinity where its energy is
Therefore, in the over-all process the
agent obtains net work b, p(1-2b6) in exchange for
the expenditure of heat hp, . The efficiency of
conversion is
e = 1-2be,

which

(34)

is smaller than unity.

In practical situations

b«x, so that be«1 and the efficiency can be quite
near to unity. But the departure of ~ from unity,
albeit small, serves to resolve the problem raised
by Geroch's example: There is no violation of the
Kelvin statement of the second law.
We must now explain why b cannot be arbitrarily
small. Physically the reason is that the box must
be large enough for the wavelengths characteristic
of radiation of some temperature T to fit into
it. More formally we can argue as follows. The
frequency of the photon ground state associated
with the box, coo, cannot exceed that frequency co~
at which the Planck photon-number spectrum

"

cc

J' [exp (her/T)

I]-

peaks. Otherwise the frequencies of all photon
states would lie in the exponential tail of the spectrum, the occupation number of each state would
be small, and the resulting large fluctuations
would make the concept of temperature meaningless. We have the conventional relation w, b'= w,
where b' is the interior radius of the box (b'& b),
and we easily find that h(d~&2T. Therefore, cu, & ~~
implies that b& wk/2T. It is thus clear that there
is a lower limit for b.
We may write the efficiency (34) in a more transparent form by recalling that 6 = a T „ In2/5 [see
(18)], where T~„ is the characteristic temperature
associated with the black hole. Since b&wh/2T we

BLACK HOLES AND ENTROPY
find that
e « I T»-/T

.

(35}

We now recall that the efficiency of a heat engine
operating between two reservoirs, one at temperature T and the second at temperature T»& T, is
restricted by e &1-T»/T. We thus see that the
Geroch process is no more efficient than its

"

This obser"equivalent reversible heat engine.
vation makes it evident again that Geroch's process is not in violation of the second law of thermodynamics. Finally, we wish to remark that since
our primary formula (33}is valid only when the
box is small compared to the black hole (be«1),
we can vouch for the validity of (35) only when
T»«T. However, due to the smallness of T» this
condition will be satisfied in all cases of practical

interest.
We now verify that the Geroch process is in
accord with the generalized second law (19). We
mentioned earlier that the agent obtains work
a p(1-259) for a decrease A p in the rest mass of
the box. This means that the black hole's mass
must increase by 2A pb8 in the complete process.
According to (6) and (16) the corresponding increase in black hole entropy is AS»=h, p. M ln2
(angular momentum is not added to the hole; see
Appendix C). But since 5& vg/2T we have that

"

"

ds' = g«dt'+2g, edtdg+geedp'+g«dr

For later reference

+geed8'.

we give g„„:

g„„=(r'+ a' cos' 8}A

',

(A2)

where

'

AS» & (—, v 1n2) d. p/ T .

(36)

the decrease in entropy of the
box is clearly n. p/T (heat/temperature)
Thus.
On the other hand,

AS, = -n, p/T

.

(37)

From (36) and (37) it follows that A(S»+S, ) & 0 as
required by the generalized second law.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author is grateful to Professor J. A. Wheeler
for his interest in this work, his encouragement
and his penetrating criticism. He also thanks
Professor Karel Kuchar" and Professor Brandon
Carter, and Dr. Bahram Mashhoon for valuable

suggestions

increase incidental to the process of bringing the
particle to black-hole horizon. For example,
there is some circumstantial evidence for believing that when the particle is lowered into the
black hole by a string, there occurs an increase
in black-hole area even as the particle is being
Furthermore, the area will experience
lowered.
an additional increase due to the gravitational
waves radiated into the black hole by the string as
Similarit relaxes when the particle is dropped.
ly, if the particle falls freely to the horizon )t
emits gravitational waves into the hole even before
it falls in; the amount of radiation may even be
significant. '4 This radiation will also result in an
increase in area. Here we shall ignore all these
incidental effects and concentrate on the increase
in area caused by the particle all by itself.
We assume that the particle is neutral so that it
follows a geodesic of the Kerr geometry when falling freely. We shall employ Boyer -Lindquist
coordinates for the charged Kerr metric"

—r'-2Mr+a'+Q
A=

(A3)

The event horizon is located at r =r, where
defined by (7}. We have

6=(r r) (r-r, ) . -

r, are
(A4)

First integrals for geodesic motion in the Kerr
background have been given by Carter. 2' Christodoulou' uses the first integral

E' [r'+a' (r'+ 2Mr —Q')] —2E (2Mr —Q') aP e

and comments.

(A5)

APPENDIX A

In (A5) E = -p,
comis
the
conserved
p&

as a starting point of his analysis.
Here we shall calculate the minimum possible
increase in black-hole area which must result
when a spherical particle of rest mass p, and
proper radius b is captured by a Kerr black ho)e.
We are interested in the increase in area ascribable to the particle itself, as contrasted with any

is the conserved energy,

ponent of angular momentum in the direction of the
axis of symmetry, q is Carter's fourth constant of
the motion,
p, is the rest mass of the particle,
and p„ is its covariant radial momentum.
Following Christodoulou we solve (A5) for E:

"

JACOB D. BEKENSTEIN
E =Bape+([B'a'+A

'(r'

scribe the motion of the particle's center of mass

2-Mr+@')]pe'

+A '[(p, 'r'+q)A+(P, &)']}' ',

(A6)

at the moment of capture.
It should be clear that to generalize Christodoulou's result to the present case one should
evaluate (A6} not at r=r, , but at r=r, +6, where
5 is determined by

where

r +5

A -=r'+a'(r'+2Mr —Q'),

= (2My- Q')A ' .
B—

(A8)

(r=r, +5 is a point a proper distance b outside
the horizon).

At the event horizon b, =0 [see (A4)] so that there

A =A, = (r+'+a~/,

B =B, =(r, *+a*)
Furthermore,

'.

~~2' = b

Y+

(A9}

at the horizon Ba =Q [see (9b)],
g~rl+q in (A6) van

and the coefficients of Pe and

Using (A2} we find

(y ~+a cos28) ~ (y

y ) &/2

(All)

-x»6

To obtain this we have assumed that r,
(black hole not nearly extreme). Expanding the
argument of the square root in (A6) in powers of
5, replacing 5 by its value given by (A11), and
keeping only terms to O(b) we get

ish. However,

E =Qp, +[(r,*-a*)(y, '+a*) 'pe'+ i 'r, '+q]'~*

p„n, =(y +a' cos'8) p'

x —,
'b(r,

does not vanish at the horizon in general. If the
particle's orbit intersects the horizon, then we
have from (A6) that

E =Qpg+A+

IPr &I+

~

As a result of the capture, the black hole's mass
increases by E and its component of angular momentum in the direction of the symmetry axis increases by Pe. Therefore, according to (8) the
black hole's rationalized area will increase by
e-'A, -' * (P„a, . As pointed out by Christodoulou
this increase vanishes only if the particle is captured from a turning point in its orbit in which
case ( p, n. (, =0. In this case we have

r)(r,-+a ) (r, '+a cos 8) ' '

Here v-e have already assumed that the particle
reaches a turning point as it is captured since we
know that this minimizes the increase in blackhole area. Equation (A12} is the generalization to
0(b} of the Christodoulou condition (A10).
What is q in (A12}'P We can obtain a lower bound
for it as follows. From the requirement that the
8 momentum Pe be real it follows that

"

~

E =Op~.

(A 10)

The above analysis shows that it is possible for
a black hole to capture a point particle without increasing its area. How is this conclusion changed
if the particle has a nonzero proper radius b?
First we note that regardless of the manner in
which the particle arrives at the horizon (being
lowered by a string, splitting off from a second
particle which then escapes, etc ), it mus. t clearly
acquire its parameters E, p&, and q while every
part of it is still outside the horizon, i.e. , while
it is not yet part of the black hole. Moreover, as
the particle is captured, it must already be detached from whatever system brought it to the
horizon, so that it may be regarded as falling
freely. Therefore, Eq. (A6) should always de-

q ~ cos'8[a' (p'

E') +P e'/sin-'8];

(A13)

the equality holds when Pe=0 at the point in question. If we replace E in (A13) by Qpe [see (A12)]
we obtain
q ~ cos'8[a'P. '+Pe'(1/sin*8

-a*Q*)],

is correct to zeroth order in b. We know
that 1/sin'8~1; it is easily shown that a'Q' & '—,
for a charged Kerr black hole. Therefore
q ~ ampm cos28. Substituting this into (A12) we
find
which

E&Qpg+g gb(r, -r )(r, '+a') '

(A14)

which is correct to 0(b). By retracing our steps
we see that the equality sign in (A14) corresponds
to the case p&=pe=p" = 0 at the point of capture.
The increase in black-hole area, computed by
means of (8), (9a), and (A14), is

BLACK HOLES AND ENTROPY
AQ +~ 2)b

.

(A15)

I.

Here we shall calculate the minimum possible
increase in black-hole area which must result
when a light beam of energy E &0 coming from
infinity is captured by a Kerr black hole. If the
black hole is nonrotating the increase is simply
obtained by setting dM=E in (8):

finds

-4(1--,'&3)ME as a-M.

APPENDIX C

A, 0. can be minimized
by maximizing the angular momentum P which is
brought in by the beam [see (8)]. To accomplish
this we consider the effective potential V for the
motion of a massless particle in a Kerr background.
This V is just the value of E given by (A6) regarded as a function of for p=0 and P, =0
(E equals V at a turning point). This potential
starts off at a value QPz at r=r+ (see Appendix A),
increases with r, reaches a maximum, and then
falls off to zero as
For the beam to be captured by the hole it is necessary that p& be small
enough for the peak of the potential barrier to be
smaller than E of the beam. The optimum case
we seek corresponds to the peak being just equal
to E so that P& has its largest possible value.
It is clear that we must take q in (A6) as small
as possible in order to have the lowest possible
potential peak for given p&. Let us first take q & 0.
Then according to Carter" there are solutions to
the geodesic equation only if (pz(& aE. From (8)

r

r-~.

it follows that

Here we compute the value of the energy (as
measured from infinity} of a particle of rest mass
p and proper radius b which is hanging from a
string just outside the horizon of a Kerr black hole.
It is clear that the particle will not be moving in
the r or 8 directions; hence P" =Pe=0 for it. We
cannot claim that the particle does not move in the
In fact, since it will be within the
Q direction.
ergosphere in general, it cannot avoid moving in
the P direction. ' our intuitive notion that the particle is "not moving" must be applied only in a
locally nonrotating (Bardeen) frame. ~' The particle
is at rest in such a frame if for it

It follows that
dt
dy
Pft= 9 ggy d +gyyd

If the particle were to be dropped, it would
clearly keep its energy E and it would still have
We may thus
p~ = p' = pe = 0, at least momentarily.
compute E for the particle hanging in the string
at a proper distance b from the horizon by setting
P&=0 in (A12). For q we take the value given by
(A13) with the equality sign (pe =0) p& = 0, and
E = 0 [since for P & = 0, E is of O(b)] . Thus

8 '(E-Qp~)

E(1-Qa).

But since Aa & ~ and 6 ' & &M it follows that

6a & 4MF. for q& 0.

(B3)

It is clear that for q&0 the potential peak will be
higher and the increase in area will be larger than
the one given by (B3). Thus we find that the minimum increase in area results when the beam is
captured by an extreme Kerr black hole from a
purely equatorial orbit.

for a =0.

If the black hole is rotating,

&8

analytically
because in this limit one can find the height of the
potential analytically with sufficient accuracy. One

(Aa)

APPENDIX 8

n, n=

with a for fixed M. The limit of

(Aa)~ as a-M may be computed

This gives the fundamental lower bound on the increase in black-hole area. We note that it is independent of M, Q, and

b, o. = Bled~

monotonically

(B2)

q= p, 'a' cos'8

':

Next we take q =0. Two cases are possible
Either (p&~ &aE as above so that (B2) is again
applicable, or else the orbit is purely equatorial.
In the second case one may calculate the peak of
the barrier numerically and then find the optimum
increase in a. It turns out that (Acf) decreases

E = -,' pb(r,
= 2pbe.

r}(r,*+a')

'-

JACOB D. BEKENSTEIN

2346

*Based in part on the author's Ph. D. thesis, Princeton
University, 1972; work supported in part by the National
Science Foundation Grants No. GP 30799X to Princeton
University and No. GP 32039 to the University of Texas
at Austin.
)National Science Foundation Predoctoral Fellow when
this work was initiated.
g Present

address.

~C. W. Misner, K. S. Thorne, and J. A. Wheeler,
Gravitation (Freeman, San Francisco, 1973).
~R. Penrose and R. M. Floyd, Nature 229, 177 (1971).
3R. Penrose, Riv. Nuovo Cimento 1, 252 (1969).
4D. Christodoulou, Phys. Rev. Letters 25, 1596 (1970).
5D.Christodoulou, Ph. D. thesis, Princeton University,

1971 (unpublished)
6D. Christodoulou

(1971).

.

and R. Ruffini,

Phys. Rev. D 4, 3552

~S. W. Hawking, Phys. Rev. Letters 26, 1344 (1971);
contribution to Black Holes, edited by B. DeWitt and
C. DeWitt (Gordon and Breach, New York, 1973).
J. M. Greif, Junior thesis, Princeton University,

1969 (unpublished) .
B. Carter, Nature 238, 71 (1972).

~OYa. B. Zel'dovich and I. D. Novikov, Sta~s and Relativity (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1971),

p. 268.
J. D. Bekenstein, Ph. D. thesis, Princeton University,

1972 (unpublished) .
~2J. D. Bekenstein, Lett. Nuovo Cimento 4 737 (1972).
~3R. Geroch, Colloquium at Princeton University,
December 1971.
~4We use units with 6 = c = 1 unless otherwise specified.
SL. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Statistical Physics
(Addison, -Wesley, Reading, Mass. , 1969).
L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Electrodynamics
of Continuous Media (Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass. ,
1960), p. 5.
~~The mathematical definition of information was first
given by C. E. Shannon; the relevant papers are re-

printed in C. E. Shannon and W. Weaver, The Mathematical Theory of Communications (University of Illinois
Press, Urbana, 1949) . An elementary introduction to
information theory is given by M. Tribus and E. C.
McIrvine, Sci. Amer. 225 (No. 3), 179 (1971). The

derivation of statistical mechanics from information
theory was first carried out by E. T. Jaynes, Phys.
Rev. 106, 620 (1957); 108, 171 (1957).
The relation between information theory and thermodynamics is discussed in detail by L. Brillouin,
Science and Information Theory {Academic, New York,
1956), especially Chaps. 1, 9, 12-14.
This was first gointed out to the author by J. A.
Wheeler (private communication) .
20J. D. Bekenstein, Phys. Rev. D 7, 949 (1973).
2~See for example, A. M. Volkov, A. A. Izmest'ev,
and G. V. Skrotskii, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 59, 1254
(1970) ISov. Phys. JETP 32, 686 {1971)
See E. Hisdal, Phys. Norv. 5, 1 (1971), and references cited therein.
In Ref. 12 we gave an alternate resolution of the
paradox posed by Geroch based on the apparent tendency of the black-hole area to increase as the box is
being lowered. ' The present approach is preferable in
that it is independent of the validity of the interpretation
given in Ref. 11, and in that it fits very well into the
thermodynamic approach of this paper as will be evident
presently.
24See M. Davis, R. Ruffini, and J. Tiomno, Phys. Rev.
D 5, 2932 (1972) for the radiation of a particle falling
radially into a Schwarzschild black hole. It is not clear
whether the large amount of radiation found to go down
the black hole is a device of the linearized approximation, or whether the effect will persist for other types of
orbits or for Kerr black holes. Therefore we do not
base any of our arguments here on this effect as we did

j.

in Refs. 11 and 12.

B. Carter, Phys. Rev. 174, 1559 (1968).
~~J. M. Bardeen,

Astrophys.

J. 161, 103 (1970).

