Geometric phases of light: insights from fibre bundle theory
C. Cisowski,∗ J. B. Götte, and S. Franke-Arnold
University of Glasgow,
School of Physics and Astronomy,
Glasgow. UK.

arXiv:2202.04356v2 [physics.optics] 9 May 2022

(Dated: May 10, 2022)
Geometric phases are ubiquitous in physics; they act as memories of the transformation
of a physical system. In optics, the most prominent examples are the PancharatnamBerry phase and the spin-redirection phase. Recent technological advances in phase
and polarization structuring have led to the discovery of additional geometric phases
of light. The underlying mechanism for all of these is provided by fibre bundle theory.
In this colloquium, we review how fibre bundle theory does not only shed light on the
origin of geometric phases of light, but also lays the foundations for the exploration of
high dimensional state spaces, with implications for topological photonics and quantum
communications.

CONTENTS
I. Introduction

1

II. Geometric versus dynamic phase in a nutshell

2

III. The Pancharatnam-Berry phase
A. Experimental realisation
B. Geometric interpretation

2
2
3

IV. The origin of geometric phases
A. Fibre bundle theory, a universal model
B. From Poincaré to Hopf

3
3
5

V. Exploring high dimensional state spaces
A. The spin-redirection phase
B. Geometric phases of spatial transverse modes
C. Geometric phases of general vectorial fields

6
7
9
10

VI. Summary and perspectives

11

VII. Acknowledgements

11

References

11

I. INTRODUCTION

Phase is a curious protagonist in the land of physics,
it bears no physical significance when a single wave is
considered, yet becomes crucially important when several waves are involved, hereby causing spectacular effects such as interference. In 1984, Sir Michael Berry established that the wave function of a quantum system can
gain a phase of geometric nature in addition to the dynamic phase naturally acquired over time (Berry, 1984).
This discovery impacted various areas of physics, such as
condensed matter, nuclear, plasma and optical physics
(Wilczek and Shapere, 1989; Wilczek and Zee, 1984). Although geometric phases may appear as mere theoretical

∗ clairemarie.cisowski@glasgow.ac.uk

curiosities, they have led to a myriad of applications and
in optics are now at the basis of wavefront shaping technologies (Cohen et al., 2019; Jisha et al., 2021). Their
importance for exotic surface effects, including superconductivity and topological insulators including the quantum Hall effect, has been honoured in the recent Nobel
Prize awarded to David Thouless, Duncan Haldane and
Michael Kosterlitz for research on topological phases of
matter.
A matrix-based formalism can be used to determine
whether a system will acquire a geometric phase (O’Neil
and Courtial, 2000), however this approach gives little
insight in regard to the origin of the phenomenon. Fibre
bundle theory provides a deeper understanding of geometric phases: it links a phase to a state transformation
based on geometrical considerations. This mathematical
framework was developed in the first half of the 20th century, and turned out, to everyone’s surprise, to provide
an excellent description of gauge fields, including electromagnetic fields (Yang, 2014). It became the universal
language of geometric phases almost immediately, even
before Berry had time to publish his seminal work (Simon, 1983), and played a key role in the generalization
of Berry’s phase to non-adiabatic and non-cyclic systems
(Aharonov and Anandan, 1987; Samuel and Bhandari,
1988).
A plethora of geometric phases have been witnessed
in optics (Bhandari, 1997; Samuel and Bhandari, 1988;
Vinitskiı̆ et al., 1990). Well-known examples include
the Pancharatnam-Berry phase (Pancharatnam, 1956),
born from polarization transformations, and the spinredirection phase (Rytov, 1938; Vladimirskiy, 1941),
which arises when light is taken along a non-planar trajectory. The last decades have seen significant technologocal advances in the control of phase and polarization structured light, with an ever expanding repertoire of higher order spatial modes and complex vector light fields. These developments have revealed new

2
geometric phases of light, caused by the transformation of spatial transverse modes (Calvo, 2005; Van Enk,
1993; Galvez et al., 2003; Galvez and O’Connell, 2005;
Gutiérrez-Cuevas et al., 2020) and of general vectorial
fields (Liu et al., 2017; Milione et al., 2012, 2011; Milman and Mosseri, 2003). However, with just a handful of
exceptions (Bliokh, 2009; Bouchiat and Gibbons, 1988;
Cohen et al., 2019) these phases are rarely linked to fibre bundles, causing key concepts such as connection and
curvature to be surrounded by an aura of mathematical
mystery.
In this colloquium, we illustrate how fibre bundle theory can bring about a deeper understanding of geometric
phases. We do not expect the reader to have prior knowledge in the area of fibre bundle theory and will introduce
a few key concepts. We show that the geometric phases
recently observed in structured light beams are mostly
based on two-dimensional sub-spaces of a much larger
state space, and that fibre bundle theory could guide
the exploration of the entire state space. Establishing
a firmer link between geometric phases of light and fibre
bundle theory could highlight interdisciplinary research
opportunities and stimulate new discoveries. The experimental simplicity and versatility of optical systems could
even allow us to test concepts of fiber bundle theory itself.
Let us start our discussion by recalling how geometric
phases differ from their dynamic counterparts using a
simple interferometric construction.

II. GEOMETRIC VERSUS DYNAMIC PHASE IN A
NUTSHELL

Interferometry is a precious tool for measuring the
phase difference between two beams of light. In a MachZehnder interferometer, the phase difference ∆φ between
the two beams exiting the interferometer is null if the
arms of the interferometer are of equal optical path
length (see Fig.1.a). The phase naturally acquired over
time as the beam propagates is called the dynamical
phase, φd . Increasing the optical path length of one of
the arms, by introducing a piece of glass for instance, will
create an excess of dynamical phase φd + φ0d in this arm
such that ∆φ = φ0d (see Fig.1.b), modifying interference
and leading to a difference in the interferometer output.
It is also possible to obtain a finite phase difference
even if the arms are of equal optical path length, by
imposing a series of state transformation to one of the
beams (see Fig.1.c) (Aharonov and Anandan, 1987).
These transformations will cause the beam propagating
through this arm to acquire a phase, φg , solely dependent
on the path formed in the state space, in addition to the
dynamical phase acquired upon propagation, such that,
at the exit of the interferometer, ∆φ = φg . The phase
φg is said to be geometric. In the next section, we show
how a succession of polarization transformations can cre-

Figure 1: Phase measurements with Mach-Zehnder
interferometers. a. Balanced interferometer with arms
of equal optical path length. b. Introducing a dynamic
phase by changing the optical path length with a piece
of glass in one arm. c. Introducing a geometric phase
by performing a succession of state transformations in
one arm.

ate such a geometric phase called Pancharatnam-Berry
phase.
III. THE PANCHARATNAM-BERRY PHASE

The Pancharatnam-Berry (PB) phase is one of the
most ubiquous geometric phases of light (Bhandari, 1997;
Lee et al., 2017; Vinitskiı̆ et al., 1990; Zela, 2012). It was
discovered by Pancharatnam in 1956, upon generalizing
the notion of interference for partially orthogonal polarized beams (Pancharatnam, 1956) and was identified as
a geometric phase by Ramaseshan and Nityananda in
1986 (Ramaseshan, 1986). This led Berry to provide a
quantum interpretation of this phenomenon, causing his
name to be linked to this phase along with Pancharatnam’s (Berry, 1987b).
A. Experimental realisation

The PB phase is generated by changing the polarization state of a beam of light propagating along a fixed
direction. In practice, a sequence of polarization transformations can be realized using several retarders, which
would correspond to the optical elements in Fig.1.c. For
simplicity, we assume that the retarders do not change
the optical path length. If the beam of light is initially
horizontally polarized (state 1), we can use a quarter

3
waveplate (QWP) to convert the beam into a circularly
polarized state (state 2), use a second QWP to return the
polarization state to linear (state 3), however rotated by
45◦ with respect to the horizontal, then employ a suitably
oriented half waveplate (HWP) to restore the polarization direction to horizontal (state 4). The sequence of
polarization transformation is illustrated in Fig. 2.a. As
stated previously, a geometric phase is dependent on the
path formed in the state space. In order to determine
whether our sequence of state transformation will generate a geometric phase, we therefore need to turn to
geometric considerations.

B. Geometric interpretation

Realizing a sequence of (unitary) polarization transformation can be visualized as a path on the Poincaré
sphere. The Poincaré sphere is the state space of purely
polarized light, meaning that each point on the sphere
represents a pure polarization state. By convention, the
poles represent circularly polarized light, the equator linearly polarized light and the hemispheres right and left
elliptically polarized light (see Fig. 2.b). All states on
the sphere can be conveniently obtained from a linear
superposition of diametrically opposed states.
The path corresponding to the polarization transformation shown in Fig. 2.a is drawn in Fig. 2.b., where
successive polarization states have been linked using
geodesics.
In optics, it is common practice to calculate the PB
phase, which we denote φg , directly from the solid angle
ΩPS enclosed by the path formed on the Poincaré sphere,
shown in light blue (shaded area) in Fig. 2 (Pancharatnam, 1956; Samuel and Bhandari, 1988), using the simple
relation:
1
φg = − ΩPS .
2

IV. THE ORIGIN OF GEOMETRIC PHASES

In what follows, we introduce some fundamentals of
fibre bundle theory and show how geometric phases are
interpreted in terms of fibre bundles. We then examine
the PB phase from this new perspective.

A. Fibre bundle theory, a universal model

In the landscape of mathematics, fibre bundle theory
sits at the crossroads of differential geometry, topology
and connection theory. It was developed independently
from physics in the first half of the 20th century (Ehresmann, 1949; Feldbau, 1939; Hopf, 1931; Seifert, 1933;
Serre, 1951; Steenrod et al., 1951; Whitney, 1935). The
overlap with physics became evident only in retrospect,
when examining Dirac’s theory on magnetic monopoles
(Dirac, 1931) from a geometric perspective showed that
Dirac had described a fibre bundle (Lubkin, 1963; Wu
and Yang, 1975). Wu and Yang went further by demonstrating that fibre bundle theory is the natural language
of gauge theory. They summarized this idea in a table
showing how both theories describe the same concept using different terminologies (Wu and Yang, 1975). At this
point, fibre bundle theory ceased to be an abstract framework, but became suitable for the description of physical
reality. This discovery profoundly influenced the physics
and the mathematics community during the late 20th
century, as detailed in the overview provided in (Boi,
2004).
We illustrate the basic idea of fibre bundles in Fig. 3
on the example of a cylinder and a Möbius strip. A fibre
bundle is constructed from a (topological) space B called
the base space (which for both Fig. 3a, and b is a circle).
Above each point p ∈ B is a space called the fibre F
(shown as a line segment, defined by its two endpoints),
linked to the base space by a projection map (indicated
by dashed lines). At the core of fibre bundle theory is the
idea that locally, within a close neighborhood of points

(1)

If the sequence of polarization transformations is associated with a vanishing solid angle, no PB phase will
be generated. Eq. 1 provides a straightforward manner
to calculate the PB phase, however, the relationship between phase and a path formed on the state space is far
from obvious. Indeed, in physics, states are defined up
to a phase factor, meaning that two state vectors |ψi and
exp(iφ) |ψi, where φ ∈ [0, 2π[, are considered to be physically equivalent. A path traced on the Poincaré sphere
thus does not directly provide information on the evolution of the phase of the system. An additional structure,
capable of tracking this evolution is needed, and this is
where fibre bundle theory comes into play.

Figure 2: A sequence of polarization transformations. a.
Practical realisation. b. Geometric interpretation: a
closed path is traced on the Poincaré sphere.

4
p ∈ B, the total space of the fibre bundle is the direct
product of the fibre space and the base space: E ≈ B⊗F .
For the cylinder this is true globally, making it a trivial
fibre bundle. The topological and geometrical properties
of the fibre bundle may however prevent us from a consistent global mapping. This is the case for the twisted
Möbius strip, as indicated by the ant, which can move
from one end of the line segment F to the other when
traversing along the Möbius band. The fiber bundle is
then said to be non-trivial (Batterman, 2003). A fibre
bundle thus contains two types of information: local and
global. Physical phenomena are often studied from a local (infinitesimal) perspective; fibre bundle theory invites
us to take a step back and look for global properties that
may also affect our system.
To complete the definition of a fibre bundle, one may
also specify the structure group G acting on the bundle.
In the case of the Möbius strip, G = ±1 where the element −1 acts on the fibre by sending an element from
the top to the bottom of the fibre (Batterman, 2003).
Fibre bundles relevant in optics and quantum optics
tend to operate in larger state spaces, e.g. with fibres
keeping track of phase evolutions. While it is perfectly
feasible to describe optics in terms of complex electromagnetic fields, and quantum optics in terms of quantum states, fibre bundle theory offers a supplementary
geometric interpretation, transcendending specific applications and potentially allowing us to develop a more
intiuitive understanding of the underlying phenomena.
The concept of a fibre bundle linking a phase to a state
transformation was introduced by Aharonov and Anandan (Aharonov and Anandan, 1987). Here, the base
space B of the fibre bundle is the complex projective
Hilbert space, as illustrated Fig. 4, which we call state
space. The fibre above each state consists of all the normalized state vectors capable of representing that state,
namely, exp(iφ) |ψi, where φ ∈ [0, 2π[. The structure

Figure 3: Illustration of a trivial (a) and a non-trivial
(b) fibre bundle. The base space B are identical circles,
several fibres are indicated by solid line segments,
embedded into the total space E (cylinder in a. and
Möbius strip in b.).

group is the unitary group U(1) and the total space, E,
is the Hilbert space. This fibre bundle is a principal bundle, meaning that the fibre is the structure group.

Figure 4: Illustration of Aharonov and Anadan’s fibre
bundle. A closed path C, starting and ending at point
p ∈ B, is lifted into the total space E. The beginning
0
and end points of C lie on the same fibre Fp , and are
related by a phase factor in Aharonov and Anadan’s
fibre bundle.
As we mentioned earlier, a state transformation can
be visualized as a path in the state space. If we assume that the transformation is cyclic, meaning that the
state transforms back to the initial state at the end of
the transformation, it forms a closed path C in the state
space, shown by the curve in the base space B in Fig. 4.
Knowledge of this path alone does not include any phase
information. To record phase information, the path C is
0
0
“lifted” to form a path C in E. Since many curves C
can project down onto the same curve C there are many
ways to realize this lift. Some rules must be provided,
this is the role of the connection A. The connection decomposes the tangent space of the bundle into a vertical
and horizontal component, specifying the direction along
the fibres and ‘perpendicular’ to the fibres, respectively.
The curve C is then lifted along the horizontal direction
(along the fibre in Fig.4). This allows us to compare
(connect) points on different fibres. The splitting of the
space into its horizontal and vertical components hence
the connection is tied to a particular set of coordinates.
Lifting a closed path in B will often result in an open
path in E. If we assume that the beginning and end point
of the path lie on the same fibre, they are linked by a simple phase factor exp(iφ) (a U(1) transformation), called
the “holonomy of the connection on the fibre bundle”
(Nakahara, 1990). This phase factor indicates that the
wave function has failed to come back to itself at the end
of the transformation. Explicitly, for a cyclic evolution
of period T , ψp (T ) = exp(iφ)ψp (0).
In the classical realm, holonomies can take the form of
a rotation, such as the one allowing a cat falling from an

5
upside-down position to land on its paws (Montgomery,
1993) or the rotation of the oscillation plane of Foucault’s
pendulum, after a day has elapsed (von Bergmann and
Von Bergmann, 2007; Hannay, 1985).
Aharonov and Anandan identified the connection AAA
that yields the geometric phase exp(iφ) = exp(iφg ) as its
holonomy. To do so, they defined the geometric phase as
the difference between the total phase and the dynamic
phase (Aharonov and Anandan, 1987; Zwanziger et al.,
1990). Of course not all evolutions are cyclic, Samuel and
Bhandari showed that the path formed in the projective
space can simply be closed using the shortest geodesic
(Samuel and Bhandari, 1988), a process which does not
affect the geometric phase (Benedict and Fehér, 1989).
The geometric phase can then be calculated using the
connection of Aharonov and Anandan:
I
I
φg =
AAA = i
hψ̃| d |ψ̃i ,
(2)
C

C

where d is an exterior differential operator and |ψ̃i is a
basis vector field, also known as section or gauge (an explicit derivation can be found in (Bohm et al., 2003)).
Eq. 2 can be used if AAA is uniquely defined over the
region of the state space covered by the path C. In practice, several AAA may coexist due to the geometry of the
Hilbert space and of the projective Hilbert space (Urbantke, 1991). One may then prefer the following expression,
obtained using Stokes theorem:
Z
Z
φg =
d AAA =
VAA ,
(3)
S

S

where S is the surface in the state space enclosed by
C, and VAA is the curvature of the connection. Unlike
the connection AAA , the curvature VAA is well defined
everywhere. It measures the dependence of the phase
holonomy on the path formed in the projective Hilbert
space. Geometric phases owe their name to this path
dependence, and one may say that it is the curvature
of the state space that gives birth to geometric phases
(Anandan, 1988).
It is possible to witness a phase holonomy even if the
curvature vanishes, when the path C cannot be shrunk
to a point. This typically happens if the path encloses a
topological defect. The phase holonomy becomes a signature of the defect and is insensible to the shape of the
path, and hence is called a “topological phase” (Lyre,
2014).
A remarkable fact about the fibre bundle interpretation
of geometric phases proposed by Aharonov and Anandan
is that it remains valid regardless of the dimension of the
state space. We will come back to this after providing a
fibre bundle interpretation of the PB phase.

B. From Poincaré to Hopf

In the case of the PB phase, the relevant state space
is the Poincaré sphere. The sphere representation is specific to two-dimensional systems, and studying its construction reveals the associated fibre bundle. When fully
polarized light propagates along a fixed direction, say z,
it becomes analogous to a two-state (qubit) system:
|ψi = α |0i + β |1i ,

(4)

where |0i and |1i are the eigenstates of the Pauli spin
operator σz , and α and β are complex parameters with
| α |2 + | β |2 = 1 to ensure normalization. The state vector
|ψi lives in the two-dimensional Hilbert space, denoted
by H2 . This space is our total space E, which can be pictured as a hypersphere S3 embedded in R4 , represented
in orange (left shaded area) in Fig.5.a. In (Sugic et al.,
2021) this space has been coined the optical hypersphere.
In optics, a pure state |ψi can only be identified up to
a phase factor exp(iφ), and in quantum theory the set of
state vectors exp(iφ) |ψi describe the same physical state:
the probability of a measurement of the system given by
Born’s rule for |ψi and exp(iφ) |ψi is one. To account for
this, in the projective Hilbert space all states exp(iφ) |ψi,
where φ ∈ [0, 2π[, represent the same quantum state.
This set of equivalent state vectors form a fibre, which
can be pictured as a circle S1 parametrized by φ (C in
Fig. 5). For a two-state system, the state space is the projective Hilbert space CP1 , which is an ordinary sphere,
known as S2 by mathematicians. The state space is obtained by mapping each quantum state (circle) in the
total space onto a point on the sphere. This mapping is
performed by the Hopf map, which maps a circle onto a
point p in a plane R2 (+∞), then maps this point onto a
point p’ on the sphere via an inverse stereographic projection, as illustrated in Fig. 5.a (Mosseri and Dandoloff,
2001). This is how the Poincaré sphere, and all spheres
representing two-state systems, are constructed.
The PB phase then corresponds to the holonomy of
the connection AAA on a fibre bundle where the base
space is CP1 (the Poincaré sphere), a fibre is a set of
equivalent states vectors, the group structure is U(1),
and the total space is H2 . This fibre bundle is known
as the Hopf fibration, and it is capable of describing all
two-state systems, not just polarization. As such, it is often encountered in physics, where it describes magnetic
monopoles, two-dimensional harmonic oscillators, TaubNUT space (relevant in the framework of general relativity) and twistors (Urbantke, 1991). Because it involves
spaces embedded in different dimensions, the Hopf bundle is difficult to visualize, however, performing a direct
stereographic map from S3 to R3 will make its fibre structure apparent (Mosseri and Ribeiro, 2007). A schematic
illustration is provided in Fig. 6.
It is not possible to assign a single connection AAA over

6
In this case, it is preferable to calculate the PB phase
using Stokes theorem:
I
Z
1
1
1
(±1 − cos θ)dφ =
sinθdθdφ = ΩS , (7)
φg =
2 C
2 S
2

Figure 5: Schematic illustration of the Hopf map. A set
of equivalent state vectors representing a pure quantum
state (circle in the Hilbert space H2 ) is mapped onto a
point in R2 (+∞), and from there onto a point in the
complex projective Hilbert space CP1 via an inverse
stereographic projection (dotted line). We have chosen
the North Pole as the projection point.

Figure 6: Fibre structure of the Hopf fibration in R3 .
Each fibre is a circle. The set of fibres linked to the red
(dark gray), orange (gray) and yellow (light gray)
points on the CP1 sphere form three tori.

the whole Poincaré sphere. Indeed, if we introduce polar
coordinates θ, φ, we may define a connection A using the
basis |ψ̃i (Bouchiat and Gibbons, 1988; Kataevskaya and
Kundikova, 1995):
1
(1 − cos θ)dφ
2
(5)
A is defined everywhere except at θ = 0 (north pole). To
cover the entire sphere we may introduce another basis
|ψ̃ 0 i and a second connection A0 :

|ψ̃i = cos(θ/2), e−iφ sin(θ/2) ;

A=

1
(−1 − cos θ)dφ
2
(6)
A0 is defined everywhere but at θ = π (south pole). The
singular points θ = π and θ = 0 correspond to Dirac
string singularities (Dirac, 1931; Yang, 1996), they can
be moved around the sphere by choosing different basis
but cannot be removed. The sphere is thus divided into
two overlapping regions, each region having a different
connection. In the overlapping region, the connections
are related by a phase transformation (Urbantke, 1991).

0
|ψ̃ i = eiφ cos(θ/2), sin(θ/2) ;

A0 =

where ΩS is the solid angle enclosed by the path C formed
in clockwise fashion on the Poincaré sphere. We have
recovered Eq. 1 using fibre bundle theory, and have detailed how the PB phase arises from a state transformation. Eq. 1 is only valid because the state space can be
represented as a sphere, which is true for all two-state
systems. Eq. 7 shows that the curvature on the Hopf fibration does not vanish, it confirms that the PB phase
depends on the path traced in the state space, it is truly
a “geometric” phase.
PB phases are at the core of state-of-the-art wavefront
shaping technologies (Bomzon et al., 2002; Dorrah et al.,
2021; Kim et al., 2015; Radwell et al., 2016). Q-plates
(Marrucci et al., 2006), in particular, rely on PB phases
to impart a helical phase profile to a beam of light and
have been commercialized under the name of vortex retarders. The underlying principle of these devices is that
a spatially variant PB phase profile can be obtained by
realizing spatially resolved polarization transformations.
Conversely, exotic polarization distributions such as the
ones witnessed when interfering multiple beams of light
(Cardano et al., 2013; Galvez et al., 2012) or obtained
upon tight focusing (Bauer et al., 2015) may contain interesting geometric phases profiles.
In this section we have directed our attention to fully
polarized light for didactic purposes. Note however, that
geometric phases can also arise from the transformation
of partially polarized light. In this case, the state space
becomes the Poincaré ball to include points inside the
sphere (Ericsson et al., 2003; Sjöqvist et al., 2000). The
geometric phase can then be obtained by purifying the
state (Milman, 2006). Interestingly, the Poincaré ball
naturally incorporates some hyperbolic geometry (Ungar,
2002), whose relevance with regard to special relativity
has been highlighted in (Lévay, 2004) and (Samuel and
Sinha, 1997).
V. EXPLORING HIGH DIMENSIONAL STATE SPACES

The state space of an n-state system where n > 2 can
no longer be represented by an ordinary sphere (Bengtsson and Zyczkowski, 2006). Such spaces have recently
become accessible in optics, through spatial transverse
modes, strongly focused light and general vectorial light.
In the following we review how geometric phases are currently calculated on these spaces, and discuss how fibre
bundle theory could lay the foundation for the exploration of high dimensional state spaces. Our first encounter with a high dimensional state space stems from
the study of polarized beams of light with spatially vary-

7
ing propagation direction.

A. The spin-redirection phase

The spin-redirection phase is a geometric phase that
arises when polarized light is taken along a non-planar
trajectory. It was first witnessed in inhomogeneous media (Rytov, 1938; Vladimirskiy, 1941) and in optical fibres (Chiao and Wu, 1986; Ross, 1984), in which case it is
the result of an adiabatic transformation, meaning that
a photon that is initially in an eigenstate of the spin operator, aligned with the direction of the wave vector, will
remain in this eigenstate at all times. In other words, its
helicity does not change upon propagation. At the time,
it was believed that the cycling of the parameters driving the adiabatic transformation determines the existence
of geometric phases. Geometric phases were calculated
from the path traversed in time formed in the space of
parameters, in our case, the sphere of directions of the
wave vector R(t) = k(t)/k. The fibre bundle linking a
phase to a parameter transformation was introduced by
Simon (Simon, 1983). The adiabatic geometric phase can
then be calculated from the connection on Simon’s fibre
bundle. The adiabatic geometric phase φg,a acquired by
a photon when the direction of the wave vector is cycled
reads:
φg,a = −σΩk (C),

(8)

where Ωk (C) is the solid angle subtended by the path
formed on the sphere of directions k and where the helicity σ denotes the projection of the spin onto k, which
takes values σ = 1 for left-handed and σ = −1 for righthanded circularly polarized light. Here, φg,a is analogous
to a well-known adiabatic phase, namely the Berry phase
obtained from the evolution of a spin particle interacting with a time-varying magnetic field B(t) of constant
amplitude, where the directions of the magnetic field,
R(t) = B(t)/B are the parameters (Berry, 1984).
The geometric phase φg,a produces a characteristic effect: when k recovers its initial orientation, the polarization axis of linearly and elliptically polarized light is
rotated. This rotation can be understood in terms of
circular birefringence: The left and right circularly polarized light components of the beam acquire opposite
geometric phases (Tomita and Chiao, 1986).
It soon appeared that this rotation can also be observed when light is redirected by a sequence of mirrors
(Berry, 1987a; Kitano et al., 1987). However, in this
case the transformation is non-adiabatic because mirror
reflections reverse the helicity. An attempt was made
to continue using the parameter space to calculate the
geometric phases but it became clear that this description had reached its limits, it had to rely on modified
wave-vectors and had to account for occasional π phase

Figure 7: Generation of SR phases. a. A linearly
polarized beam is taken along a non planar trajectory,
the mirrors M2 and M3 form a beam elevator. At the
end of the trajectory the polarization axis is rotated. b.
Path formed on the sphere of spin directions.

shifts (Kitano et al., 1987). At a similar time, Aharonov
and Anandan changed their emphasis from the parameter space to the state space. They showed that adiabaticity is not a necessary condition for the existence of
geometric phase, but it is the state evolution that matters (Aharonov and Anandan, 1987). Similarly, for the
case of a spin particle in a magnetic field Anandan considered the evolution of the spin instead of the evolution
of the magnetic field direction (parameter), hereby lifting the adiabatic requirement (Anandan, 1992). For spin
1/2 particles, the sphere of spin directions is the Bloch
sphere. Inspired by this work, Chiao et al. shifted the
emphasis from the evolution of the direction of the wave
vector to the evolution of the spin vector S of photons
(Chiao et al., 1988). The geometric phase, now called
spin-redirection (SR) phase, became:
φg,a = −σΩSR (C),

(9)

where ΩSR (C) is the familiar solid angle formed on the
sphere representing the directions of the spin S of the
photon in real space. Fig. 7 illustrates how a beam of
light can be taken along a non-planar trajectory using
a succession of mirrors, and shows the respective path
traced on the sphere of spin directions of photons.
Note, however, that unlike the Bloch sphere of spin-1/2
particles, which incorporates information on the direction
of the spin in real space and identifies all pure states, the
sphere of spin directions of photons is not a state space.
The state space identifying all pure polarization states
was presented earlier - it is the Poincaré sphere. However, the Poincaré sphere is built on the assumption that
polarization characterizes the oscillation of a two dimensional electric field contained in the plane transverse to
a constant propagation direction. If the propagation direction varies, so does the orientation of the transverse
plane spanning the polarization.
When the propagation direction of a beam of light is

8
varied, the electric field becomes a 3-component vector
E = (Ex , Ey , Ez ) in the laboratory frame. The normalized state vector |ψi representing the system then corresponds to a rotated 3-component spinor, reflecting the
spin-1 nature of photons (Berry, 1987b; Hannay, 1998).
We are thus dealing with a 3-state system, of state space
CP2 , which is no longer an ordinary sphere. State spaces
become difficult to visualize as their dimension increases,
and so does picturing the evolution of the state in that
space. Fortunately, Majorana provided an elegant way to
circumvent this difficulty. Majorana was studying the behaviour of a spin system of arbitrary angular momentum
j in the presence of a magnetic field when he realized that
varying the direction and magnitude of the magnetic field
amounts to rotating j (Majorana, 1932). After the rotation, a system that was originally in an eigenstate finds
itself in a superposition of 2j + 1 states. The j-spin problem thus becomes equivalent to relating angular momentum states associated with different directions in space
(Schwinger, 1977). This is equivalent to the problem we
encounter when we wish to compare polarization along a
varying propagation direction. Majorana went on by representing a spin j state as a constellation of 2j points on
an ordinary sphere. Each point, poetically called a star,
represents the direction of a spin-1/2 angular momentum
(Bloch and Rabi, 1945). From a geometric perspective,
what Majorana really did was write an n-dimensional
state space CPn , as an unordered product of n − CP1 ,
the space of all unordered sets of n-points on a sphere.
In 1998, Hannay used the Majorana representation to
visualize 3D polarized light as two stars on a sphere (see
Fig.8) (Hannay, 1998). In his work, he managed to relate
the Majorana’s mathematical construct with a concept
of a polarization ellipse and its orientation direction in
3D space, familiar to all researchers working in optics.
Specifically, he showed that the foci of the polarization
ellipse are given by the projection of the stars onto the
plane perpendicular to the bisector of their angle. He also
deduced the geometric phase associated with the transformation of 3D polarized light from the circuits traced
by the two stars.
Nonparaxial fields, for which the electric field component along the propagation direction is non-negligible,
have attracted increasing attention in the past decades,
in virtue of their capacity to mix the spin and orbital
angular momentum content of the beam (Barnett and
Allen, 1994; Bliokh et al., 2010; Ma et al., 2016). This
renewed the interest in their geometric phases and has
brought the Majorana representation back in the spotlight (Alonso, 2020; Bliokh et al., 2019).
While picturing the state evolution is certainly helpful,
we have shown in section IV that all we really need to
calculate the geometric phase is the connection on the
relevant fibre bundle. For a spin-1 system, the base space
is the state space CP2 , the total space is the Hilbert
space H3 and the fibre is U(1). A good description of

Figure 8: Hannay’s representation of 3D polarized light.
The stars correspond to the tips of the vectors v and u.
The polarization ellipse is represented in orange (solid
gray circle), n is aligned with the propagation direction.
The foci of the ellipse correspond to the projection of
the stars onto the plane orthogonal to their bisector.

this fibre bundle is provided in (Bouchiat and Gibbons,
1988). In this case, the set of pure states is characterized
by four parameters consisting of three Euler angles θ, ϕ, α
giving the orientation in space of the principal axis of
the polarisation vector, and an extra parameter defining
the shape of the ellipse δ. The geometric phase of 3D
polarized light reads:
I
I
φg =
A=
(sinδ cos θ dϕ + (sinδ − 1) dα). (10)
C

C

Hannay recognized that this expression is equivalent to
the one found using the Majorana representation (Hannay, 1998). The set of coordinates on CP2 contains some
singularities, like the ones we identified at the poles on
the Poincaré sphere (Bouchiat and Gibbons, 1988). It
would be interesting to study whether this has physical consequences. A clear geometric interpretation of
the limiting cases, where the geometric phase becomes
the Pancharatnam-Berry phase or the spin-redirection
phases would also be useful. It has been suggested
that, in the context of general relativity, CP2 can be
regarded as a half pseudoparticle surrounded by a cosmological event horizon and that it shares properties of
the Yang-Mills instanton (Gibbons and Pope, 1978). We
ask whether investigating the phase holonomies of 3D polarized light could be exploited to study these systems.
Turning paraxial light into a 3D field is relatively
straightforward, one can use a high numerical aperture
or rely on scattering (Bliokh et al., 2011), measuring the
entire electric field however, is a highly challenging task.
Fortunately, it is now possible to access high dimensional
state space without breaking the paraxiality, by structuring light in its spatial degree of freedom.

9
B. Geometric phases of spatial transverse modes

Optical modes are characterized not only by their polarization but also by their spatial profile, determining
both phase and intensity distribution across the beam
(Forbes et al., 2021). While polarization is usually limited to a two dimensional state space, there is an infinite number of orthogonal spatial modes, with HermiteGaussian (HGn,m ) and Laguerre-Gaussian (LG`p ) modes
providing possible basis sets in Cartesian and polar coordinates respectively.
A spatial transverse mode of order N = n + m =
2 p + |`|, may be represented by a normalized vector |ψi
which may refer to a coherent state as approximated by
a classical light beam, or the wavefunction of a photon.
The state vector then lives in a Hilbert space of dimension
N + 1, and the state space is CPN (Allen et al., 1999).
For N = 1, |ψi is a two-state system, of the form of Eq.
4, where |0i and |1i correspond to any two linear dependent orthogonal modes, conveniently we can choose LG10
modes or HG0,1 and HG1,0 modes. Like for
and LG−1
0
all two-state systems, this state space can be pictured
as an ordinary sphere, the so-called sphere of first order modes, shown in Fig. 9.a (Agarwal, 1999; Van Enk,
1993; Padgett and Courtial, 1999). By convention, the
poles represent the modes LG±1
and the equator cor0
responds to first order HG modes of varying alignment.
All diametrically opposed modes form a suitable orthogonal basis system, from which all modes on the sphere
can be obtained as a linear superposition. A path C
can be formed on the sphere using a sequence of modepreserving optical elements, like a pair of Dove prisms
acting as a mode rotator, or a pair of cylindrical lenses
acting as a mode convertor (Beijersbergen et al., 1993).
The geometric phase associated with the transformation
of first order modes reads as (Van Enk, 1993; Galvez
et al., 2003):
1
φg,N=1 = − Ω(C),
2

(11)

where Ω(C) is the solid angle enclosed by the path formed
on the sphere, in analogy to the PB phase. This is not
surprising since the underlying geometry is the same.
The phase φg,N=1 can be interpreted as the holonomy
of the connection on the Hopf fibration, where the base
space corresponds to the sphere of first order modes. This
interpretation, to the best of our knowledge, has not yet
been made explicit in the literature.
For N > 1, the dimension of the state space |ψi grows.
Second order modes, for example, need to be expressed
in terms of not two, but three fundamental modes, where
0
−2
LG+2
form a complete basis; third or0 , LG1 and LG0
der modes require four fundamental modes, where LG+3
0 ,
−1
−3
LG+1
,
LG
and
LG
form
a
complete
basis,
and
so
on.
1
1
0
So far, geometric phases have been calculated on two-

dimensional subspaces of these high dimensional state
spaces, represented as spheres. In (Habraken and Nienhuis, 2010), a number of (N + 1)/2 spheres is used to
represent modes of odd mode order N and a number of
(N + 2)/2 spheres in order to represent modes of even
mode order. In practice, this means that both second order and third order modes will be represented using two
ordinary spheres (see Fig.9. b and c.).
However, unlike for first and third order modes, not
all the poles of the spheres of second order modes carry
orbital angular momentum, indeed, one sphere presents
the LG01 mode and the mode (iLG01 ) at the poles. This
is a general feature of even modes. Also note that the
modes at the equator of the spheres no longer correspond
to the linear superposition of the poles, as would be the
case for generalized Poincaré spheres: for the first sphere
of second order modes, for example, we would expect
to see HG1,1 rather than HG0,2 modes at the equator.
This reflects the choice of the authors in (Habraken and
Nienhuis, 2010) to obtain all the modes on these spheres
by performing a mode-preserving transformation on the
modes at the poles, which can easily be realized in the
laboratory using astigmatic mode converters (to move
along lines of constant longitude) and image rotators
(to move along lines of constant latitude). The geometric phase obtained from a cyclic mode-preserving transformation, which effectively forms a path on these subdimensional state spaces, is then calculated using (Calvo,
2005):
1
φg,N = − ` Ω,
2

(12)

where Ω is the solid angle formed on the sphere describing the transformation. Interestingly, when a path is
formed on a sphere on which all modes carry the same
amount of orbital angular momentum, like the second
sphere of second order modes, no geometric phase is generated (Galvez and O’Connell, 2005). This would indicate that geometric phases are mediated by a variation
of orbital angular momentum, in the same way as polarization transformations that generate a PB phase involve variation of the spin angular momentum (Van Enk,
1993; McWilliam et al., 2022; Tiwari, 1992). While the
sphere-based representation is useful as it directly relates
to transformations that are easily realisable in the laboratory, it is not suitable to describe generic transformations
in the state space of higher order modes.
Interpreting spatial transverse modes in terms of a fibre bundle would allow us to explore geometric phases
over the entire state space, not just over two-dimensional
sub-spaces. For a spatial transverse mode of order N,
the relevant fibre bundle would be the so called tautological line bundle, with the same base space CPN , total
space HN+1 and U(1) as the fibre. It would be interesting
to determine, at least theoretically, whether transforma-

10

Figure 9: Spheres of spatial transverse modes following the convention of (Habraken and Nienhuis, 2010), with all
modes on one sphere linked by optical mode converters and rotators. a. The sphere of first order modes is the direct
analogue of the Poincaré sphere. b. and c. Second and third order modes each are represented on two spheres.

tions over extended portions of the state space lead to the
discovery of new geometric or topological phases, with
possible applications for topological photonics and quantum communication. In tandem with such fundamental discussions we may develop experimental techniques
that can realize general forms of mode transformations,
hereby leading to the expansion of the spatial mode shaping toolbox.
In reality, the exploration of high order spaces in optics
has already begun. Indeed, a Majorana representation
of structured Gaussian beams been introduced in 2020,
revealing that geometric phases born from cyclic model
transformation of generalised structured-Gaussian beams
can be discrete (Gutiérrez-Cuevas et al., 2020). Following Hannay’s observation about the Majorana represention we expect this result to be confirmed by fibre bundle
theory. Investigations are still at an early stage and other
geometric and topological phases may still be waiting to
be discovered. Also, note that more general mode solutions of the paraxial wave equation have received increasing attention in the past years and promise to expand
the horizon of geometric phases even further (Alonso and
Dennis, 2017; Dennis and Alonso, 2017, 2019).
Knotted beams, for which the locus of phase singularities form linked and knotted threats upon propagation
(Berry and Dennis, 2001; Leach et al., 2004) may also
uncover intriguing geometric phases.
So far, we have considered the spatial and polarization degree of freedom of light independently. We shall
now study vector light fields where they become nonseparable, and discuss the implications with regard to their
geometric phases.

C. Geometric phases of general vectorial fields

Combining the polarization and spatial degrees of freedom of light amounts to building a bipartite system,
where the Hilbert space of the system corresponds to
the tensor product of the individual spaces Hpol ⊗ Hspa .

For simplicity, we shall only consider first order transverse modes, in which case we are dealing with a twoqubit system (Souza et al., 2007). Homogeneously polarized light is described by a product state, separable
into a qubit that describes the polarization, and one for
the spatial mode. Light with non-homogeneous polarization instead is non-separable in these distinct degrees
of freedom (Souza et al., 2007). Well-known examples
of non-separable modes are radially and azimuthally polarized modes of the form LG1p σ± + LG−1
p σ∓ , where σ±
represents left and right circular polarised light respectively (Liu et al., 2018; Otte et al., 2016; Selyem et al.,
2019; Zhan, 2009). These modes have received increasing attention as they can be focused to tighter spots than
their uniformly polarized counterparts (Youngworth and
Brown, 2000). General vector beams built from first order modes are usually represented using two Poincaré-like
S2 spheres, shown in Fig. 10, where the poles correspond
to uniformly circularly polarized vortex modes, of helicity σ = ±1 and carrying an optical vortex of topological
charge ` = ±1. The states on the equator correspond to
co-rotating modes, such as radial and azimuthal modes,
and counter-rotating modes (Holleczek et al., 2011; Milione et al., 2011). The geometric phase associated with
the transformation of these modes is then calculated from
the solid angle Ω formed on the relevant sphere (Milione
et al., 2011):
1
φg = ± (` + σ)Ω,
2

(13)

The total geometric phase is thus linked to the total angular momentum of the beam ` + σ. This was experimentally verified in (Milione et al., 2012), where a combination of a half wave plate and an astigmatic mode
converter realized the mode transformation.
Again, the space of pure states of a two-qubit system,
CP3 , is not an ordinary sphere. However, depending
on the degree of separability of the states, the associated substate space may take a more recognizable form

11
but would be pure speculation without first addressing
the questions raised by two-qubit systems.

VI. SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVES

Figure 10: Spheres of first order polarized modes. On
the left sphere, σ = −` at the poles and the modes on
the equator are co-rotating vector modes. For the
sphere on the right, σ = ` and the modes on the
equator are counter-rotating modes.

(Bengtsson and Zyczkowski, 2006). Separable states for
instance, form a CP1 ⊗ CP1 subspace, called Segre embedding (Bengtsson and Zyczkowski, 2006). There is
a curious correspondence between the geometry of arbitrary separable states and the fibre bundle with base
space S4 , fibre S3 and total space S7 (Mosseri and Dandoloff, 2001). Interestingly, this fibration is a generalization of the Hopf fibration, and is normally used to
describe quaternions, but it has also been used to study
the geometric phases of two-qubit systems (Lévay, 2004).
The phase associated with the cyclic evolution of a maximally entangled state is purely topological (Lévay, 2004;
Milman and Mosseri, 2003). The topological phase arising under the cyclic transformation of maximally nonseparable optical modes has been measured in (Matoso
et al., 2019; Souza et al., 2014, 2007). It would be useful
to study whether the tautological line bundle over CP3
yields similar results, considering that the Hopf fibration
is not originally intended for the description of complex
fields, and does not generalize to arbitrary dimensions.
In this section, we have considered vector modes built
from first order modes, but a more general description
would include arbitrary vector fields based on spatial
modes of higher order. The sphere-based representation
presented in Fig. 10 then needs to be expanded by allowing the LG beams at the poles to be of different topological charge, ` and m. The associated geometric phase
then reads (Yi et al., 2015):
φg = −

` − (m + 2σ)
Ω,
4

(14)

where Ω is the solid angle formed on the modified sphere
under consideration. This phase was measured in (Liu
et al., 2017) using two identical q-plates. Interpreting
this phase in terms of a fibre bundle is certainly possible,

Fibre bundle theory presents a rigorous treatment for
the understanding of phases. It sheds light on the origin
of the solid angle law linking a geometric phase to the
path formed on a generalised Poincaré sphere representing the mode space when the mode is transformed. These
spaces however often only represent two-dimensional subspaces of a high dimensional state space. They cannot
be represented by a sphere and are difficult to visualize,
they may however present geometric and topologic features giving birth to interesting geometric and topologic
phases, undetectable in the two-dimensional sub-space
descriptions. Majorana-based representations are slowly
emerging, they are capable of providing an accurate expression for geometric phases born in high dimensional
state spaces, while providing a clear visual interpretation. At a more fundamental level, tautological line bundles should be used to calculate these geometric phases,
the only ingredient needed is the connection on these
bundles. Research on general vectorial modes raises the
question of how non-separability can be accounted using
fibre bundles, and whether this causes measurable effects.
With this colloquium we hope to encourage collaborations between the optics and the mathematics communities, as we believe that higher order structured Gaussian
modes and vector modes may allow the exploration of
new concepts.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors acknowledge insightful discussions with
Remy Mosseri, Antonio Zelaquett Khoury, Kerr Maxwell
and Mark Dennis.
This work was supported by the Royal Society through
a Newton International Fellowship (NIF/R1/192384),
the Leverhulme Trust and the UK’s Engineering
and Physical Research Council with grant number
EP/V048449/1.

REFERENCES
Agarwal, G S (1999), “SU(2) structure of the Poincaré sphere
for light beams with orbital angular momentum,” J. Opt.
Soc. Am. A 16 (12), 2914–2916.
Aharonov, Y, and J. Anandan (1987), “Phase change during a
cyclic quantum evolution,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1593–1596.
Allen, L, J. Courtial, and M. J. Padgett (1999), “Matrix formulation for the propagation of light beams with orbital
and spin angular momenta,” Phys. Rev. E 60, 7497–7503.

12
Alonso, Miguel A (2020), “Geometric descriptions for the
polarization for nonparaxial optical fields: a tutorial,”
arXiv:2008.02720 [physics.optics].
Alonso, Miguel A, and Mark R. Dennis (2017), “Ray-optical
Poincaré sphere for structured Gaussian beams,” Optica
4 (4), 476–486.
Anandan, J (1988), “Non local aspects of quantum phases,”
Annales de l’I.H.P. Physique théorique 49 (3), 271–286.
Anandan, Jeeva (1992), “The geometric phase,” Nature
360 (6402), 307–313.
Barnett, Stephen M, and L. Allen (1994), “Orbital angular
momentum and nonparaxial light beams,” Optics Communications 110 (5), 670–678.
Batterman, Robert W (2003), “Falling cats, parallel parking,
and polarized light,” Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 34 (4), 527 – 557.
Bauer, Thomas, Peter Banzer, Ebrahim Karimi, Sergej Orlov,
Andrea Rubano, Lorenzo Marrucci, Enrico Santamato,
Robert W. Boyd, and Gerd Leuchs (2015), “Observation
of optical polarization Möbius strips,” Science 347 (6225),
964–966.
Beijersbergen, MW, L. Allen, H.E.L.O. [van der Veen], and
J.P. Woerdman (1993), “Astigmatic laser mode converters
and transfer of orbital angular momentum,” Optics Communications 96 (1), 123 – 132.
Benedict, M G, and L. Gy. Fehér (1989), “Quantum jumps,
geodesics, and the topological phase,” Phys. Rev. D 39,
3194–3196.
Bengtsson, Ingemar, and Karol Zyczkowski (2006), Geometry
of Quantum States: An Introduction to Quantum Entanglement (Cambridge University Press).
von Bergmann, Jens, and HsingChi Von Bergmann (2007),
“Foucault pendulum through basic geometry,” American
Journal of Physics 75 (10), 888–892.
Berry, M V (1987a), “Interpreting the anholonomy of coiled
light,” Nature 326 (6110), 277–278.
Berry, M V, and M R Dennis (2001), “Knotting and unknotting of phase singularities: Helmholtz waves, paraxial
waves and waves in 2+1 spacetime,” Journal of Physics A:
Mathematical and General 34 (42), 8877–8888.
Berry, Michael Victor (1984), “Quantal phase factors accompanying adiabatic changes,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences
392 (1802), 45–57.
Berry, MV (1987b), “The adiabatic phase and Pancharatnam’s phase for polarized light,” Journal of Modern Optics
34 (11), 1401–1407.
Bhandari, Rajendra (1997), “Polarization of light and topological phases,” Physics Reports 281 (1), 1–64.
Bliokh, Konstantin Y (2009), “Geometrodynamics of polarized light: Berry phase and spin Hall effect in a gradientindex medium,” Journal of Optics A: Pure and Applied
Optics 11 (9), 094009.
Bliokh, Konstantin Y, Miguel A Alonso, and Mark R Dennis
(2019), “Geometric phases in 2D and 3D polarized fields:
geometrical, dynamical, and topological aspects,” Reports
on Progress in Physics 82 (12), 122401.
Bliokh, Konstantin Y, Miguel A. Alonso, Elena A. Ostrovskaya, and Andrea Aiello (2010), “Angular momenta and
spin-orbit interaction of nonparaxial light in free space,”
Phys. Rev. A 82, 063825.
Bliokh, Konstantin Y, Elena A. Ostrovskaya, Miguel A.
Alonso, Oscar G. Rodrı́guez-Herrera, David Lara, and

Chris Dainty (2011), “Spin-to-orbital angular momentum
conversion in focusing, scattering, and imaging systems,”
Opt. Express 19 (27), 26132–26149.
Bloch, F, and I. I. Rabi (1945), “Atoms in variable magnetic
fields,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 17, 237–244.
Bohm, Arno, Ali Mostafazadeh, Hiroyasu Koizumi, Qian Niu,
and Joseph Zwanziger (2003), The Geometric Phase in
Quantum Systems (Springer Berlin Heidelberg).
Boi, Luciano (2004), “Geometrical and topological foundations of theoretical physics: from gauge theories to string
program,” International Journal of Mathematics and Mathematical Sciences 2004 (34), 1777–1836.
Bomzon, Ze’ev, Gabriel Biener, Vladimir Kleiner, and Erez
Hasman (2002), “Space-variant Pancharatnam-Berry phase
optical elements with computer-generated subwavelength
gratings,” Opt. Lett. 27 (13), 1141–1143.
Bouchiat, C, and G.W. Gibbons (1988), “Non-integrable
quantum phase in the evolution of a spin-1 system: a physical consequence of the non-trivial topology of the quantum
state-space,” Journal de Physique 49 (2), 187–199.
Calvo, Gabriel F (2005), “Wigner representation and geometric transformations of optical orbital angular momentum
spatial modes,” Opt. Lett. 30 (10), 1207–1209.
Cardano, Filippo, Ebrahim Karimi, Lorenzo Marrucci, Corrado de Lisio, and Enrico Santamato (2013), “Generation
and dynamics of optical beams with polarization singularities,” Opt. Express 21 (7), 8815–8820.
Chiao, R Y, A. Antaramian, K. M. Ganga, H. Jiao, S. R.
Wilkinson, and H. Nathel (1988), “Observation of a topological phase by means of a nonplanar Mach-Zehnder interferometer,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 1214–1217.
Chiao, Raymond Y, and Yong-Shi Wu (1986), “Manifestations of Berry’s topological phase for the photon,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 57, 933–936.
Cohen, Eliahu, Hugo Larocque, Frédéric Bouchard, Farshad Nejadsattari, Yuval Gefen, and Ebrahim Karimi
(2019), “Geometric phase from Aharonov–Bohm to
Pancharatnam–Berry and beyond,” Nature Reviews
Physics 1 (7), 437–449.
Dennis, M R, and M. A. Alonso (2017), “Swings and roundabouts: optical Poincaré; spheres for polarization and gaussian beams,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
375 (2087), 20150441.
Dennis, Mark R, and Miguel A Alonso (2019), “Gaussian
mode families from systems of rays,” Journal of Physics:
Photonics 1 (2), 025003.
Dirac, Paul Adrien Maurice (1931), “Quantised singularities
in the electromagnetic field,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing Papers of a Mathematical and Physical Character 133 (821), 60–72.
Dorrah, Ahmed H, Michele Tamagnone, Noah A. Rubin, Aun
Zaidi, and Federico Capasso (2021), “Introducing Berry
phase gradients along the optical path via propagationdependent polarization transformations,” Nanophotonics
doi:10.1515/nanoph-2021-0560.
Ehresmann, Charles (1949), “Sur la théorie des espaces
fibrés,” Colloques Internat. Centre Nat. Rech. Sci. 12
(Topologie algebrique, Paris 26.6.-2.7.1947), 3-15 (1949).
Van Enk, SJ (1993), “Geometric phase, transformations of
Gaussian light beams and angular momentum transfer,”
Optics Communications 102 (1), 59 – 64.
Ericsson, Marie, Arun K. Pati, Erik Sjöqvist, Johan
Brännlund, and Daniel K. L. Oi (2003), “Mixed state geo-

13
metric phases, entangled systems, and local unitary transformations,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 090405.
Feldbau, J (1939), “Sur la classification des espaces fibrés.”
C. R. Acad. Sci., Paris 208, 1621–1623.
Forbes, Andrew, Michael de Oliveira, and Mark R. Dennis
(2021), “Structured light,” Nature Photonics 15 (4), 253–
262.
Galvez, E J, P. R. Crawford, H. I. Sztul, M. J. Pysher, P. J.
Haglin, and R. E. Williams (2003), “Geometric phase associated with mode transformations of optical beams bearing
orbital angular momentum,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 203901.
Galvez, Enrique J, Shreeya Khadka, William H. Schubert, and
Sean Nomoto (2012), “Poincaré-beam patterns produced
by nonseparable superpositions of Laguerre-Gauss and polarization modes of light,” Appl. Opt. 51 (15), 2925–2934.
Galvez, Enrique J, and Megan A. O’Connell (2005), “Existence and absence of geometric phases due to mode
transformations of high-order modes,” in Nanomanipulation with Light, Vol. 5736, edited by David L. Andrews,
International Society for Optics and Photonics (SPIE) pp.
166 – 172.
Gibbons, G W, and C. N. Pope (1978), “CP2 as a gravitational instanton,” Communications in Mathematical
Physics 61 (3), 239–248.
Gutiérrez-Cuevas, R, S. A. Wadood, A. N. Vamivakas, and
M. A. Alonso (2020), “Modal majorana sphere and hidden symmetries of structured-gaussian beams,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 125, 123903.
Habraken, Steven J M, and Gerard Nienhuis (2010), “Geometric phases in higher-order transverse optical modes,” in
Complex Light and Optical Forces IV , Vol. 7613, edited by
Enrique J. Galvez, David L. Andrews, and Jesper Glückstad, International Society for Optics and Photonics (SPIE)
pp. 121 – 128.
Hannay, J H (1985), “Angle variable holonomy in adiabatic
excursion of an integrable Hamiltonian,” Journal of Physics
A Mathematical General 18 (2), 221–230.
Hannay, J H (1998), “The Berry phase for spin in the Majorana representation,” Journal of Physics A: Mathematical
and General 31 (2), L53–L59.
Holleczek, Annemarie, Andrea Aiello, Christian Gabriel,
Christoph Marquardt, and Gerd Leuchs (2011), “Classical
and quantum properties of cylindrically polarized states of
light,” Opt. Express 19 (10), 9714–9736.
Hopf, H (1931), “Über die abbildungen der dreidimensionalen
sphäre auf die kugelfläche,” Mathematische Annalen 104,
637–665.
Jisha, Chandroth Pannian, Stefan Nolte, and Alessandro Alberucci (2021), “Geometric phase in optics: From wavefront manipulation to waveguiding,” Laser & Photonics Reviews 15, 2100003.
Kataevskaya, I V, and N D Kundikova (1995), “Influence of
the helical shape of a fibre waveguide on the propagation
of light,” Quantum Electronics 25 (9), 927–928.
Kim, Jihwan, Yanming Li, Matthew N. Miskiewicz, Chulwoo
Oh, Michael W. Kudenov, and Michael J. Escuti (2015),
“Fabrication of ideal geometric-phase holograms with arbitrary wavefronts,” Optica 2 (11), 958–964.
Kitano, M, T. Yabuzaki, and T. Ogawa (1987), “Comment
on “Observation of Berry’s topological phase by use of an
optical fiber”,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 523–523.
Leach, Jonathan, Mark R. Dennis, Johannes Courtial, and
Miles J. Padgett (2004), “Knotted threads of darkness,”

Nature 432 (7014), 165–165.
Lee, Yun-Han, Guanjun Tan, Tao Zhan, Yishi Weng, Guigeng
Liu, Fangwang Gou, Fenglin Peng, Nelson V. Tabiryan, Sebastian Gauza, and Shin-Tson Wu (2017), “Recent progress
in Pancharatnam–Berry phase optical elements and the applications for virtual/augmented realities,” Optical Data
Processing and Storage 3 (1), 79–88.
Lévay, Péter (2004), “The geometry of entanglement: metrics,
connections and the geometric phase,” Journal of Physics
A: Mathematical and General 37 (5), 1821–1841.
Liu, Sheng, Shuxia Qi, Yi Zhang, Peng Li, Dongjing Wu, Lei
Han, and Jianlin Zhao (2018), “Highly efficient generation
of arbitrary vector beams with tunable polarization, phase,
and amplitude,” Photonics Research 6 (4), 228.
Liu, Yuanyuan, Zhenxing Liu, Junxiao Zhou, Xiaohui Ling,
Weixing Shu, Hailu Luo, and Shuangchun Wen (2017),
“Measurements of Pancharatnam Berry phase in mode
transformations on hybrid-order Poincare sphere,” Opt.
Lett. 42 (17), 3447–3450.
Lubkin, Elihu (1963), “Geometric definition of gauge invariance,” Annals of Physics 23 (2), 233–283.
Lyre, Holger (2014), “Berry phase and quantum structure,”
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 48, 45–51.
Ma, LB, SL Li, Vladimir M Fomin, Martina Hentschel, Jörg B
Götte, Yin Yin, MR Jorgensen, and Oliver G Schmidt
(2016), “Spin–orbit coupling of light in asymmetric microcavities,” Nature Communications 7 (1), 1–6.
Majorana, Ettore (1932), “Atomi orientati in campo magnetico variabile,” Il Nuovo Cimento 9 (2), 43–50.
Marrucci, L, C. Manzo, and D. Paparo (2006), “Optical spinto-orbital angular momentum conversion in inhomogeneous
anisotropic media,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 163905.
Matoso, A A, R. A. Ribeiro, L. E. Oxman, A. Z. Khoury,
and S. Pádua (2019), “Fractional topological phase measurement with a hyperentangled photon source,” Scientific
Reports 9 (1).
McWilliam, Amy, Claire Marie Cisowski, Robert Bennett,
and Sonja Franke-Arnold (2022), “Angular momentum
redirection phase of vector beams in a non-planar geometry,” Nanophotonics 11 (4), 727–736.
Milione, Giovanni, S. Evans, D. A. Nolan, and R. R. Alfano
(2012), “Higher order Pancharatnam-Berry phase and the
angular momentum of light,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 190401.
Milione, Giovanni, H. I. Sztul, D. A. Nolan, and R. R. Alfano
(2011), “Higher-order Poincaré sphere, Stokes parameters,
and the angular momentum of light,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 107,
053601.
Milman, Pérola (2006), “Phase dynamics of entangled
qubits,” Phys. Rev. A 73, 062118.
Milman, Pérola, and Rémy Mosseri (2003), “Topological
phase for entangled two-qubit states,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,
230403.
Montgomery, Richard (1993), “Gauge theory of the falling
cat,” Fields Inst. Commun. 1, 10.1090/fic/001/09.
Mosseri, Rémy, and Rossen Dandoloff (2001), “Geometry
of entangled states, Bloch spheres and Hopf fibrations,”
Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General 34 (47),
10243–10252.
Mosseri, Rémy, and Pedro Ribeiro (2007), “Entanglement and
Hilbert space geometry for systems with a few qubits,”
Math. Struct. Comput. Sci. 17 (6), 1117–1132.
Nakahara, Mikio (1990), Geometry, topology and physics,
Graduate student series in physics (Hilger, Bristol).

14
O’Neil, Anna T, and Johannes Courtial (2000), “Mode transformations in terms of the constituent Hermite–Gaussian
or Laguerre–Gaussian modes and the variable-phase mode
converter,” Optics Communications 181 (1), 35–45.
Otte, E, C Alpmann, and C Denz (2016), “Higher-order polarization singularitites in tailored vector beams,” Journal
of Optics 18 (7), 074012.
Padgett, M J, and J. Courtial (1999), “Poincaré-sphere equivalent for light beams containing orbital angular momentum,” Opt. Lett. 24 (7), 430–432.
Pancharatnam, S (1956), “Generalized theory of interference
and its applications,” Proceedings of the Indian Academy
of Sciences - Section A 44 (6), 398–417.
Radwell, N, R. D. Hawley, J. B. Götte, and S. FrankeArnold (2016), “Achromatic vector vortex beams
from a glass cone,” Nature Communications 7 (1),
10.1038/ncomms10564.
Ramaseshan, S Nityananda, R (1986), “The interference of
polarized light as an early example of Berry’s phase,” Current Science India 55, 1225–1226.
Ross, J N (1984), “The rotation of the polarization in low
birefringence monomode optical fibres due to geometric effects,” Optical and Quantum Electronics 16 (5), 455–461.
Rytov, S M (1938), “On transition from wave to geometrical
optics,” Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR 18(2).
Samuel, Joseph, and Rajendra Bhandari (1988), “General setting for Berry’s phase,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 2339–2342.
Samuel, Joseph, and Supurna Sinha (1997), “Thomas rotation and polarized light: A non-abelian geometric phase in
optics,” Pramana 48 (5), 969–975.
Schwinger, Julian (1977), “The Majorana formula,” Transactions of the New York Academy of Sciences 38 (1 Series
II), 170–184.
Seifert, H (1933), “Topologie dreidimensionaler gefaserter
Räume,” Acta Mathematica 60 (0), 147–238.
Selyem, Adam, Carmelo Rosales-Guzmán, Sarah Croke, Andrew Forbes, and Sonja Franke-Arnold (2019), “Basisindependent tomography and nonseparability witnesses of
pure complex vectorial light fields by stokes projections,”
Physical Review A 100 (6).
Serre, Jean-Pierre (1951), “Homologie singulière des espaces
fibrés,” The Annals of Mathematics 54 (3), 425.
Simon, Barry (1983), “Holonomy, the quantum adiabatic theorem, and Berry’s phase,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 2167–2170.
Sjöqvist, Erik, Arun K. Pati, Artur Ekert, Jeeva S. Anandan, Marie Ericsson, Daniel K. L. Oi, and Vlatko Vedral
(2000), “Geometric phases for mixed states in interferometry,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2845–2849.
Souza, C E R, J. A. O. Huguenin, and A. Z. Khoury (2014),
“Topological phase structure of vector vortex beams,” J.
Opt. Soc. Am. A 31 (5), 1007–1012.
Souza, C E R, J. A. O. Huguenin, P. Milman, and A. Z.
Khoury (2007), “Topological phase for spin-orbit transformations on a laser beam,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 160401.
Steenrod, NE, N. Steenrod, and Princeton University Press
(1951), The Topology of Fibre Bundles, Princeton landmarks in mathematics and physics (Princeton University

Press).
Sugic, Danica, Ramon Droop, Eileen Otte, Daniel Ehrmanntraut, Franco Nori, Janne Ruostekoski, Cornelia Denz,
and Mark R. Dennis (2021), “Particle-like topologies in
light,” Nature Communications 12 (1), 10.1038/s41467021-26171-5.
Tiwari, SC (1992), “Geometric phase in optics,” Journal of
Modern Optics 39 (5), 1097–1105.
Tomita, Akira, and Raymond Y. Chiao (1986), “Observation
of Berry’s topological phase by use of an optical fiber,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 937–940.
Ungar, Abraham A (2002), “The hyperbolic geometric structure of the density matrix for mixed state qubits,” Foundations of Physics 32 (11), 1671–1699.
Urbantke, H (1991), “Two-level quantum systems: States,
phases, and holonomy,” American Journal of Physics
59 (6), 503–509.
Vinitskiı̆, S I, V L Derbov, Vladimir M Dubovik, B L
Markovski, and Yu P Stepanovskiı̆ (1990), “Topological
phases in quantum mechanics and polarization optics,” Soviet Physics Uspekhi 33 (6), 403–428.
Vladimirskiy, VV (1941), “The rotation of a polarization
plane for curved light ray,” Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR 31.
Whitney, H (1935), “Sphere-spaces,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 21 (7), 464–468.
Wilczek, F, and A Shapere (1989), Geometric Phases in
Physics, 1st ed. (World Scientific, Singapore).
Wilczek, Frank, and A. Zee (1984), “Appearance of gauge
structure in simple dynamical systems,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
52, 2111–2114.
Wu, Tai Tsun, and Chen Ning Yang (1975), “Concept of nonintegrable phase factors and global formulation of gauge
fields,” Phys. Rev. D 12, 3845–3857.
Yang, Chen Ning (1996), “Magnetic monopoles, fiber bundles,
and gauge fields,” in NATO ASI Series (Springer US) pp.
55–65.
Yang, Chen Ning (2014), “The conceptual origins of
Maxwell’s equations and gauge theory,” Physics Today
67 (11), 45–51.
Yi, Xunong, Yachao Liu, Xiaohui Ling, Xinxing Zhou,
Yougang Ke, Hailu Luo, Shuangchun Wen, and Dianyuan
Fan (2015), “Hybrid-order poincaré sphere,” Phys. Rev. A
91, 023801.
Youngworth, K S, and T. G Brown (2000), “Focusing of
high numerical aperture cylindrical-vector beams,” Opt.
Express 7 (2), 77–87.
Zela, Francisco De (2012), “The Pancharatnam-Berry phase:
Theoretical and experimental aspects,” in Theoretical Concepts of Quantum Mechanics (InTech).
Zhan, Qiwen (2009), “Cylindrical vector beams: from mathematical concepts to applications,” Adv. Opt. Photon. 1 (1),
1–57.
Zwanziger, J W, M Koenig, and A Pines (1990), “Berry’s
phase,” Annual Review of Physical Chemistry 41 (1), 601–
646.

