                     Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150




         The Hopf fibration—seven times in physics
                                           H.K. Urbantke
                     Institut für Theoretische Physik, Universität Wien, Boltzmanngasse 5,
                                             A-1090 Vienna, Austria
                         Received 21 May 2002; received in revised form 7 June 2002




Abstract
   It is pointed out that the Hopf fibration—a special but very basic non-trivial principal fiber
bundle—occurs in at least seven different situations in theoretical physics in various guises. Sur-
prisingly, the gauge theory aspect is in the minority here.
© 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

MSC: 81G99; 55R25

JGP SC: Differential geometry; Quantum mechanics

Keywords: Hopf fibration; Quantum mechanics




1. Introduction

   The Hopf fibration as a purely mathematical idea has been around since 1931 when
it allowed Hopf1 to determine the third homotopy group of the 2-sphere and to show, in
particular, that this group is non-trivial, by exhibiting a suitable map from the 3-sphere
to the 2-sphere and the fibration of the 3-sphere related to it. It was realized only much
later that this fibration occurred in the same year well-hidden in a physics context when
Dirac extended the framework of wave mechanics by admitting for “wave functions”
what we now call sections of non-trivial complex line bundles, and studied, in particu-
lar, quantum mechanical motion in the field of a magnetic monopole. The basic defini-
tion of the Hopf fibration is, however, also closely related to the distinction between state
vectors and states in quantum mechanics, and its base space—the 2-sphere S2 —appears
literally in the case of two-level systems (“qubits”, as they have been called recently)

 1 [23]; later Hopf invented more fibrations that now bear his name, but we will stick strictly to the 1931

construction in this article.

0393-0440/02/$ – see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S 0 3 9 3 - 0 4 4 0 ( 0 2 ) 0 0 1 2 1 - 3
126               H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150

as the so-called “Bloch sphere”, as was pointed out, e.g., by Penrose. Without recognition
of the nature of the base space, a directly related fibration was—as remarked by Hopf—
considered in the context of the parallelism invented by Clifford in 1873, couched, however,
in the language of real projective 3-space (elliptic version of non-Euclidean geometry). A
very direct occurrence, without any obvious role for the nature of the base space, appears
when the phase space flow of the two-dimensional harmonic oscillator is restricted to a
non-trivial energy shell. A more tricky occurrence of the fibration is in Penrose’s theory
of twistors, where it serves to illustrate one special geometrical realization of a (projec-
tive) twistor. More features of the Hopf fibration are involved in its occurrence in General
Relativity, namely in the global structure of Taub-NUT space: the nature of its base space
and the linking of its fibers play an essential role in the study of that space. Complex line
bundles associated with the Hopf fibration appear directly when the zero mass helicity rep-
resentations of the (covering group of the) Poincaré group are considered (“Wignerism”),
the non-trivial topological features making themselves felt at various instances, inhibiting
the procedure of going from finite to zero mass. Finally, the Hopf fibration determines the
spin structure of the 2-sphere, a concept entering not only “two-dimensional Wick-rotated
physics”, but appearing also upon separation of the ordinary Dirac equation in spherically
symmetric external electrostatic fields—although this fact is seldom mentioned in conven-
tional treatments of the relativistic hydrogen spectrum.
    This remarkable multiple occurrence of Hopf’s fiber bundle in at least seven different
physical situations indicates that it is a basic geometrical element, possibly useful in the
physical description of more situations, rather than a mathematical curiosity which most
physicists did not know about before the mid-1970s. In the words of Penrose, it may be
regarded as an “element of the architecture of our world”. Naturally then, the present
article is more a matter of contemplation rather than research. In Appendix A, we will
include the definition and a brief indication of several mathematical features of the fibration
together with textbook references; the reader is advised to consult, if necessary, Appendix A
parallel to the main text. In Section 2, the appearance of the fibration in two-level quantum
systems is described, including a “connection” in the bundle that is related to adiabatic
transport and Berry’s geometrical phase. This is, in a sense, a “top-down” version of the
description, and in this form the fibration makes its appearance also in the two-dimensional
isotropic harmonic oscillator (Section 3), in Taub-NUT space (Section 4) and in twistor
theory (Section 5). Its is only in Wigner’s helicity representations of the Poincarë group
(Section 6) and in Dirac’s monopole quantization (Section 7) that the bottom-up view—
cherished by us physicists since we learn it this way in gauge theory—comes first; in fact,
it is only the latter example where the scheme “local gauge potential, local field strength”,
augmented by global considerations because of singularities in the local, gauge-dependent
quantities, leads to the well-known patching construction of the fibration. We close by
pointing out the role of the fibration in giving the 2-sphere’s spin structure (Section 8),
a concept necessary for global considerations involving the Dirac equation and the Dirac
operator.
    Our collection could result in the moral that there are perhaps more fiber bundles in
physics than a local, gauge theory shaped eye allows to see, and that, therefore, there may
be some merit for us physicists in also looking at the non-differential geometric methods
of studying them.
                  H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150        127

2. Hopf and the qubit—two-level quantum systems

   The occurrence of the Hopf fibration in two-level quantum systems—systems that can
be described using a two-dimensional complex Hilbert space, also nowadays known as
qubits—was mentioned, e.g., by Penrose [36], and is described more extensively in [48];
so we can be brief and somewhat schematic about it here.
   We take the two-dimensional Hilbert space just to be C2 with its standard Hermitian
inner product z, w := z̄1 w1 + z̄2 w2 = z† w. The states of the system are given by density
matrices, i.e., Hermitian-positive 2 × 2 matrices of trace 1; the observables of the system are
given by Hermitian matrices; the expectation values of the observable with matrix A in the
state with density matrix ρ is given by the real number Tr Aρ. When ρ has rank 1, it has the
form of a one-dimensional projector, ρ = zz† /z† z, and is called a pure state, represented
by the (non-zero) state vector z ∈ C2 , and the expectation value of A becomes z† Az/z† z.
One notes that a pure state determines the state vector only up to a non-zero complex factor,
and even when z is required to be normalized, z, z ≡ z† z = 1, a phase factor eiα , α real,
remains undetermined. This of course means that the pure states can also be identified with
the points of the projectivized space P(C2 ) = CP1 , but for the moment we will stick to the
density matrices.
   Consider now the expectation values of three observables σ1 , σ2 , σ3 , where
                                                                 
               0 1                   0 −i                      1 0
      σ1 =            ,      σ2 =             ,      σ3 =               .
               1 0                    i 0                      0 −1

(These are known as the Pauli spin matrices, since they relate to the components of the spin
angular momentum observables of a spin 21 particle; but for our formal purposes here this
interpretation is not essential.) Collecting them into a matrix vector σ = (σ1 , σ2 , σ3 ), we
have for its expectation value in a state ρ the vector R := Tr ρσ ∈ R3 . One can verify that
this relation can be inverted as ρ = 21 (1 + R · σ), where the positivity of ρ implies R2 ≤ 1,
equality holding precisely for pure states. This means that R(z) := z† σz/z† z satisfies
R2 (z) = 1. In other words, the density matrices ρ may, in the qubit case, be represented by
vectors in R3 belonging to the closed unit ball B3 (the “Bloch sphere”, in physics jargon,
since it was used by F. Bloch to illustrate magnetic spin resonance phenomena), and the
state is pure iff the representing R3 -vector is a unit vector.
   We can also get a geometric picture of the state vectors z themselves by looking at
C2 as being R4 , taking the real and imaginary parts of z1 , z2 (in some order) as its real
components. Then the assignment z → R(z) gives us a map R4 → S2 ⊂ R3 , and restricting
to normalized z, z† z = 1, whose realifications fill the 3-sphere S3 ⊂ R4 , we get a map
S3 → S2 . This is the Hopf map: if the real components of z are numbered suitably and
the definition of R(z) is written out explicitly in terms of them, the above expression for
the latter becomes literally identical to Hopf’s original formulae. It is easy to check that
the inhomogeneous coordinate ζ = z2 /z1 on the space of pure states when looked at as
CP1 is just the complex stereographic coordinate on the Bloch 2-sphere when this sphere is
projected onto its equatorial plane from its south pole. The inverse images of the points on
the Bloch 2-sphere under the Hopf map are “phase circles” on the 3-sphere. The 2-parameter
128                 H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150

system of phase circles on the 3-sphere so obtained constitute its Hopf fibration. In [48],
the author explains the visualization of this system of circles by stereographic projection
of the 3-sphere onto its equatorial 3-plane, where it appears as the system of “Villarceau
circles” on a nested family of coaxial concentric tori orthogonal to the unit 2-sphere.
   In [48], the author describes the idea of Penrose how to represent normalized state vectors
z in terms of the Bloch sphere picture: one assigns to z not only the phase-insensitive
position R(z), but also the phase-sensitive unit tangent vector at that position given by
P(z) := RZ(z), where Z(z) := {z, σz} with {z, w} := z1 w2 − z2 w1 . When z undergoes a
phase change, this tangent is just rotated through twice the phase angle.
   In [48], the author further discussed adiabatic transport of state vectors over curves in
the space of pure states, as specialized from the general case to the qubit case. For a given
curve τ → Rτ on the 2-sphere, the transport τ → zτ is required to satisfy the differential
equation z, (dz/dτ) = 0, i.e., zτ is to be a curve on S3 having R(zτ ) = Rτ whose tangent
vectors are annihilated by the connection form z, dz ≡ z† dz. It is shown there explicitly
that the associated P(z) undergo Levi–Cività transport (which again only illustrates several
general theorems). The holonomy of the connection resulting from parallel transport over
a closed curve in state space—yields the famous “geometric phase” of Berry. Note that this
connection is invariant under the action of the unitary group on our Hilbert space—it is in
fact the only one with this property and will be encountered again in Section 7.


3. Hopf and mechanics—the harmonic oscillator

   It may surprise some that the simple two-dimensional isotropic classical harmonic oscil-
lator provides an example of the occurrence of the Hopf fibration in physics. But indeed, its
phase flow, restricted to a non-trivial energy shell, Hopf-fibers the latter! To see this easily,
we scale everything such that the mass and the angular frequency of the oscillator become
1; the Hamiltonian then reads
      H = 21 (p21 + p22 + q12 + q22 ),
whence the equations of motion
      q̇k = pk ,      ṗk = −qk      (k = 1, 2).
Employing the usual complex variables ak := qk + ipk , these become
      H = 21 (|a1 |2 + |a2 |2 ),      ȧk = −iak
with√solution ak (t) = ak (0) exp(−it). If H(0) = 0, energy conservation allows to normalize
ak / 2H =: zk , the zk satisfying zk (t) = zk (0) exp(−it), |z1 |2 + |z2 |2 = 1. Hence we see
that the phase space trajectories give a Hopf fibration of the energy shell. Moreover, the
2-surfaces given by H1 = const., H2 = const., where Hk = 21 (p2k + qk2 ) = 21 |ak |2 are
conserved and have vanishing Poisson bracket with each other, are analogous to the tori
whose stereographic projection is depicted in [48]; they are just the Arnold tori of our
integrable system. The similarity of the pictures of the Hopf fibration with Fig. 242 of [1]
or with Fig. 31 of [16] is, therefore, not accidental. More details, such as the relation of
the Hopf map to the concept of moment map, as well as its role in rigid body motion and
                  H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150          129

classical analogs of the quantum geometric phase, together with many historical remarks,
are given in Section 1.10 of [51].
   Interesting generalizations concerning the linking of flux lines of divergence-free vector
fields on 3-manifolds, with application, e.g., as an obstacle to the dissipation of magnetic
energy in stars, discussed in Chapter III of [2], show that the important feature of the Hopf
fibration in the present context is the linking of its fibers (cf. Appendix A).


4. Hopf and General Relativity—Taub-NUT space

  Around 1950, Gödel and Taub independently started the investigation of spatially ho-
mogeneous cosmological models in General Relativity. The ones constructed by them are
space-times M having line elements of the form
     ds2 = −dτ 2 + γik (τ)ωi ωk ,
where the ωk are essentially left-invariant 1-forms on a three-dimensional Lie group G and
the product of forms in ds2 is symmetric tensor multiplication as usual. More precisely,
M = I × G, where I is some interval for τ, to be determined during the process of solving
the Einstein field equations, which become ODEs under the ansatz above, and the ωk are
pullbacks under M → G of left-invariant forms on G.
   By “the” Taub universe one means the solution of Einstein’s vacuum field equations with
vanishing cosmological constant in which the ωk belong to G = SU(2) (“Bianchi type IX”)
and may be constructed from the manifestly left-invariant Maurer–Cartan matrix U −1 dU,
which is Lie algebra-valued and so may be decomposed as (−i/2)ωk σk , the σk again being
the Pauli matrices. Further, γik (τ) is assumed diagonal and γ11 = γ22 . As a consequence,
ds2 has as isometries not only the left translations of SU(2) (augmented by τ → τ) but also
the 1-parameter group of right translations generated by −iσ3 : the latter does not preserve
ω1 , ω2 but does preserve ω3 and (ω1 )2 + (ω2 )2 . Using the group approach to the Hopf
fibration (described in Appendix A), we see that it is this extra symmetry which brings
in the Hopf fibration—and it also permits the Einstein equations to be solved explicitly.
(Without it, the SU(2) model is known as “mixmaster universe” [30], for which the vacuum
field equations are not integrable; on the other hand, requiring γ11 = γ33 in addition implies
symmetry under all right translations and thus makes the model isotropic as well, so that no
distinguished Hopf fibration appears: this is the geometry of the standard Robertson–Walker
cosmology with positive spatial curvature.) Even without imposing field equations, the extra
symmetry causes the 4-geometry to be “algebraically special” in that its Weyl tensor is of
Petrov–Penrose type D [11,35], both degenerate principal null directions of it having the
Hopf fiber tangents for their spatial projections. This is also related to the “optical geometry”
of the Taub space-time, which in turn is related to the standard “CR-structure” of S3 [46].
When the vacuum field equations (without cosmological constant) are imposed, the general
solution of the resulting system of ODEs is [40]
             k cosh (ktTaub + α)                                      k
      γ11 =                             = γ22 ,     γ33 =                        ,
             2 1 + cosh (ktTaub + β)                          cosh (ktTaub + α)
     dτ 2 = γ11
             2
                γ33 dtTaub
                      2
                           .
130                  H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150

Here α, β and k > 0 are the constants of integration.2 The interval for tTaub is the whole
real line, but contrary to Taub’s original belief this does not prevent this space-time from
being incomplete. We cannot go into a discussion of this in any detail, but only highlight
the appearance of the Hopf fibration in the further development. By a number of trans-
formations one (analytically yet non-uniquely!) continues to other regimes (NUT regimes,
after [28,34])—remarkably discovered independently, following an entirely different route),
where the symmetries described above—which are spacelike in the Taub regime—become
timelike in part. More specifically, it is the Killing field tangent to the Hopf fibers which
becomes timelike; thus the appearance of closed timelike lines makes the solution very
peculiar. The transitions from one regime to the other happens [32,35]) across a “Cauchy
horizon”, an S3 null hypersurface generated by the SU(2) symmetry group, whose null
geodesic generators are just Hopf fibers.3 In the NUT regime, a further feature of the
Hopf fibration becomes important—the linking of the fibers. Generally, the linking of
the inverse images of points under a smooth map S3 → S2 can be expressed by a cer-
tain integral, its Hopf invariant [4], and it turns out that this integral is related here to a
physical quantity called “NUT charge” or “dual mass” [38]. The linking also prevents the
NUT regime from being asymptotically flat in the usual global sense, although its curva-
ture tensor goes to zero asymptotically: it is only locally asymptotically flat, there are no
global spacelike hypersurfaces. Nevertheless a null conformal boundary I may be attached
[38] to the asymptotic region; however, it does not have the usual topology S2 × R but
rather S3 , again Hopf-fibered by its null generators. There are many more peculiar prop-
erties of the Taub-NUT solution which we cannot even mention here [29]. NUT space
has been termed the spherically symmetric “gravimagnetic monopole” in [25]; indeed,
the analogy to the spherically symmetric Dirac magnetic monopole (Section 7) would be-
come more pronounced if a Kaluza–Klein type formulation (cf. [41]) of the latter were
used.


5. Hopf and twistors—Robinson congruences

   The concept of twistor can, according to its inventor, Penrose, be introduced in a number
of ways, and all conformally invariant field laws in flat space-time can be reformulated in
terms of twistors, generating new ways of looking at such laws; this has already been very
fruitful in the past in many cases.
   Clearly, this is not the place to give any of the different ways of approaching or using
twistors. We rather pick out one way of representing a twistor space-time-geometrically
 2 Because it is seldom written down explicitly, we give the transformation between Taub’s time coordinate and

constants of integration and the ones used later, following the NUT paper [34]. Namely, one achieves a rational
dependence on the time coordinate and the constants by introducing t, m,  via

        t−m          1                          m                                 
      √        = tanh (ktTaub + β),           √        = tanh (α − β),          4 m2 + 2 = k,
       m2 + 2       2                         m2 + 2

rendering γ11 = t 2 + 2 , γ33 = 42 U, dτ 2 = dt 2 /U, where U := (2 + 2mt − t 2 )/(2 + t 2 ).
  3 Moncrief [31] has shown that there exists a wider class of solutions to Einstein’s equations possessing an S
                                                                                                                 3
Cauchy horizon Hopf-fibered by its null geodesic generators.
                         H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150                   131

and highlight its relation to Hopf, referring to [13,18] for more concerning twistors. For
this, we will make a shortcut [47] that, while unfortunately destroying manifest conformal
covariance of the geometry, fits nicely to the group geometric description of the Hopf fibra-
tion (given in Appendix A). Namely, instead of the group SU(2) considered in Appendix A,
we here take the group U(2) of all unitary 2 × 2 matrices. The unitarity restriction for
U ∈ U(2) implies that the determinant det U has absolute value 1, so leaves open an arbi-
trary phase factor for it: U(2) is a four-dimensional compact Lie group. It may in fact be
decomposed as a product
                  √        U(1) × SU(2), but this is slightly tricky, in that√the ‘naive’ decom-
position U = U1 det U yields a√direct product decomposition with det U ∈ U(1) and
U1 ∈ SU(2) only locally,4 since det U is 2-valued and it is not possible to pick a unique
branch in a continuous fashion because U(2) is not simply connected. No such problem
arises if we set
                                                                
                     1        0                        1     0
      U = U0                            or   U=                        U0 :
                     0     det U                       0   det U

the assignments U → U0 ∈ SU(2) and U → det U ∈ U(1) are both continuous here.
However, the decomposition is now only a semidirect one in the algebraic sense: SU(2),
being the kernel of the homomorphism    U(2) → U(1) given by U → det U, is an invariant
                                            1    0
(or normal) subgroup, but the matrices                form a subgroup isomorphic to U(1)
                                            0 det U
that is not invariant. So wehave the homomorphisms
                                                     det : U(2) → U(1) and ι0 : U(1) →
                              1     0
U(2), sending exp iα →                    , whose composition is the identity on U(1), thus
                              0 exp iα
splitting the short exact sequence 1 → SU(2) → U(2) → U(1) → 1; this is the situa-
tion of a semidirect product. Using this decomposition we see that topologically5 U(2) ∼ =
S1 × S3 .
   The relation of this setup to twistor theory comes from a way of putting a Lorentzian
global metric on U(2) which is locally conformal to the Minkowski metric and which
is such that the cosets of the subgroup ι0 (U(1)) are null geodesics. This system of null
geodesics constitutes an example (in fact the only one up to conformal transformations) of
what Penrose calls a Robinson congruence of null geodesics and which is a geometrical
representation—either in U(2) or in the conformally related Minkowski space, as we shall
see shortly—of a (projective) twistor. We now describe the relation to Hopf and give the
metric involved.



  4 Globally, we have a homomorphism of the direct product U(1) × SU(2) onto U(2) given by (exp iα, U ) →
                                                                                                            1
U1 exp iα with kernel {(1, 1), (−1, −1} ∼
                                        = Z2 . More important for us will be the universal covering homomorphism
R × SU(2) → U(2), sending (α, U1 ) → U1 exp iα with kernel {nπ, (−1)n |n ∈ Z} ∼      = Z.
  5 In the group theory sense, one can still regard the 3-sphere as the coset space U(2)/U(1) if U(1) is embedded

as just described. This makes it the simplest example of a Stiefel manifold. See [33,42] for physics applications
of the more general cases.
132               H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150

   The relation to Hopf is easy: one simply applies to the second, global decomposition the
first, local one, writing
                                  √                     
                  1     0            1/ det U        0       √
       U = U0                 = U0               √             det U,
                  0 det U                0          det U
                                           
or
                                      √                     
              1     0           √        1/ det U         0
       U=                  U0 = det U                 √          U0 .
              0 det U                        0           det U
                                                   
The unimodular part indicated by the brace constitutes the projection of the coset of ι0 (U(1))
passing through U0 ∈ SU(2) onto SU(2) in the local direct product decomposition sense.
If U0 is kept fixed while det U is varied, U traces the coset through U0 in U(2), while
the indicated local projection traces part of the Hopf or anti-Hopf fiber through U0 in
SU(2) ∼= S3 .
   To get the metric, start from the right (resp. left) invariant Maurer–Cartan matrix Ω :=
dU · U −1 (resp. = U −1 dU) on U(2); then for arbitrary real constants α, β the symmetric
differential forms of degree 2 given by α(Tr Ω)2 + β Tr(Ω2 ) are bi-invariant, i.e., invariant
under U → AUB for all A, B ∈ U(2). (Here multiplication of differentials is symmetric
tensor multiplication as in the usual gik dui duk for metrics; i.e., if the ui are some parameters
on the group manifold, the gik for the above forms are gik = α Tr(U,i U −1 )Tr(U,k U −1 ) +
β Tr(U,i U −1 U,k U −1 ).) Among them, the ones with the ratio α : β = −1 are of partic-
ular importance because of their Lorentzian signature and their high (maximal possible)
conformal symmetry. If we take −α = β = 21 , we have
                                           −1
      2 Tr(Ω ) − 2 (Tr Ω) ≡ −det Ω = −det U det dU =: dsE ,
      1     2    1       2                              2

where also under the det sign symmetric multiplication of differentials is understood.
   We refer the reader to [47] or [18] for the description of the full conformal symmetry
of dsE2 in terms of U, but repeat from there its relation to Minkowski space; it is given as
follows. Decompactify U(2) by removing all U having det(U − 1) = 0; to the rest, apply
the Cayley transformation
      X = −i(U + 1)(U − 1)−1 ⇔ U = (X − i1)(X + i1)−1 ,
producing Hermitian matrices X from unitary U and conversely. One then calculates
      dX = 2i(U − 1)−1 dU(U − 1)−1 ,              det dX = −4 det U(det(U − 1))−2 det Ω.
Finally, parametrizing X as
                             
             x0 + x3 x1 − ix2
     X=                         = x0 1 + x · σ
             x1 + ix2 x0 − x3
with the Pauli matrices σ = (σ1 , σ2 , σ3 ), we see that the Minkowski metric
        2
      dsM := (dx0 )2 − dx2 = det dX
is conformally related to dsE2 , i.e., the Cayley transformation is conformal.
                  H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150           133

   The decompactification above removes from the SU(2) subgroup just the single element
1; the rest gets, via Cayley, related to the hypersurface Tr X = 0—i.e., x0 = 0—of the
Minkowski space constituted by the X or (xi ); one checks that this is just a stereographic
relation. The system of Hopf fibers on SU(2) ∼       = S3 thus gets mapped to the system of
Villarceau circles described in [48].
   Let us now have a closer look at dsE2 in order to see that the cosets of our subgroup ι0 (U(1))
are null geodesics. Write det U = exp 2iτ, U = U1 exp iτ, U1 ∈ SU(2), remembering that
τ and exp iτ are only locally defined as smooth functions, having jumps on non-contractible
loops which we know exist on U(2); so dτ is still globally defined. In terms of this local
decomposition, we have Ω = i dτ1 + Ω1 with Ω1 := dU1 · U1−1 (resp. =U1−1 dU1 ), so that
Tr Ω1 = 0 from det U1 = 1. This gives the manifestly global definition of dτ as (1/2i)Tr Ω
and

     dsE2 = −det(idτ1 + Ω1 ) = dτ 2 − det Ω1 ,

where det Ω1 ≡ det dU1 is seen (Appendix A) to be the usual line element on S3 ∼     = SU(2),
for which the Hopf fibers, being great circles, are geodesics. Since dsE2 is a Riemannian
sum of two metrics, its geodesics are given by their local projections which are geodesics
in their respective metrics. Thus the cosets under consideration   are indeedgeodesics for
                                                                     1      0
dsE2 ; and they are null, since parametrizing them as α → U0                      (resp. α →
                                                                     0 exp iα
             
   1      0
                U0 ), we easily find det Ω = 0 along them.
   0 exp iα
   Two remarks are as follows. (1) On passing from U(2) to its universal covering group
R × SU(2) (cf. the preceding footnote), τ becomes globally defined, and dsE2 is then the
usual metric on the Einstein cylinder universe R × S3 (up to some scaling); and while the
closure of the Cayley image of Minkowski space within U(2) is all of U(2), the closure
(of a connected lift) within the universal cover gives the usual ‘conformal infinity’ picture
[13]. (2) Performing the local projection onto SU(2) first and Cayley afterwards is not
the same as doing Cayley first and orthogonally projecting onto SU(2)’s Cayley image
3-space x0 = 0 in Minkowski space thereafter. Thus the Cayley images of the above
cosets (null geodesics of dsE2 ) are null geodesics of dsM 2 and therefore straight null lines

by the well-known conformal invariance property of null geodesics. So their Minkowski
orthogonal projections onto x0 = 0 are straight lines there and not the stereographic Hopf =
Villarceau circles! As Penrose points out, the latter are useful nevertheless in this context,
however: a null straight line in Minkowski space is easily constructed from an initial point in
x0 = 0 and the direction there of its projection onto x0 = 0 by running through the straight
line given by these data with the speed of light; and for the null geodesics in question, this
direction is given by the tangent to the stereographic Hopf circle at the stereographic image
point. This is how Penrose instructs us to read the stereographic Hopf fibration in the twistor
context.
   We finally describe, following Penrose, the relation to (projective) twistors. Twistors are
elements of a four-dimensional complex vector space T equipped with a Hermitian form
h of signature (2, 2) and a compatible determinant function (; the automorphism group of
134                  H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150

this structure, SU(2, 2), is a 4:1 covering of the (connected component of the) conformal
group of dsE2 . We will be interested in the projective twistors, i.e., the one-dimensional
subspaces CT of T (0 = T ∈ T)—so notice that all equations below are homogeneous in
the twistor variables that occur, unless special normalizations are made. We first interpret
CN, 0 = N ∈ T, in the null case h(N, N) = 0, and only then interpret CT , 0 = T ∈ T, in
the non-null case h(T, T) = 0 by looking at those null twistors N = 0 which are orthogonal
to T , h(N, T) = 0: this will lead to the Robinson congruences.
   We choose a basis in T that diagonalizes h, so that its matrix is diag(1, 1, −1, −1);
then h(T, N) = T 1 N 1 + T 2 N 2 − T 3 N 3 − T 4 N 4 . Consider now a null twistor N: we have
|N 1 |2 +
         |N 
             2 |2 = |N 3 |2 + |N 4 |2 . Therefore a unitary 2 × 2 matrix U ∈ U(2) exists6 effect-
                                                                                         
          N 3         N1                                                                N3
ing U             =          , but it is not unique. We exemplify this by the choice           =
          N4          N2                                                                N4
 
   1
       : we then have |N 1 |2 + |N 2 |2 = 1, and U is given by U = U0 diag(1, exp iα) with
   0
                      
           N 1 −N 2
U0 =                       ∈ SU(2) and α real—so in this case CN determines and is deter-
           N2 N1
mined by the left coset through U0 of ι0 (U(1)). For some other choice of N 4 , we would
similarly have obtained the coset of a conjugate subgroup, which, by the invariance of
our metric, would again constitute a null geodesic. This gives the interpretation of null
twistors. The choice N 4 = 0 of the example already exemplifies the interpretation of a
non-null twistor T having h(T, T) < 0, since if we take T to have T 4 as its only non-zero
component, the condition h(T, N) = 0 just implies N 4 = 0, allowing to normalize N
to look as above with U0 ∈ SU(2) arbitrary. Thus CT indeed gets interpreted by all the
cosets of ι0 (U(1)), constituting the Robinson congruence considered before. Similarly, if
we choose T to have T 2 as its only non-zero component, exemplifying non-null twistors
having the opposite sign h(T, T) > 0, the null twistors N orthogonal to it satisfy N 2 =
0; when we scale N 1 = 1, the condition on U becomes the same as before with U re-
placed by U −1 and N 1 , N 2 by N 3 , N 4 , implying that U now runs through right rather than
left cosets: this is related to the anti-Hopf fibration, having the opposite sense of twist.
(A general position of T leads to a general position of the congruence, whose descrip-
tion in Minkowski space by the method above would involve Dupin cyclides instead of
tori.)


6. Hopf and Wignerism—helicity representations

   In all examples discussed so far, the bundle, or total, space S3 was of immediate impor-
tance and thus in the forefront of the formalism; the base space S2 , on the other hand, did
figure in the qubit case and is used in technical treatments of NUT space that work with the

  6 The description of conformal transformations in terms of fractional linear block matrix transformations of the

unitary matrices U as given in [47] can be directly inferred from this parametrization of null twistors. A similar
parametrization using Hermitian matrices X is possible when components with respect to a null basis are used
(the relation of the X to the U being given just by the Cayley transformation); cf. [18,13].
                  H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150           135

space of Killing trajectories. In the two examples to follow, it will be the other way round:
it is the base space that is in the foreground, while the bundle space appears as derived,
e.g., via a patching construction. The latter is necessitated by the need to look at the global
aspects of the objects involved. The situation in which such an object is a connection or
covariant derivative will be treated in the next section; common to that example and the one
to be treated now is a smoothness requirement that will provide a domain of definition for
certain differential operators.
   In the present example, the latter will be the generators of the (homogeneous, proper,
orthochronous) Lorentz group L in the well-known “massless” helicity representations of
the (universal covering group P̃ of the proper orthochronous) Poincaré group P. It may
surprise some that something topologically unusual should be lurking behind this matter,
but consequences of this fact have indeed been discussed in the literature [21,22]. These
representations show up as one of the “physical” cases in Wigner’s classification of the
unitary irreducible representations of P̃, which in turn are building blocks of any formalism
that realizes relativistic symmetry in the quantum domain [49].
   From the fact that the translation subgroup T of P is an Abelian invariant subgroup one
derives that every such representation can be realized in the space Γ(E) of sections of a
(complex) vector bundle E over an orbit O of L in the vector space T ∗ dual to T. (In
physics, that vector space is the space of wave numbers and is, according to de Broglie,
via × (inverse Minkowski metric tensor), identified with T except for its physical dimen-
sion, which then is momentum.) L̃ (covering L) acts on E, each L̃ ∈ L̃ transforming
the fiber over p ∈ O into the fiber over Lp by a linear transformation Q(L̃, p). From
this derives a linear action on Γ(E) which is irreducible iff for any “origin” p̄ ∈ O the
Q(L̃, p̄) furnish a unitary irreducible representation when the L̃ are restricted to the sub-
group K̃p̄ —the “little group”—of L̃ that leaves p̄ unchanged. Further, the representation of
L̃ in Γ(E) is determined (“induced”) uniquely up to unitary equivalence by that represen-
tation of the little group. Thus the classification is by classifying the orbits of L in 4-vector
space and by classifying the unitary irreducible representations of the associated little
groups.
   The case of interest for us is the one where O is a half null cone in T ∗ (forward or back-
ward), corresponding to zero mass particles, so that p̄ is null (lightlike) and the little group
has structure U(1)×C (semidirect product). Further, the relevant representations of the little
group are those where the invariant subgroup corresponding to the factor C (covering “null
rotations”) is represented trivially in the fiber over p̄; then, for irreducibility and unitarity,
the U(1) factor has to be represented one-dimensionally, i.e., the whole representation is
determined by a character of U(1), and the vector bundle has one-dimensional fibers—it is
a complex line bundle. The characters are indexed by integers; since U(1) double-covers a
1-parameter subgroup of rotations of L and since the effect of non-null translations on the
state vectors of the representation may be compensated by such rotations depending on this
integer, 1/2 times the relevant integer is called the helicity λ of the particle associated with
the representation.
   Our interest in those representations comes from the fact that for non-vanishing λ the
line bundle is topologically non-trivial, enabled by the fact that the base space null cone
O∼  = S2 × R is non-contractible. The interesting topology already resides in the restriction
of the line bundle to an S2 cross-section of the null cone O; we may take it to be the orbit of
136                  H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150

p̄ under the SO(3) subgroup of L and may then restrict the little group to be U(1). We thus
get an induced representation7 of SU(2) (double-covering SO(3)), carried by the space of
sections of the restricted line bundle over S2 , and this is the point where the Hopf fibration
appears in the setup.
    To see this first as cheaply as possible, we use a mathematical trick of the trade ([9, p. 114];
[41]). Namely, in situations like the one above (“homogeneous vector bundles”), there is a
standard bijection between sections ψ of vector bundles over group orbits and vector-valued
functions ψ̃ on the group itself with a prescribed behavior along the cosets of the little group.8
In our case as restricted to S2 and SU(2), to every section of the line bundle there corresponds
bijectively a C-valued function ψ̃ on SU(2) whose values change as ψ̃(U exp iασ3 ) =
exp(2iλα)ψ̃(U) as one goes along a left coset of U(1) in SU(2). Thus again using the group
description of the Hopf fibering, we see that the Hopf fibers serve as “guiding lines” for
the behavior of the functions ψ̃. The representation of the L̃ is, in this language, given by
composing the ψ̃ with the left translation by L̃. (Since the Hopf fibration is left-invariant,
the defining property of the ψ̃ is not lost.)
    In physics texts, this is presented somewhat differently and slightly heuristically. One
uses the system of “improper” eigenvectors common to all translation operators as a basis
in representation space. They are indexed in part by the spectral values of the translation
generators, and the Lorentz group acts on that spectrum which thus must, for irreducibility,
be an orbit of the Lorentz group. One fixes p̄ and chooses a basis in the eigenspace indexed by
it. One then imagines this basis transported to all other eigenspaces, using the representing
operators of selected Lorentz transformations, one for each orbit point p to be reached from
p̄. Traditionally, these coset representatives are chosen, for definiteness and explicitness,
as boosts. In the “massive” case, p̄ is timelike, and the boost is taken with respect to an
“observer” whose 4-velocity is parallel to it; but in the massless case we are interested in,
such choice is impossible, since a 4-velocity must be timelike. However, if any timelike
choice of the observer is made, there is a unique boost with respect to it that carries p̄ into
p (by the Doppler and aberration effect, physically speaking) except when p has its space
direction antipodal to that of p̄ with respect to the observer. In this case, the boost becomes
undefined, the necessary speed being that of light. One might argue that fixation to boosts
w.r.t. one single observer or to any boost at all is unnecessary, it could be just any Lorentz
transformation representing the coset defined by p. But for a simple topological reason no
choice that would depend continuously on p is possible for all of O, because if it were, the
topology of K̃p̄ and of O would imply the infinitely connected topology S2 ×R ×U(1)×R2
for L̃—but the latter is simply connected. Why bother about continuity at a single null line

  7 As a representation of SU(2), it is reducible; according to Frobenius reciprocity, it contains all irreducible

representations with highest weights λ, λ+1, λ+2, . . . exactly once, and none else. The irreducible subspaces are
spanned, in the “ψ-language” below—by “spin-weighted spherical harmonics” [12], in the context of Section 7
also known as “monopole spherical harmonics”. Incidentally, since the base space S2 may be regarded as the
complex manifold CP1 , it makes sense to ask whether these complex line bundles are holomorphic—and they
are. The spaces of their holomorphic sections are only finite-dimensional, as one may check by series expansion
around the north and south pole, and are easily related to binary forms in the homogeneous coordinates z1 , z2
of CP1 which are well known to carry the irreducible representations of SU(2). This illustrates a famous general
construction of Borel–Bott–Weil in rudimentary form.
  8 Explicitly, if ψ : O → E is the section, the associated ψ̃ is given by ψ̃(L̃) = (Q(L̃, p̄))−1 ψ(Lp̄).
                 H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150        137

on the cone O—in the end the representation space Γ(E) will be enlarged anyway to include
all sections square-integrable over the cone? The reason is that one wants to have continuous
representations, and for them one must provide a domain of definition for the infinitesimal
generators of L̃, which are differential operators—so we want to start with the space of
smooth sections of a smooth vector bundle. The above continuous, in fact smooth, choice
allows the construction of the bundle just over the patch of O where the boosts work, and
one can then choose an anti-podal origin and boosts “starting” from there to obtain a second
patch, and finally match the two. The bundle so obtained is non-trivial for non-zero helicity,
but it is clear now that the trick used above is preferable to doing the patching explicitly:
this is possible in our “group-dominated” situation. We just mention that for the restricted
bundle over S2 considered above one can choose the coset representatives to belong to
SO(3) instead of being boosts; one then encounters a similar problem, and the necessary
patching will be related to the patching to be treated in our next example.
   Alternatively, one can see the occurrence of the Hopf fibration by starting from the Weyl
equation (∂t ± σ · ∇)ψ = 0 and the “positive frequency condition” for 2-component spinor
fields, which are well known to carry helicity ± 21 under these conditions. In Fourier (i.e.,
momentum) space, the latter are (p0 1 ± p · σ)ψ̃(p) = 0 and p0 > 0, implying that the
Hermitian matrix 2P := p0 1 ± p · σ is singular. This puts p on the forward light cone O and
implies P to be of rank 1, so P = zz† for some complex 2-rowed column z (2-component
spinor). It follows then that z† ψ̃ = 0, so ψ̃ is uniquely determined by z apart from a
complex factor, while z is uniquely determined by p apart from a phase factor. This says
that p → ψ̃(p) is a section of a complex line bundle over O, associated to C2 \{0} ∼ = S3 ×R
viewed as a circle bundle over O ∼  = S2 × R whose fibers over the p consist of all z ∈ C2
having zz† = P. So if we consider the + case and restrict to the cross-section p0 = 1 of
the cone, we can immediately compare P formally with the 2 × 2 density matrix of a pure
state as discussed in Section 2 to obtain the same geometry as discussed there.
   The − sign leads to anti-Hopf; other helicities obtain from generalized Weyl equations
for positive frequency fields carrying 2|λ| totally symmetric indices [12]; the corresponding
line bundles over O are then tensorial powers of the one above—the tautological line bundle
of CP1 , cf. Appendix A—and of its dual, as follows easily from the spinor algebra described
in [12]. This will bring in identifications modulo 2|λ|th roots of unity, related to so-called
“lens spaces” (Appendix A), also to be mentioned in the next section.



7. Hopf and magnetic monopoles

   This example of our collection is probably the first one that caught the attention of a
larger number of physicists. As announced, the Hopf fibration comes here from a bottom-up
construction.
   In his 1931 article “Quantised Singularities in the Electromagnetic Field” (magnetic
monopoles), Dirac [19] starts out looking for a generalization of wave mechanics in which
the wave function does not have a definite value for its phase difference between two
points. In the 1970s, it was realized [50] that it is advantageous to rephrase Dirac’s idea in
the “fiber bundle with connection” language that had been given to electromagnetism and
138               H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150

non-Abelian gauge theories in the 1960s by DeWitt [20], Lubkin [27], Loos [26], Trautman
[41]. In the e.m. case and neglecting spin and inner degrees of freedom, the relevant bundle is
a complex line bundle E over space-time, and instead of ordinary C-valued wave functions
one considers sections of the line bundle. (Dirac still called them wave functions.) Ordinary
numerical wave functions reappear when a basis (consisting of only one non-zero vector
per fiber in the case of a line bundle!) is chosen in each fiber, smoothly from point to point,
and the value of the section at each point is written as a (complex) scalar multiple of that
basis vector. The gain in generality here is that one can consider non-trivial line bundles
(“twisted” like Moebius bands), which are still smooth but not capable of a smooth choice
of basis vectors, except locally. In regions where two choices (two “gauges”) coexist, one
has two smooth numerical wave functions for one smooth section, related by a smooth
gauge transformation (of “second kind”); but although a section can be smooth globally, in
the non-trivial case there is no globally smooth choice of gauge (due to the independence
condition on basis vectors), and thus no globally smooth numerical wave function for that
section. To include the cases where the line bundle has, because of spin and inner degrees of
freedom, to be replaced by a vector bundle with higher fiber dimension, one isolates from
the line bundle the bundle of its unit vectors—a circle bundle over space-time, a principal
fiber bundle with structure group U(1)—and then considers vector bundles “associated” to
it. In this scheme, there is a global but more abstract description of the e.m. field in terms
of a connection and its curvature on the (circle) bundle space, and a local “patchwork”
description of it in terms of the usual scalar and vector potentials.
    To see in more detail how the Hopf fibration relates to this, we first indicate how to
derive the Dirac quantization condition on magnetic charges in the modern approach. To
the magnetic field B produced by a static distribution of (hypothetical) magnetic charge,
compactly supported, with total magnetic charge g = 0, there corresponds the equivalent
2-form β = B dS = Bx dy ∧ dz + · · · having div B = 0 or d ∧ β = 0 outside the
support. Locally, we then have there the existence of a vector potential A or the equivalent
1-form α = A dx such that B = curl A or β = d ∧ α. If one restricts β, α to a sphere
S2 surrounding the support and uses the same symbols for the restrictions, one still has
locally β = d ∧ α; but α cannot exist globally on the sphere, as this would give 0 = g =
  S2 B dS = S2 β = ∂S2 α = 0 by Stokes, since the sphere is closed. Covering the sphere
by U+ := S2 \ {south pole}, U− := S2 \ {north pole}, one has for the restrictions β± of β to
U± that β± = d ∧ α± with 1-forms α± defined all over U± , since these are homeomorphic
to R2 . Clearly on U := U+ ∩ U− we have 0 = β+ − β− = d ∧ (α+ − α− ), so locally there
α+ − α− = dΛ for some function Λ. Since U is not simply connected, Λ will not exist
globally there as a continuous function. For example, if we consider Λ along the equator
contained in U, it will have a jump somewhere on it of size dΛ = α+ − α− =
            +                       +                                                        ±
  H+ d ∧ α + H− d ∧ α = H+ β + H− β = S2 β = g, using Stokes and denoting by H
                                   ±
the hemispheres contained in U . (Note that this involves a convention on the unit for g.)
The replacement, on U, of α− with α+ = α− + dΛ is called a local gauge transformation.
    Now quantum mechanics comes in, where the Hamiltonian H = (1/2m)p2 entering the
Schrödinger equation for a particle with electrical charge e moving in a given magnetic field
is built from the canonical momentum p = (/i)∇ + (e/c)A, which is gauge-dependent.
Therefore, a gauge transformation of the local potential A− has to be accompanied by a phase
                  H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150          139

transformation (“gauge transformation of second kind”) of the numerical wave function ψ−
of the particle, i.e., by its replacement with ψ+ = ψ− exp(−i(e/c)Λ), all on U, to keep the
physics locally gauge-invariant. However, ψ± have to be smooth there, being restrictions
of functions belonging to a domain of definition of the Hamiltonian, which is a differential
operator. So, although globally Λ has the non-zero jump g somewhere on the equator, its
exponential exp(i(e/c)Λ) is not permitted to have one, which implies (eg/2πc) ∈ Z to be
an integer n. This is the Dirac condition. The integer n may be interpreted as the winding
number, or mapping degree, of the map from the equator circle to the unit circle given by
x → exp(i(e/c)Λ(x)).
   With the idea of interpreting ψ± as component functions of a smooth section ψ of
a smooth complex line bundle with respect to two local normalized basis sections s± ,
one derives the transition function between the latter: s+ = exp(i(e/c)Λ)s− . From the
interpretation of (d + (ie/c)α± )ψ± as the local components of a covariant differential of
a section ψ one gets the interpretation of (ie/c)α± as local pullbacks Γ± under s± of a
connection form ω on a principal bundle whose curvature form is (ie/c)B dS. Multiplying
by −(2πi)−1 , one gets [10, p. 309] the representative −(e/2πc)B dS of its Chern class and
−(eg/2πc) = −n as its Chern number. The integer (“topological quantum number”) n,
being the winding number of the transition map taken along the equator, characterizes a
complex line bundle over S2 or the associated circle bundle of its unit vectors uniquely up
to bundle isomorphisms [4, p. 301]. It should be clear now that from the conceptual point
of view the state vectors of our quantum mechanical system are given by global sections
of the relevant line bundle and that the Hamiltonian is built from the covariant derivative
operators acting on sections.
   Our point here is that for n = 1 such a circle bundle is isomorphic to the Hopf bundle.
(n = −1 would correspond to anti-Hopf.) Since we have defined the Hopf bundle up to
now globally as embedded into R4 , to see this we must first patch the bundle up as above
and find two sections, one smooth over U+ , the other smooth over U− , and then look at the
transition function between them when followed round the equator of the basis space S2 .
A section s is the result of trying to find a right inverse to the bundle projection z → R(z).
Given R ∈ S2 ⊂ R3 , we form ρ = 21 (1 + R · σ), which is Hermitian-positive with trace 1
and rank 1; so ρ = zz† for some z ∈ C2 having z† z = 1, unique up to a phase factor—but
we know we cannot make the choice such that z is a continuous      function ofR all over S2 .
                                                                      cos (θ/2)
Using polar coordinates for R, we may take z = s+ (θ, φ) =                          for a section
                                                                     sin (θ/2)eiφ
                                                                  
 +                       +           −1             cos (θ/2)e−iφ
s continuous over U and z = s (θ, φ) =                               for a section s− continuous
                                                      sin (θ/2)
over U− . (Since θ = 0 and 0 = π each give only one point on the sphere for all φ, these
sections are discontinuous at the south and north pole, respectively; see Appendix A for
the less dangerous complex stereographic parametrization.) The transition function thus
equals eiφ , and the associated winding number as defined above is 1, which we wanted to
check.
   Actually, the Hopf fibration provides more than just the topology ([42]; [17, p. 110]).
Namely, the canonical connection form on the bundle space, given globally by z† dz and
140                  H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150

locally, using a parametrization given in Appendix A, by (i/2)(dψ − cos θ dφ) is invariant
under the U(2) action on z and pulls back by the sections s± (which are obviously given
by ψ = ±φ) to the forms (i/2)(±1 − cos θ) dφ with curvature form (exterior derivative)
(i/2) sin θ dθ dφ ≡ (i/2)(x/r3 ) dS. These provide the vector potentials A± and magnetic
field B for the exterior of a magnetic charge distribution invariant under the associated SO(3)
action and thus spherically symmetric—e.g., of a single point monopole; one immediately
checks that the Chern number is −1. To construct the circle bundle globally outside the
point monopole, i.e., over the part R3 \ {0} ∼= S2 × R of physical space R3 , we present the
                             ∼          ∼
bundle space as C \ {0} = R \ {0} = S3 × R (rather than only its unit sphere) but factor
                    2            4

out only the U(1) action z → eiα z (rather than the C× action, which again would give only
the quotient S2 ∼ = CP1 ). Concretely, the bundle projection is z → z† σz; all concentric
spheres get Hopf-fibered this way as in Section 3. A U(2)-invariant connection form on
this U(1) bundle is given by iI(z† dz/z† z) ≡ (i/2)(dψ − cos θ dφ), where now θ, φ are
regarded as angular coordinates on all of R3 \ {0}. (Note that the standard radial coordinate
                        †
in physical space is z z, while on our R it is given by z† z!) We leave this somewhat
                                            4

sketchy, however, because our goal—to present a role of the Hopf fibration in the monopole
context—has already been reached before.
   We mention finally that the circle bundles corresponding to higher values of |n| are
so-called lens spaces. Roughly, they are the bundles of unit vectors of complex line bundles
obtained by taking tensorial powers of the n = ±1 line bundle, as can be seen immediately
from their transition functions. For connections on them, see [42,43] and Appendix A.


8. Hopf and the Dirac equation 9

   The two-level quantum systems of Section 2 may be considered, in particular, as describ-
ing the spin states of a non-relativistic spin- 21 particle—i.e., one ignores its spatial degrees
of freedom. If the latter is not done, one must write spinorial wave functions, subject to
appropriate wave equations. In the relativistic regime, the relevant wave equation is the
Dirac equation. We shall point out here that the Hopf fibration has significance also in
this context. Most directly this comes about when one considers the analog of the Dirac
equation in two-dimensional space-times in their Euclideanized and compactified versions,
which is done either when studying field theories in two space-time dimensions for their
own sake, or in (super)string theory. In this context, S2 ∼ = CP1 is just the simplest example
of such a space-time or string world-sheet, more complicated ones being Riemann surfaces
corresponding to algebraic curves [37]. The concept of spinor field, to be subjected to a
Dirac equation, requires that of a spin structure, which is a 2:1 covering of the space-time’s
bundle of oriented orthonormal tangent frames (see, e.g., [44] for detailed exposition suit-
able in the present context). Now the assignment z → Z(z) used in Section 2 to graphically
represent state vectors in the Bloch sphere picture of pure states shows that the Hopf bundle
yields a 2:1 covering of the bundle of oriented orthonormal tangent frames of the 2-sphere,
the structure group U(1) playing the role of the spin group covering the frame bundle’s

 9 The idea to include this topic is due to A. Trautman.
                     H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150                        141

structure group SO(2). Indeed one verifies by elementary calculation that P(z) = RZ(z),
Q(z) := IZ(z) satisfy P2 = Q2 = 1, P · Q = 0, P × Q = R. Thus the Hopf bundle is the
spin bundle of the 2-sphere.10
   The canonical connection on the Hopf bundle (cf. Appendix A) already played a role
in Sections 2 and 7. Its associated covariant differential for sections of vector bundles
associated to the Hopf bundle provides the necessary ingredient for the definition of the
Dirac operator, since it is directly related to the Levi–Civitá connection on the 2-sphere, as
already remarked in Section 2.
   It is, however, not necessary to enter these esoteric two-dimensional worlds to see the
Hopf fibration as a relevant structure in the realm of spinor fields: Trautman [44] has noted
that the Dirac operator on 2-spheres appears when one tries to solve the Dirac equation in
ordinary four-dimensional Minkowski space in presence of an external spherically sym-
metric electrostatic field by the method of separation of variables, using polar coordinates.
Indeed, the operators j and k appearing in Section 71 and Section 53 of [6] and [14],
respectively—just to quote two popular expositions—are essentially the Dirac operator on
the 2-sphere: this is easy to see locally, and was shown to be true globally in [44]. As
Trautman points out, there is a direct global analog for Dirac operators to the well-known
splitting of the Laplacian on R3 into a radial operator and r −2 × (Laplacian on S2 ).11 At
least for the mathematically minded, this way of looking at the formal procedure in [6,14]
will be more satisfactory; and it allows for interesting generalizations [44] and applications
[45].


Acknowledgements

   I am indebted at least to the following persons for directly or indirectly educating me on
matters included in this article: R. Beig, I. Bengtsson, P. Nurowski, R. Penrose, H. Rumpf,
W. Simon, and A. Trautman. In particular, important information came from participants
of a meeting in honor of E.T. Newman held in June 2001 at the Banach Center, Warsaw; I
thank the organizers of that meeting for inviting me there to present a preliminary version
of this article, for hospitality, and encouragement.


Appendix A. 12

A.1. Defining the Hopf fibration

  In mathematics, the Hopf fibration is nowadays defined as follows ([4, p. 227]; [5,
Section 16.14]). Take the complex vector space C2 of columns z = ( z1 z2 )T , where
 10 Also, z⊗z → Z·dR turns out to give an explicit isomorphism between the tensorial square of the “tautological”
                        z
line bundle (bundle of chiral spinors) associated to the Hopf bundle and the holomorphic cotangent bundle of CP1 ,
mentioned in Appendix A; see [37] for the extension of this aspect to higher genus algebraic curves and its
application in superstring theory.
 11 Even the otherwise rather complete monograph [15] misses this point.
 12 As a general reference for the concepts used below, we recommend the text [17].
142                  H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150

zi ∈ C. Then the complex projective line13 P(C2 ) = CP1 obtains from C2 \ {0} by factor-
ing out the equivalence relation “z ∼ w iff w = λz for some λ ∈ C× = C\{0}”. Since these
equivalence classes bijectively correspond to the one-dimensional subspaces of C2 , one can
also define the points of the projective space to be just these subspaces. For its (complex)
manifold structure (see [4, p. 75]; [5, Section 6.11]; [10, p. 134]). Instead, one can first
restrict to the unit 3-sphere S3 ⊂ R4 = C2 given by the z having z† z = 1, and then factor
out “z ∼ w iff w = λz for some λ from the unit circle S1 ∼    = U(1) = {λ ∈ C, |λ| = 1}”.
Using the stereographic maps from CP1 to the 2-sphere S2
                                                     
            z2             2ζ        2ζ      1 − |ζ|2
      ζ :=      → R             ,I         ,            ,
            z1          1 + |ζ|2 1 + |ζ|2 1 + |ζ|2
wherever z1 = 0 and
                                                         
         z1            2ζ̄        2ζ̄      1 − |ζ  |2
    ζ :=      → R               ,I          ,               ,
          z2         1 + |ζ  |2 1 + |ζ  |2 1 + |ζ  |2

wherever z2 = 0, one gets a smooth map π from S3 onto S2 ⊂ R3 which we can also
express as
      z → (2Rz̄1 z2 , 2Iz̄1 z2 , |z1 |2 − |z2 |2 ) =: R(z).
(ζ, ζ  are the inhomogeneous complex coordinates around 0 and ∞ in CP1 ). This is the Hopf
map. π is a projection in the sense that S3 is a principal fiber bundle over the base space
S2 ∼= CP1 with structure group U(1) ([5, Section 16.14]; [7, Section 4.4.4]; [9, p. 50]) which
we will call the Hopf bundle or Hopf fibration.14 Hopf actually started out with a version in
real terms, considering instead of C2 its realification R4 , i.e., columns X = (X1 , . . . , X4 )T ,
where z1 = X1 + iX2 , z2 = X3 + iX4 . The real counterpart of multiplying z by i is
multiplying X by the matrix (a complex structure for R4 )
                              
                 0 −1 0 0
              1 0 0 0 
                              
        J :=                  .
               0 0 0 −1 
                 0 0 1 0

We also equip C2 with its standard Hermitian inner product z, w := z† w = z̄1 w1 +
z̄2 w2 . In R4 , with Y the real counterpart of w, this gives rise to the standard inner prod-
uct X, Y  = Rz, w ≡ XT Y and an anti-symmetric non-degenerate bilinear form
Φ(X, Y) := Iz, w ≡ Riz, w = JX, Y . In terms of X, the unit sphere is XT X = 1,
and the fibers of the Hopf bundle—the inverse images of the points of S2 under the Hopf
map—turn out to be linked great circles on S3 : the orbit of z under the U(1) action, α → z eiα ,
is in real terms α → X cos α + JX sin α, where X and JX are orthogonal unit vectors. We
note that the tangent to the fiber at z is given by iz, thus in real terms at X by JX. The linkage
 13 We will write dimensions as subscripts except where they at the same time can be read as Cartesian powers;

it should be clear from the context whether a real or a complex dimension is meant.
 14 Likewise, one has C2 \ {0} as a (holomorphic) principal fiber bundle over CP with structure group C× .
                                                                                1
                      H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150                          143

can be visualized by stereographic projection of the 3-sphere to its equatorial 3-plane: one
obtains one family of Villarceau circles on each torus of a system of nested coaxial con-
centric tori orthogonal to the unit 2-sphere in that 3-plane; see, e.g., [48] and works quoted
there for detailed illustration, and [4, pp. 227–239], for more on linking. The linking of the
fibers was used by Hopf to compute the homotopy group π3 (S2 ) ∼          = Z, while nowadays this
is done using the machinery of the exact homoptopy sequence of fiber bundles ([4, p. 209];
[5, Section 16.30, Ex. 5,6]).
   It should be noted that this linking of the fibers is not in conflict with the local triviality of
the bundle. Since it is needed in one of our applications, we make this explicit with respect
to a bundle atlas consisting of two charts. Let U+ = S2 \ {south pole} and U− = S2 \
{north pole} be the open subsets where ζ and ζ  are well defined, respectively; together, they
cover the 2-sphere. Then an explicit fiber-preserving diffeomorphism from π−1 (U± ) to the
product bundles U± × U(1)—in which the fibers are not linked—is given by ( z1 z2 )T →
(z2 /z1 , z1 /|z1 |) for U+ and ( z1 z2 )T → (z1 /z2 , z2 /|z2 |) for U− with respective inverses
(ζ, eiα1 ) → (1 + |ζ|2 )−1/2 eiα1 ( 1 ζ )T and (ζ  , eiα2 ) → (1 + |ζ  |2 )−1/2 eiα2 ( ζ  1 )T . The
usual polar coordinates θ, φ centered at the north pole of the 2-sphere are related to the
complex stereographic coordinate ζ by ζ = tan (θ/2) eiφ (projecting from the south pole to
the equatorial plane). Taking α1 = 0 and α2 = 0 we get cross-sections s+ and s− of the
Hopf bundle over U+ and U− given by
                                                        
                                                   θ
                                                cos
                                     1               2 
      s+ (ζ) = (1 + |ζ|2 )−1/2              =
                                             
                                                         
                                      ζ            θ iφ 
                                               sin e
                                                   2
and
                                                            
                                                    θ
                                                cos e−iφ
                                        ζ            2      
      s− (ζ  ) = (1 + |ζ  |2 )−1/2         =
                                              
                                                             ,
                                        1               θ 
                                                    sin
                                                        2
respectively, which on U+ ∩ U− are related by s+ = eiφ s− with the transition function
eiφ .15 Instead of θ, φ, α1 or θ, φ, α2 one may also use θ, φ, ψ := α1 + α2 or θ, α1 , α2 as
convenient coordinates on the bundle manifold S3 :16
                  θ iα1    θ                                            θ iα2    θ
      z1 = cos      e = cos ei((ψ−φ)/2) ,                   z2 = sin      e = sin ei((ψ+φ)/2) .
                  2        2                                            2        2

A.2. Clifford parallels

  Clifford parallelism in real projective 3-space with the elliptic version of non-Euclidean
geometry may be described as the following instruction to “draw” “parallels” to a given
 15 Similarly, one has local trivializations of the bundle mentioned in the previous footnote using the holomorphic

local sections ζ → ( 1 ζ )T and ζ  → ( ζ  1 )T with transition function ζ.
 16 Note that the latter are not bundle coordinates. The former are, being essentially Euler angles when the 3-sphere

is interpreted as the group SU(2) as below and thus as the covering group of the rotation group SO(3).
144               H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150

straight line . The geometry being specified by an “absolute” quadric of signature ++++,
thus having no real points but defining a real polarity, one complexifies  and intersects it
with the complexified quadric. This gives the complex-conjugate points P and P̄. Through
them there pass complex-conjugate generators g and ḡ, both taken from the same of the
two families of straight lines (=generators) carried by the complexified absolute. (Due to
the present signature, each family is invariant under complex conjugation.) Any complex
line joining a point P  on g with its complex-conjugate P̄  on ḡ is the complexification of
a real line  , which is then called a Clifford parallel of . Depending on which of the two
families of generators is being used, one has a right and a left Clifford parallelism. One can
show that Clifford parallels are skew and equidistant in the sense of elliptic geometry and
may be defined without using complexification [3, p. 200 et seq.].
   We now indicate the relation of the Hopf fibration to Clifford parallels. We stated above
that when C2 with its Hermitian form ·, · of signature ++ is realified, i.e., regarded as
R4 , the latter comes with the quadratic form ·, · and the complex structure J. One now
complexifies the R4 to become C4 and extends J and the bilinear form corresponding to
·, · linearly and bilinearly, respectively, denoting the extensions by the same symbols.
From J 2 = −1 it follows that iJ has eigenvalues ±1, the corresponding two-dimensional
eigenprojectors being 21 (1 ± iJ). The eigenspaces are complex-conjugates of each other,
check to be totally null with respect to ·, · due to the relation JX, JY = X, Y , and
to belong, due to signature ++++, to the same family of 2-spaces contained in the null cone
defined by ·, · (their Plücker tensors are both selfdual). Given now z ∈ C2 , we have its
realification X; we can form JX and the 2-space span(X, JX). Then the two null directions
contained in the complexification of the latter are parallel to X ± iJX, thus belonging to
the eigenspaces just introduced. Projectivizing everything we see that the projectivized
spaces span(X, JX) are indeed Clifford-parallel straight lines of RP3 = P(R4 ) with the
projectivized ·, · for its absolute. (Note that one gets a system of Clifford parallels for
any J sharing the properties just written. Also remember that the process of projectivization
identifies anti-podal points on S3 .)

A.3. Symmetry group

   The Hopf fibration has a symmetry group: the action of the unitary group U(2) on C2
leaves the 3-sphere invariant and carries fibers into fibers, as it commutes with the U(1)
action; it thus descends to an action on the 2-sphere by ordinary rotations. This gives
nothing but the well-known covering homomorphism SU(2) → SO(3), as will transpire
from the quantum mechanical interpretation in Section 2. The difference between U(2) and
SU(2) is ineffective on the 2-sphere due to the factoring out of the structure group U(1).

A.4. Group theoretic definition

   It will be useful for our purposes to give a slightly modified description of the fibering
of the 3-sphere. To            z we attach their unitary perpendiculars to form the 2 × 2
                   the columns
                     z1 −z̄2
matrices U(z) =                 : if z† z = 1, they make up the group SU(2) ∼
                                                                            = S3 . (If z is left
                     z2 z̄1
                    H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150                 145

arbitrary, one obtains a matrix ring isomorphic to the skew field of quaternions.) The U(1)
action on z can be replaced here by multiplying on the right by diag(λ, λ−1 ) ∈ SU(2), so
that the Hopf fibers are just left cosets of a U(1) subgroup in SU(2) embedded as indicated,
and we now have the 2-sphere as the coset space SU(2)/U(1). The above-mentioned U(2)
symmetry of the fibration corresponds to left multiplication by SU(2) matrices in addition
to right multiplication by the U(1) subgroup elements.17 One can also consider right cosets
of that U(1) subgroup, resulting in the anti-Hopf fibration—its stereographic projection
gives the second family of Villarceau circles on the tori mentioned above, with the opposite
sense of linking. Embedding U(1) into SU(2) by λ = eiα → exp(iαnk σk ) (where the σk are
the Pauli matrices; these subgroups are all conjugate to the one above) one gets all other
systems of Clifford parallels, one for each pair ±n of real unit vectors.
   The standard metric ds2 = dz1 dz̄1 +dz2 dz̄2 of S3 can also be written as ds2 = det dU =
det Ω, where Ω is the left or right invariant Maurer–Cartan matrix on SU(2), U −1 dU or
(dU)U −1 , and where the products of differentials are symmetric tensor products as usual. Ω
takes values in the matrix Lie algebra of SU(2) which consists of traceless anti-Hermitian
matrices. If it is decomposed as Ω = (−i/2)ωk σk , the ωk constitute a basis of left- or
right-invariant 1-forms on the group manifold. They are used in Section 4. In terms of
them, one gets ds2 = 41 δjk ωj ωk , so that the ωk /2 form an orthonormal (co)basis and the
Riemannian volume form is given by − 18 ω1 ∧ ω2 ∧ ω3 . (The sign has been chosen so as to
conform with the standard orientation of the 3-sphere as embedded into R4 as we have it
here.) For the left-invariant forms one has d ∧ Ω = −Ω ∧ Ω, implying the Maurer–Cartan
relations d ∧ ω = − 21 (jk ωj ∧ ωk . In particular, for ω3 = 2i(z̄1 dz1 + z̄2 dz2 ) = 2iz† dz
one has dω3 = −ω1 ∧ ω2 , so that the volume element also equals 18 ω3 ∧ d ∧ ω3 .
   The exterior 2-form globally defined on R3 by R · dR × dR restricts to the usual surface
element Σ on the unit 2-sphere with its standard orientation (locally, Σ = sin θ dθ ∧ dφ
in polar coordinates). Σ is trivially closed but not exact, as its integral over S2 is 4π = 0.
When pulled back to S3 by the Hopf map z → R(z), some computation (using z† z = 1)
yields the 2-form 2i(dz1 ∧ dz̄1 + dz2 ∧ dz2 ) ≡ d ∧ (−ω3 ), which is manifestly exact on
S3 . Generally, for a smooth map f : S3 → S2 , the pullback f ∗ ((4π)−1 Σ) = d ∧ α is exact
since it is closed as the pullback of a closed form and since all closed 2-forms on S3 are
exact. The integral S3 α ∧ d ∧ α is called the Hopf invariant of f ; it can be shown [4] to
be an integer equal to the linking number of the inverse images of any two points in S2
under f . For the Hopf map, this number becomes (4π)−2 S3 ω3 ∧ d ∧ ω3 = (2π2 )−1 ·
volume(S3 ) = 1.
   Note in this context that for any 1-form α the (non)vanishing of the integrand α ∧ d ∧ α
is the Frobenius criterion18 for the local (non)existence of 2-surfaces on which α restricts
to zero or which are orthogonal to the flow lines of the vector field metric-related to α. In
case of non-existence, the vector field is said to be twisting.
   Locally, using the parametrization by ψ, θ, φ, the left-invariant 1-form z† dz equals
(i/2)(dψ − cos θ dθ), and the Hopf map is (ψ, θ, φ) → (θ, φ) (so that locally it is

 17 So the symmetry group seems to be SU(2) × U(1), but the action has a kernel Z consisting of (1, 1) and
                                                                                    2
(−1, −1); the quotient is isomorphic to U(2).
 18 For the interesting history of this criterion and its generalization, see [39].
146                  H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150

immediate that the surface element of the 2-sphere pulls back to the exterior derivative
of −ω3 , but notice the dangers of sloppy notation!). It will be met again below.

A.5. Associated line bundles: lens spaces

   We will encounter complex line bundles associated to the Hopf bundle, the basic one
being the tautological line bundle over CP1 .19 This is C2 with its origin “blown up”, i.e.,
the subset of the trivial rank 2 vector bundle CP1 × C2 consisting of those pairs (P, z),
where z belongs to the one-dimensional subspace of C2 determined by the equivalence
class P ∈ CP1 . The others will be tensorial powers of it or of its dual (“negative” tensorial
powers; the zeroth power is defined to be the trivial line bundle CP1 × C). Equivalently,
these are associated to the Hopf bundle in the sense of forming (S3 × C)/U(1), where U(1)
acts on the “standard fiber” C by some of its one-dimensional representations λ → λn ,
n ∈ Z ([5, Section 16.14.7]; [7, Section 4.4.5]; [9, p. 54]).
   The circle bundles formed by their unit vectors—the Hopf bundle is just the bundle of
unit vectors, in the sense of ·, ·, of the tautological one—are so-called lens spaces L(3, n)
(employing the notation of [4]—we warn the reader that there are other notations for them,
depending on the generalizations envisaged). A related construction of L(3, n) (cf. [42])
is by first considering the circle bundle S2n+1 → CPn —defined in complete analogy to
our S3 → CP1 —and then considering the circle bundle induced [9, p. 60] from there
over CP1 under the Veronese20 embedding CP1 → CPn . The most direct definition [4,
p. 243] consists in quotienting S3 by the (free) action of the subgroup Zn ⊂ U(1) generated
by exp(2πi/n): thus S3 → S3 /Zn = L(3, n) is an n-fold covering, and, writing [z] for
z mod Zn , we have the U(1) action [z]λ := [zλ1/n ] on L(3, n) which makes it into a principal
U(1) bundle over the 2-sphere, homomorphic [9, p. 53] to the Hopf bundle via the covering
map and the homomorphism U(1) → U(1) given by λ → λn . The standard metric dz† dz
on the 3-sphere descends to a metric on L(3, n) which is thus one of the positive curvature
Clifford–Klein space forms;21 notice that the identification of points in the transition to
L(3, n) reduces the global isometry group of the 3-sphere to SU(2) × U(1)/{1, −1} for
L(3, n), if n > 2. The lens space L(3, 2) is just real projective 3-space as we used it above
for Clifford parallelism, or, using the group description of the Hopf fibration, L(3, 2) =
SU(2)/Z2 ∼   = SO(3); as a bundle over the 2-sphere, it is isomorphic to the latter’s bundle
of oriented orthonormal tangent frames. The Hopf bundle is thus the spin bundle of the
2-sphere, so that the tautological bundle is also the bundle of the 2-sphere’s semispinors of
one chirality. (The other chirality corresponds to the bundle dual to the tautological one.)
   We shall not need the holomorphic aspects of the line bundles above; but let it be men-
tioned that these bundles are similarly associated to the holomorphic principal bundle that
came up when we introduced the Hopf fibration, and thus are holomorphic; the square of

 19 Apart from the blowing-up of the origin of C2 , the fiber over a point of CP is the one-dimensional subspace of
                                                                                   1
C2 which a point of CP1 is by definition—hence the name. Other names to be encountered are natural, canonical,
universal (cf. [4, p. 268]; [5, Section 16.16, ex. 1, 2]; [7, p. 13]; [10, p. 306]).
                            n+1 with the nth symmetric tensorial power of C , one gets an isometric map C → C
 20 Suitably identifying C                                                     2                         2     n+1

by assigning to z ∈ C2 its nth tensorial power z⊗n ; this descends to an embedding of the projectivized spaces.
 21 These spaces are sometimes considered by cosmologists [24].
                  H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150           147

the tautological bundle is holomorphically equivalent to the holomorphic cotangent bundle
of CP1 ; its positive powers admit only the zero section for holomorphic sections, while if
n ≤ 0 its nth powers possess (−n + 1)-dimensional spaces of holomorphic sections. (This
is best seen by series expansion using the local trivializations mentioned.)

A.6. Connections

   A connection in a principal fiber bundle is specified geometrically by choosing, in each
tangent space to the bundle manifold, a complement to the tangent space of the fiber in
such a way that the distribution of these complements (the horizontal subspaces) is smooth
and invariant under the action of the structure group ([5, Section 20.2]; [9, p. 63]; [41]).
Equivalently, one can use the connection form ω, defined in those references, which takes
values in the Lie algebra of the structure group and annihilates the horizontal subspaces.
In the Hopf bundle, a particular and distinguished connection is obtained by taking the
horizontal subspaces to be orthogonal to the fibers; it is sometimes called the canonical
connection, and it obviously shares the full symmetry possessed by the fibration. (For
its definition in terms of the group theory description of the bundle and in terms of the
holomorphic aspects, see [9, p. 103] and [10, p. 178], respectively.) Parallel transport of
points in the bundle space over a given curve in the base space means going along a curve
in the bundle space that projects to the given one in the base and is tangent to the horizontal
subspace at each of its points. Thus for the canonical connection of the Hopf bundle these
curves are orthogonal to the Hopf circles—so their tangents Ẋ at position X must satisfy
X, Ẋ = 0 to be tangent to the 3-sphere and JX, Ẋ = 0 to be orthogonal to the
fiber. This gives z, ż = 0 as the equation for parallel transport. The connection form for
the canonical connection is z, dz ≡ z† dz; it is obviously also invariant under the full
symmetry group of the bundle.
   Since the distribution of horizontal subspaces for a connection on the Hopf bundle is to be
invariant under the action of the structure group—and therefore under its Zn subgroups—one
can use the covering projection to the lens space L(3, n) to define a connection there; its con-
nection form is such that its pullback to the Hopf bundle via the covering projection equals
n times the connection form one started with, and the same also holds for the curvature form
[9, p. 79]. This implies, in particular, that the Chern class [10, p. 305] of L(3, n) or the asso-
ciated line bundle is n times the one for Hopf. In particular, from the canonical connection
one gets a connection on each L(3, n) whose horizontal subspaces are again orthogonal to
the fibers in the sense of the metric mentioned above, again possessing the same symmetry
group. One can also obtain it by pulling back [9, p. 82], via the Veronese embedding [42], the
canonical connection form on the U(1) bundle S2n+1 → CPn , which is similarly defined.
The connection obtained in L(3, 2) from the canonical connection on the Hopf bundle is
nothing but the Levi–Cività connection on the 2-sphere, as is clear from its symmetry; con-
versely, the canonical connection on the Hopf bundle is the spin connection for Levi–Cività.

A.7. CR-structure

  The horizontal subspaces of the canonical connection, orthogonal to the Hopf fibers,
enjoy another property that has physical relevance mentioned in Section 4. They are the
148                  H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150

maximal subspaces of the tangent spaces to the 3-sphere that are complex subspaces of the
embedding C2 , since being , -orthogonal to z is a complex-linear condition. This presents
the 3-sphere as a CR-manifold; but we refer the reader to [8,46] for any further discussion
of this aspect.

A.8. Covariant differentiation: local gauges

   Along with a connection in a principal bundle P comes covariant differentiation ∇
of (smooth) sections ψ of associated vector bundles E ([5, Section 20.3]; [9, p. 113];
[41]). There are two equivalent ways of describing it invariantly and globally, one using
parallel transport in associated bundles and one using the bijective correspondence that exists
between such sections and functions ψ̃ on the principal bundle with values in the standard
fiber F of the associated one, subject to a certain equivariance condition. (We make use
of this correspondence in Section 6.22 ) One derives from this (cf. [41]) a description using
local trivializations (local gauge choices, in physics terminology), and that is the way we
need for comparison with the monopole situation.
   Let ω be a connection form on the principal bundle space P, and ψ cross-section of the
associated vector bundle E → M, where the structure group G acts on the standard fiber
F of the latter by the representation σ (and its Lie algebra by the representation σ̇); let
U ⊂ M be an open subset of the base space M and s : U → P be a local section. Then ψ
is locally given by the F -valued function ψs := ψ̃ ◦ s on U and its covariant differential by
the F -valued 1-form dψs + Γψs on U, where Γ := σ̇(s∗ ω). In Section 7, we are interested
in G = U(1) and complex line bundles—thus in unitary representations σ on F = C; they
are given by the characters σ : eiα → einα , n ∈ Z. The forms ω, s∗ ω and Γ are then purely
imaginary, like ω = z† dz on S3 . The local versions ∂k + Γk of the covariant derivative, with
Γk = (ie/c)Ak , are used in Section 7 for writing the Hamiltonian of an electrically charged
particle in a magnetic field.
   The description of principal bundles in terms of local trivializations ([5, Section 16.13];
[9, p. 51]) is particularly simple in the case of the Hopf bundle (and the lens spaces derived
from it), since one needs only a covering of the basis 2-sphere by the two open subsets U± ,
containing the upper (+) and lower (−) closed hemispheres H± : over these contractible
subsets, the bundles are trivial, so sections exist, and one has only to write down the one
single transition function (“clutching function”) between them on U+ ∩ U− . For Hopf and
anti-Hopf, we did this explicitly before, and we get it immediately for the lens spaces—as
we defined them—to be einφ . (Bott and Tu [4, p. 301] teach us that this already exhausts all
circle bundles and associated complex line bundles over the 2-sphere, up to isomorphism,
since n fixes the homotopy class of the clutching function.)


References

 [1] V.I. Arnold, Mathematical Methods in Classical Mechanics, Springer, New York, 1978.
 [2] V.I. Arnold, B.A. Khesin, Topological Methods in Hydrodynamics, Springer, New York, 1998.

 22 When this bijection is applied to holomorphic sections ψ of our holomorphic line bundles, the ψ̃—if non-zero

at all—become just binary forms in z1 , z2 of degree −n = Chern number.
                     H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150                        149

 [3] R. Bonola, Non-Euclidean Geometry, Dover, New York, 1955.
 [4] R. Bott, L.W. Tu, Differential Forms in Algebraic Topology, Springer, New York, 1982.
 [5] J. Dieudonné, Treatise on Analysis, Vol. 3, Academic Press, New York, 1972.
 [6] P.A.M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1948.
 [7] D. Husemoller, Fibre Bundles, Springer, New York, 1966.
 [8] H. Jacobowitz, An Introduction to CR Structure, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1990.
 [9] S. Kobayashi, K. Nomizu, Foundations of Differential Geometry, Vol. 1, Interscience, New York, 1963.
[10] S. Kobayashi, K. Nomizu, Foundations of Differential Geometry, Vol. 2, Interscience, New York, 1969.
[11] D. Kramer, H. Stephani, M. McCallum, E. Herlt, Exact solutions of Einstein’s Field Equations, Deutscher
     Verlag der Wissenschaften, Berlin, 1980.
[12] R. Penrose, W. Rindler, Spinors and Space-Time, Vol. 1, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1985.
[13] R. Penrose, W. Rindler, Spinors and Space-Time, Vol. 2, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1986.
[14] L.I. Schiff, Quantum Mechanics, third ed., McGraw-Hill, Kogakusha, Tokyo, 1968.
[15] B. Thaller, The Dirac Equation, Springer, Berlin, 1992.
[16] W. Thirring, A Course in Mathematical Physics, Vol. 1, Classical Dynamical Systems, Springer, New York,
     1978.
[17] A. Trautman, Differential Geometry for Physicists, Bibliopolis, Napoli, 1984.
[18] R.S. Ward, R.O. Wells, Twistor Geometry and Field Theory, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1990.
[19] P.A.M. Dirac, Quantised singularities in the electromagnetic field, Proc. R. Soc. London A 133 (1931) 60.
[20] B.S. DeWitt, Dynamical theory of groups and fields, in: C. DeWitt, B.S. DeWitt (Eds.), Relativity, Groups,
     and Topology, Gordon and Breach, New York, 1961.
[21] B. Ek, B. Nagel, Differentiable vectors and sharp momentum states of helicity representations of the Poincarè
     group, J. Math. Phys. 25 (1984) 1662.
[22] M. Flato, C. Fronsdal, D. Sternheimer, Difficulties with massless particles? Commun. Math. Phys. 90 (1983)
     563.
[23] H. Hopf, Über die Abbildungen der dreidimensionalen Sphäre auf die Kugelfläche, Math. Annalen 104 (1931)
     637.
[24] M. Lachièze-Rey, J.-P. Luminet, Cosmic topology, Phys. Rep. 254 (1995) 135.
[25] D. Lynden-Bell, M. Nouri-Zonoz, Classical monopoles: Newton, NUT spaces, gravomagnetic lensing, and
     atomic spectra, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70 (1998) 427.
[26] H.G. Loos, Internal holonomy groups of Yang–Mills fields, J. Math. Phys. 8 (1967) 2114.
[27] E. Lubkin, Geometric definition of gauge invariance, Ann. Phys. 23 (1963) 233.
[28] C.W. Misner, The flatter regions of Newman, Unti, and Tamburino’s generalized Schwarzschild space, J.
     Math. Phys. 4 (1963) 924.
[29] C.W. Misner, Taub-NUT space as a counter example to almost anything, in: J. Ehlers (Ed.), Relativity Theory
     and Astrophysics. I. Relativity and Cosmology, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1967.
[30] C.W. Misner, Mixmaster universe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 22 (1969) 1071.
[31] V. Moncrief, The space of (generalized) Taub-NUT spacetimes, J. Geom. Phys. 1 (1984) 107.
[32] C.W. Misner, A.H. Taub, A singularity-free empty universe, Sov. Phys. JETP 28 (1969) 122.
[33] J. Nowakowski, A. Trautman, Natural connections on Stiefel bundles are sourceless gauge fields, J. Math.
     Phys. 19 (1978) 1100.
[34] E.T. Newman, L. Tamburino, T. Unti, Empty-space generalization of the schwarzschild metric, J. Math. Phys.
     4 (1963) 915.
[35] R. Penrose, Structure of space-time, in: C. DeWitt, J.A. Wheeler (Eds.), Battelle Rencontres 1967, Benjamin,
     New York, 1968.
[36] R. Penrose, The geometry of the world, in: L.A. Steen (Ed.), Mathematics Today, Springer, New York, 1978.
[37] C. Reina, Spinors on compact Riemann surfaces, in: A. Trautman, G. Furlan (Eds.), Spinors in Physics and
     Geometry, World Scientific, Singapore, 1988.
[38] S. Ramaswami, A. Sen, Dual-mass in general relativity, J. Math. Phys. 22 (1981) 2612.
[39] H. Samelson, Differential forms, the early days; or the stories of Deahna’s theorem and Volterra’s thoerem,
     Am. Math. Mon. 108 (2001) 522.
[40] A.H. Taub, Empty space-times admitting a three-parameter group of motions, Ann. Math. 53 (1951) 472.
[41] A. Trautman, Fiber bundles associated with space-time, Rep. Math. Phys. 1 (1970) 29.
150                  H.K. Urbantke / Journal of Geometry and Physics 46 (2003) 125–150

[42] A. Trautman, Solutions of the Maxwell and Yang–Mills equations associated with Hopf fibrings, Int. J.
     Theoret. Phys. 16 (1977) 561.
[43] A. Trautman, Fiber bundles, gauge fields, and gravitation, in: A. Held (Ed.), General Relativity and
     Gravitation, Vol. 1, Plenum Press, New York, 1980.
[44] A. Trautman, Spinors and the Dirac operator on hypersurfaces. I. General theory, J. Math. Phys. 33 (1992)
     4011.
[45] A. Trautman, The Dirac operator on hypersurfaces, Acta Phys. Polon. B 26 (1995) 1283.
[46] A. Trautman, Gauge and optical aspects of gravitation, Class. Quantum Grav. 16 (1999) A157.
[47] A. Uhlmann, The closure of minkowski space, Acta Phys. Polon. 24 (1963) 293.
[48] H.K. Urbantke, Two-level quantum systems: states, phases, and holonomy, Am. J. Phys. 59 (1991) 503.
[49] E.P. Wigner, On unitary representations of the inhomogeneous Lorentz group, Ann. Math. 40 (1939) 149.
[50] T.T. Wu, C.N. Yang, Concept of nonintegrable phase factors and global formulation of gauge fields, Phys.
     Rev. D 12 (1975) 3845.
[51] J.E. Marsden, T.S. Ratiu, Introduction to Mechanics and Symmetry, Springer, New York, 1999.
