                                                                                                     gr-qc/9504004
                                                                                                    UMDGR-95-114


                                            Thermodynamics of Spacetime:
                                            The Einstein Equation of State




arXiv:gr-qc/9504004v2 6 Jun 1995
                                                                    Ted Jacobson

                                                 Department of Physics, University of Maryland
                                                      College Park, MD 20742-4111, USA
                                                          jacobson@umdhep.umd.edu


                                                                       Abstract
                                            The Einstein equation is derived from the proportionality of entropy
                                        and horizon area together with the fundamental relation δQ = T dS
                                        connecting heat, entropy, and temperature. The key idea is to demand
                                        that this relation hold for all the local Rindler causal horizons through
                                        each spacetime point, with δQ and T interpreted as the energy flux
                                        and Unruh temperature seen by an accelerated observer just inside
                                        the horizon. This requires that gravitational lensing by matter energy
                                        distorts the causal structure of spacetime in just such a way that the
                                        Einstein equation holds. Viewed in this way, the Einstein equation
                                        is an equation of state. This perspective suggests that it may be no
                                        more appropriate to canonically quantize the Einstein equation than
                                        it would be to quantize the wave equation for sound in air.




                                       The four laws of black hole mechanics, which are analogous to those of
                                   thermodynamics, were originally derived from the classical Einstein equation[1].
                                   With the discovery of the quantum Hawking radiation[2], it became clear
                                   that the analogy is in fact an identity. How did classical General Relativity
                                   know that horizon area would turn out to be a form of entropy, and that
                                   surface gravity is a temperature? In this letter I will answer that question by
                                   turning the logic around and deriving the Einstein equation from the propor-
                                   tionality of entropy and horizon area together with the fundamental relation
                                   δQ = T dS connecting heat Q, entropy S, and temperature T . Viewed in
                                   this way, the Einstein equation is an equation of state. It is born in the

                                                                           1
thermodynamic limit as a relation between thermodynamic variables, and
its validity is seen to depend on the existence of local equilibrium conditions.
This perspective suggests that it may be no more appropriate to quantize
the Einstein equation than it would be to quantize the wave equation for
sound in air.
     The basic idea can be illustrated by thermodynamics of a simple homo-
geneous system. If one knows the entropy S(E, V ) as a function of energy
and volume, one can deduce the equation of state from δQ = T dS. The
first law of thermodynamics yields δQ = dE + pdV , while differentiation
yields the identity dS = (∂S/∂E) dE + (∂S/∂V ) dV . One thus infers that
T −1 = ∂S/∂E and that p = T (∂S/∂V ). The latter equation is the equa-
tion of state, and yields useful information if the function S is known. For
example, for weakly interacting molecules at low density, a simple counting
argument yields S = ln(# accessible states) ∝ ln V +f (E) for some function
f (E). In this case, ∂S/∂V ∝ V −1 , so one infers that pV ∝ T , which is the
equation of state of an ideal gas.
     In thermodynamics, heat is energy that flows between degrees of freedom
that are not macroscopically observable. In spacetime dynamics, we shall
define heat as energy that flows across a causal horizon. It can be felt
via the gravitational field it generates, but its particular form or nature is
unobservable from outside the horizon. For the purposes of this definition
it is not necessary that the horizon be a black hole event horizon. It can be
simply the boundary of the past of any set O (for “observer”). This sort of
horizon is a null hypersurface (not necessarily smooth) and, assuming cosmic
censorship, it is composed of generators which are null geodesic segments
emanating backwards in time from the set O. We can consider a kind of
local gravitational thermodynamics associated with such causal horizons,
where the “system” is the degrees of freedom beyond the horizon. The
outside world is separated from the system not by a diathermic wall, but by
a causality barrier.
     That causal horizons should be associated with entropy is suggested by
the observation that they hide information[3]. In fact, the overwhelming
majority of the information that is hidden resides in correlations between
vacuum fluctuations just inside and outside of the horizon[4]. Because of
the infinite number of short wavelength field degrees of freedom near the
horizon, the associated “entanglement entropy” is divergent in continuum
quantum field theory. If, on the other hand, there is a fundamental cutoff
length lc , then the entanglement entropy is finite and proportional to the
horizon area in units of lc2 , as long as the radius of curvature of spacetime is

                                       2
much longer than lc . (Subleading dependence on curvature and other fields
induces subleading terms in the gravitational field equation.) We shall thus
assume for most of this letter that the entropy is proportional to horizon
area. Note that the area is an extensive quantity for a horizon, as one
expects for entropy[5].
     As we will see, consistency with thermodynamics requires that lc must be
of order the Planck length (10−33 cm). Even at the horizon of a stellar mass
black hole, the radius of curvature is 1038 times this cutoff scale. Only near
the big bang or a black hole singularity, or in the final stages of evaporation
of a primordial black hole, would such a vast separation of scales fail to exist.
Our analysis relies heavily on this circumstance.
     So far we have argued that energy flux across a causal horizon is a kind
of heat flow, and that entropy of the system beyond is proportional to the
area of that horizon. It remains to identify the temperature of the system
into which the heat is flowing. Recall that the origin of the large entropy is
the vacuum fluctuations of quantum fields. According to the Unruh effect[8],
those same vacuum fluctuations have a thermal character when seen from
the perspective of a uniformly accelerated observer. We shall thus take the
temperature of the system to be the Unruh temperature associated with
such an observer hovering just inside the horizon. For consistency, the same
observer should be used to measure the energy flux that defines the heat
flow. Different accelerated observers will obtain different results. In the
limit that the accelerated worldline approaches the horizon the accelera-
tion diverges, so the Unruh temperature and energy flux diverge, however
their ratio approaches a finite limit. It is in this limit that we analyse the
thermodynamics, in order to make the arguments as local as possible.
     Up to this point we have been thinking of the system as defined by any
causal horizon. However, in general, such a system is not in “equilibrium”
because the horizon is expanding, contracting, or shearing. Since we wish to
apply equilibrium thermodynamics, the system is further specified as follows.
The equivalence principle is invoked to view a small neighborhood of each
spacetime point p as a piece of flat spacetime. Through p we consider a small
spacelike 2-surface element P whose past directed null normal congruence to
one side (which we call the “inside”) has vanishing expansion and shear at p.
It is always possible to choose P through p so that the expansion and shear
vanish in a first order neighborhood of p. We call the past horizon of such a
P the “local Rindler horizon of P”, and we think of it as defining a system—
the part of spacetime beyond the Rindler horizon—that is instantaneously
stationary (in “local equilibrium”) at p. Through any spacetime point there

                                       3
are local Rindler horizons in all null directions.
    The fundamental principle at play in our analysis is this: The equilib-
rium thermodynamic relation δQ = T dS, as interpreted here in terms of
energy flux and area of local Rindler horizons, can only be satisfied if gravi-
tational lensing by matter energy distorts the causal structure of spacetime
in just such a way that the Einstein equation holds. We turn now to a
demonstration of this claim.
    First, to sharpen the the above definitions of temperature and heat, note
that in a small neighborhood of any spacelike 2-surface element P one has an
approximately flat region of spacetime with the usual Poincaré symmetries.
In particular, there is an approximate Killing field χa generating boosts
orthogonal to P and vanishing at P. According to the Unruh effect[8],
the Minkowski vacuum state of quantum fields—or any state at very short
distances— is a thermal state with respect to the boost hamiltonian at
temperature T = h̄κ/2π, where κ is the acceleration of the Killing orbit on
which the norm of χa is unity (and we employ units with the speed of light
equal to unity.) The heat flow is to be defined by the boost-energy current
of the matter, Tab χa , where Tab is the matter energy-momentum tensor.
Since the temperature and heat flow scale the same way under a constant
rescaling of χa , this scale ambiguity will not prevent us from inferring the
equation of state.
    Consider now any local Rindler horizon through a spacetime point p.
(See Fig. 1.) Let χa be an approximate local boost Killing field generating
this horizon, with the direction of χa chosen to be future pointing to the
“inside” past of P. We assume that all the heat flow across the horizon is
(boost) energy carried by matter. This heat flux to the past of P is given
by                                  Z
                             δQ =       Tab χa dΣb .                       (1)
                                    H
(In keeping with the thermodynamic limit, we assume the quantum fluctu-
ations in Tab are negligible.) The integral is over a pencil of generators of
the “inside” past horizon H of P. If ka is the tangent vector to the horizon
generators for an affine parameter λ that vanishes at P and is negative to
the past of P, then χa = −κλka and dΣa = ka dλdA, where dA is the area
element on a cross section of the horizon. Thus the heat flux can also be
written as                       Z
                        δQ = −κ     λ Tab ka kb dλdA.                     (2)
                                    H
   Assume now that the entropy is proportional to the horizon area, so the

                                        4
entropy variation associated with a piece of the horizon satisfies dS = η δA,
where δA is the area variation of a cross section of a pencil of generators of
H. The dimensional constant η is undetermined by anything we have said
so far (although given a microscopic theory of spacetime structure one may
someday be able to compute η in terms of a fundamental length scale.) The
area variation is given by
                                      Z
                              δA =            θ dλdA,                     (3)
                                       H

where θ is the expansion of the horizon generators.
    The content of δQ = T dS is essentially to require that the presence of
the energy flux is associated with a focussing of the horizon generators. At
P the local Rindler horizon has vanishing expansion, so the focussing to the
past of P must bring an expansion to zero at just the right rate so that the
area increase of a portion of the horizon will be proportional to the energy
flux across it. This requirement imposes a condition on the curvature of
spacetime as follows.
    The equation of geodesic deviation applied to the null geodesic congru-
ence generating the horizon yields the Raychaudhuri equation
                        dθ    1
                           = − θ 2 − σ 2 − Rab ka kb ,                    (4)
                        dλ    2
where σ 2 = σ ab σab is the square of the shear and Rab is the Ricci tensor.
We have chosen the local Rindler horizon to be instantaneously stationary
at P, so that θ and σ vanish at P. Therefore the θ 2 and σ 2 terms are higher
order contributions that can be neglected compared with the last term when
integrating to find θ near P. This integration yields θ = −λ Rab ka kb for
sufficiently small λ. Substituting this into the equation for δA we find
                                 Z
                        δA = −        λ Rab ka kb dλdA.                   (5)
                                  H

    With the help of (2) and (5) we can now see that δQ = T dS = (h̄κ/2π)η δA
can only be valid if Tab ka kb = (h̄η/2π) Rab ka kb for all null ka , which im-
plies that (2π/h̄η)Tab = Rab + f gab for some function f . Local conservation
of energy and momentum implies that Tab is divergence free and therefore,
using the contracted Bianchi identity, that f = −R/2 + Λ for some constant
Λ. We thus deduce that the Einstein equation holds:
                            1              2π
                       Rab − Rgab + Λgab =     Tab .                      (6)
                            2              h̄η

                                          5
The constant of proportionality η between the entropy and the area de-
termines Newton’s constant as G = (4h̄η)−1 , which identifies the length
η −1/2 as twice the Planck length (h̄G)1/2 . The undetermined cosmological
constant Λ remains as enigmatic as ever.
     Changing the assumed entropy functional would change the implied grav-
itational field equations. For instance, if the entropy density is given by a
polynomial in the Ricci scalar α0 + α1 R + ..., then δQ = T dS will imply
field equations arising from a Lagrangian polynomial in the Ricci scalar[9].
It is an interesting question what “integrability” conditions must an entropy
density satisfy in order for δQ = T dS to hold for all local Rindler horizons.
It seems likely that the requirement is that the entropy density arises from
the variation of a generally covariant action just as it does for black hole
entropy. Then the implied field equations will be those arising from that
same action.
     Our thermodynamic derivation of the Einstein equation of state pre-
sumed the existence of local equilibrium conditions in that the relation
δQ = T dS only applies to variations between nearby states of local ther-
modynamic equilibrium. For instance, in free expansion of a gas, entropy
increase is not associated with any heat flow, and this relation is not valid.
Moreover, local temperature and entropy are not even well defined away
from equilibrium. In the case of gravity, we chose our systems to be defined
by local Rindler horizons, which are instantaneously stationary, in order to
have systems in local equilibrium. At a deeper level, we also assumed the
usual form of short distance vacuum fluctuations in quantum fields when we
motivated the proportionality of entropy and horizon area and the use of the
Unruh acceleration temperature. Viewing the usual vacuum as a zero tem-
perature thermal state[11], this also amounts to a sort of local equilibrium
assumption. This deeper assumption is probably valid only in some ex-
tremely good approximation. We speculate that out of equilibrium vacuum
fluctuations would entail an ill-defined spacetime metric.
     Given local equilibrium conditions, we have in the Einstein equation a
system of local partial differential equations that is time reversal invariant
and whose solutions include propagating waves. One might think of these as
analogous to sound in a gas propagating as an adiabatic compression wave.
Such a wave is a travelling disturbance of local density, which propagates via
a myriad of incoherent collisions. Since the sound field is only a statistically
defined observable on the fundamental phase space of the multiparticle sys-
tem, it should not be canonically quantized as if it were a fundamental field,
even though there is no question that the individual molecules are quantum

                                       6
mechanical. By analogy, the viewpoint developed here suggests that it may
not be correct to canonically quantize the Einstein equations, even if they
describe a phenomenon that is ultimately quantum mechanical.
    For sufficiently high sound frequency or intensity one knows that the
local equilibrium condition breaks down, entropy increases, and sound no
longer propagates in a time reversal invariant manner. Similarly, one might
expect that sufficiently high frequency or large amplitude disturbances of the
gravitational field would no longer be described by the Einstein equation,
not because some quantum operator nature of the metric would become
relevant, but because the local equilibrium condition would fail. It is my
hope that, by following this line of inquiry, we shall eventually reach an
understanding of the nature of “non-equilibrium spacetime”.


    I am grateful to S. Corley, J.C. Dell, R.C. Myers, J.Z. Simon, and L.
Smolin for helpful comments on the presentation in earlier drafts of this
letter. This work was supported in part by NSF grant PHY94-13253.


References
     [1] J.M. Bardeen, B. Carter and S.W. Hawking, Comm. Math. Phys.
         31 161 (1973).

     [2] S.W. Hawking, Comm. Math. Phys. 43 199 (1975).

     [3] J.D. Bekenstein, Phys. Rev. D 7, 2333 (1973).

     [4] L. Bombelli, R.K. Koul, J. Lee, and R.D. Sorkin, Phys. Rev. D 34,
         373 (1986).

     [5] Another argument that might be advanced in support of the
         proportionality of entropy and area comes from the holographic
         hypothesis[6, 7], ie, the idea that the state of the part of the uni-
         verse inside a spatial region can be fully specified on the boundary
         of that region. However, currently the primary support for this
         hypothesis comes from black hole thermodynamics itself. Since we
         are trying to account for the occurrence of thermodynamic-like laws
         for classical black holes it would therefore be circular to invoke this
         argument.


                                      7
     [6] G. ‘t Hooft, “Dimensional Reduction in Quantum Gravity”,
         Utrecht preprint THU-93/26, gr-qc/9310026 .

     [7] L. Susskind, “The World as a Hologram”, Stanford preprint SU-
         ITP-94-33, hep-th/9409089, to appear in J. Math. Phys., Novem-
         ber 1995.

     [8] W.G. Unruh, Phys. Rev. D 14, 870 (1976).

     [9] If the entropy density on the horizon takes the form eρ dA, with
         ρ a function of the Ricci scalar, one finds that δQ = T dS implies
         (2π/h̄η)Tab = Rab −∇a ∇b ρ+f gab for some function f [10]. Imposing
         the local energy conservation equation ∇a Tab = 0 then allows one
         to solve uniquely for f up to a constant.

    [10] T. Jacobson, G. Kang, R.C. Myers, “Increase of Black Hole En-
         tropy in Higher Curvature Gravity”, McGill preprint 94-95, Mary-
         land preprint UMDGR-95-047, gr-qc/9503020, to be published in
         Phys. Rev. D.

    [11] D.W. Sciama, P. Candelas, and D. Deutsch, Adv. in Phys., 30, 327
         (1981).



FIGURE 1: Spacetime diagram showing the heat flux δQ across the local
Rindler horizon H of a 2-surface element P. Each point in the diagram
represents a two dimensional spacelike surface. The hyperbola is a uniformly
accelerated worldline, and χa is the approximate boost Killing vector on H.




                                     8
χ a δQ
