                                            Cosmology at Low Frequencies: The 21 cm
                                            Transition and the High-Redshift Universe


                                           Steven R. Furlanetto a,1, S. Peng Oh b , and Frank H. Briggs c
                                       a Department of Physics, Yale University, PO Box 208121, New Haven, CT 06520,




arXiv:astro-ph/0608032v2 20 Sep 2006
                                                                                USA
                                       b Department of Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA

                                             c Research School of Astronomy and Astrophysics, The Australian National

                                             University, Mount Stromlo Observatory, Cotter Road, Weston, ACT 2611,
                                                                           Australia



                                       Abstract

                                       Observations of the high-redshift Universe with the 21 cm hyperfine line of neutral
                                       hydrogen promise to open an entirely new window onto the early phases of cosmic
                                       structure formation. Here we review the physics of the 21 cm transition, focusing
                                       on processes relevant at high redshifts, and describe the insights to be gained from
                                       such observations. These include measuring the matter power spectrum at z ∼ 50,
                                       observing the formation of the cosmic web and the first luminous sources, and map-
                                       ping the reionization of the intergalactic medium. The epoch of reionization is of
                                       particular interest, because large HII regions will seed substantial fluctuations in the
                                       21 cm background. We also discuss the experimental challenges involved in detecting
                                       this signal, with an emphasis on the Galactic and extragalactic foregrounds. These
                                       increase rapidly toward low frequencies and are especially severe for the highest red-
                                       shift applications. Assuming that these difficulties can be overcome, the redshifted
                                       21 cm line will offer unique insight into the high-redshift Universe, complement-
                                       ing other probes but providing the only direct, three-dimensional view of structure
                                       formation from z ∼ 200 to z ∼ 6.

                                       Key words: cosmology: theory – diffuse radiation – intergalactic medium – line:
                                       formation – techniques: interferometric
                                       PACS: 95.30.Dr; 95.85.Bh; 98.62.Ra; 98.70.Vc




                                       1   Corresponding author. E-mail: steven.furlanetto@yale.edu.


                                       Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint                             26 November 2024
Contents

  1     Introduction                             4

  1.1   From the Dark Ages to Reionization       4

  1.2   Historical Overview                     11

  1.3   Some Preliminaries                      13

  2     Fundamental Physics of the 21 cm Line   20

  2.1   Basic Definitions                       20

  2.2   Collisional Coupling                    25

  2.3   The Wouthuysen-Field Effect             32

  2.4   The Lyman Series                        40

  2.5   Polarization                            42

  2.6   Other Hyperfine Transitions             44

  3     The Global Evolution of the IGM         45

  3.1   The Dark Ages                           45

  3.2   The Thermal History of the IGM          48

  3.3   The Spin Temperature                    54

  3.4   The Ionization History                  56

  3.5   The Global History                      63

  3.6   Observational Prospects                 67

  4     The Power Spectrum                      69

  4.1   Redshift-Space Distortions              74

  4.2   Cosmological Tests                      77

  4.3   Secondary Fluctuations                  79

  5     The Dark Ages                           81

  6     The First Structures                    85


                                      2
6.1   Minihalos                                        85

6.2   The IGM                                          89

7     The First Luminous Objects                       91

7.1   Fluctuations from the Wouthuysen-Field Effect    91

7.2   X-Ray Pre-ionization                             94

8     Reionization                                     99

8.1   Simulations                                      99

8.2   Analytic Models                                 104

8.3   Statistical Predictions                         112

8.4   The Imaging Regime                              120

9     Low-Frequency Radio Observations                125

9.1   Overview                                        126

9.2   Sensitivity: Statistical Measures               139

9.3   Foreground Removal Strategies                   148

9.4   Other Systematics                               155

10    The 21 cm Forest                                162

10.1 Spectral Features                                164

10.2 Is It Feasible?                                  168

11    Complementary Observations                      170

11.1 Galaxy Surveys                                   170

11.2 Quasar and GRB Spectra                           173

11.3 CMB Polarization                                 177

11.4 Small-Scale CMB Anisotropies                     179

12    Concluding Remarks                              184

References                                            185




                                      3
1    Introduction


1.1 From the Dark Ages to Reionization


Perhaps the most compelling story in all of astrophysics is the formation of
structure in our Universe: how the exceedingly complex objects that surround
us today grew out of the remarkably simple and smooth medium that emerged
from the Big Bang. Recent decades have seen enormous progress in disentan-
gling many of the threads in this story, and the basic paradigm for structure
formation is now in place. In the resulting picture, the tiny (∼ 10−5 ) density
fluctuations that we observe in the cosmic microwave background (CMB) grew
through gravitational instability until they collapsed into the “cosmic web” of
sheets, filaments, and halos that we see around us today.

This overarching scheme has been extraordinarily successful in explaining ob-
servations of both the early Universe and local structures. But two significant
gaps remain in the story: we have yet to directly observe the cosmic “dark
ages” between the last scattering surface of the CMB and the formation of
the first luminous structures, and we are only just now beginning to explore
the era of “first light” that stretches from the formation of these sources to
the full reionization of the intergalactic medium (IGM). These epochs – be-
tween z ∼ 1000 and z ∼ 6 – constitute the next frontier of observational
cosmology, where we can directly study the transition between the linear and
nonlinear regimes of gravitational growth, the characteristics of the first stars
and quasars, and their influence on the Universe around them. They offer an
opportunity to connect our detailed pictures of the early Universe with the
galaxies around us, thus completing the narrative of structure formation.

The physics content of the dark ages 2 is sufficiently simple that observa-
tions of this period could directly constrain cosmology in an analogous way
to the CMB. After the hydrogen gas recombined, only a few basic processes
contributed to the Universe’s evolution: its expansion, the recombination of
electrons and protons, the interaction between CMB photons and the resid-
ual electrons, and gravity. Furthermore, except at the conclusion of this era
(z . 50), baryonic perturbations remained linear throughout the Universe.
Thus, given a set of underlying cosmological parameters, we can straightfor-
wardly compute the distribution of structure and its characteristics at any
time during the dark ages. As with the CMB, measurements of this era would
therefore help to constrain the basic global parameters of our Universe, such
as the baryon and matter densities, the shape of the underlying matter power
spectrum, and the amplitude of the initial fluctuations. Conversely, any ob-

2   The name first became part of astrophysical parlance through W. Sargent [1].


                                         4
served deviation from the expected evolution would be a “clean” signature of
fundamentally new physics. The dark ages even have one key advantage over
the CMB: because the IGM 3 is no longer affected by photon diffusion, the
baryons develop fluctuations on scales down to the Jeans mass in the neutral
IGM. In principle, this permits tests of the matter power spectrum on much
smaller scales than the CMB does [2]. Unfortunately, with present technology
we have no way to access this treasure trove of information.

Astrophysics became important – and even dominant – during the next phase
of cosmic history, which stretches from the formation of the first luminous
sources (most likely at z & 30) to “reionization,” when stars and quasars ion-
ized hydrogen in the IGM. This era obviously holds a great deal of interest for
cosmologists. Most important is the simple desire to study the first generation
of stars and galaxies. But it could also answer any number of fundamental
astrophysical questions. Although hierarchical structure formation – in which
small dark matter halos and galaxies collapse first, later merging into larger
objects – most likely describes this era as well as it does the z . 5 Universe,
it leaves many crucial questions unanswered. Through which processes did
the first stars form? How massive were they, and do fossils remain in the local
Universe? When did heavy elements first form, and what processes distributed
them throughout galaxies and the IGM? Was the IGM clumpy at these early
epochs, or did it remain smooth until later on? How did feedback regulate the
formation of galaxies, and what types – radiative, mechanical, or chemical –
were most important? How and when did the first supermassive black holes
form, and what role did they play in galaxy formation?

A particularly fascinating set of questions relate to the epoch of reionization,
the hallmark event of the high-redshift Universe. It is the point at which
structure formation directly affected every baryon in the IGM, even though
only a small fraction of them actually resided in galaxies. It also marked an
important phase transition for galaxies: once the IGM was ionized, it became
transparent to ultraviolet (UV) photons – a dawn (of sorts) for the young
galaxies inhabiting the high-redshift Universe.

Precisely because its astrophysics is so rich, this phase is much easier to explore
than the dark ages – although, even so, only in the last few years has it finally
become accessible. So far, nearly all of the observational attention has focused
on understanding reionization itself (see [3] for a recent review). Figure 1
summarizes all the existing direct measurements of the IGM ionization state
at z > 5. The most straightforward come from quasar absorption spectra:
as at lower redshifts, the Lyα forest offers a powerful window into the IGM
and specifically the ionized fraction xi (or the neutral fraction xHI ; we will

3 Of course, the “intergalactic medium” is a misnomer at these times, but we will
nevertheless use it without reservation.


                                        5
Fig. 1. Compilation of direct observational constraints on reionization (see also [3]).
The Lyα forest measurements with errors and the proximity zone point in the lower
panel are taken from [7,?], the other Lyα forest points from [12], the proximity zone
point in the upper panel from [14,?], the Lyα galaxy constraint from [16,?,?], and
the GRB point from [19]. The shaded box shows the 1σ errors on the reionization
redshift from the 3-year WMAP data [20], assuming that it is instantaneous. Note
that these are approximate limits (at best) and depend upon a number of theoretical
assumptions (see text).

use overbars to denote global averages of these quantities). With its large sky
coverage, the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) has proven particularly useful
in extending this test to high redshifts and has (to date) identified 19 bright
quasars at z > 5.74 [4,?,?,?]. Unfortunately, inferring the neutral fraction from
these measurements requires a theoretical model, because only the rarest voids
in the IGM allow light to pass through; thus only the tail of the IGM density
distribution is directly sampled, and its properties must be extrapolated to the
bulk of the matter [8,?]. Inserting a model based on simulations of the lower-
redshift Lyα forest [10] (shown by the solid triangles) implies that the neutral
fraction evolved rapidly at z & 5 [11,?]; because we expect reionization to
proceed rapidly, this may indicate that it ended at about this time. However,
other models are consistent with a much more gentle evolution; for example,
extrapolation from empirical fits to Lyα forest measurements at 1.7 < z < 5.6
(shown by the crosses) requires no break in the smooth evolution at z > 6 [12]
(see also [8,?]).

However, because the Lyα forest probes specific lines of sight and resolves fea-
tures radially, it contains much more information than just x̄i (z). One example


                                          6
is the “proximity zone,” which is the region of the IGM directly influenced
by the ionizing radiation from the background quasar itself (and thus more
highly ionized than average). Before reionization is complete, the extent of
the proximity zone measures the number of photons consumed in ionizing the
initially neutral gas (and hence x̄i ) – at least if the HII region has not yet
reached the Strömgren limit [21,?]. This test has been used in three differ-
ent ways. First, the sizes clearly decrease with increasing redshift [7], which
requires an increasing neutral fraction from z ∼ 5.8 to z ∼ 6.3 (shown by
the lower open square on Figure 1; note that the errors on this extrapola-
tion are hard to quantify and were not reported by [7]). Second, the inferred
spatial extent of the region with non-zero transmissivity appears to indicate
x̄HI & 0.2 [23,?]. Unfortunately, this constraint is degenerate with the quasar
lifetime and luminosity and is subject to uncertainties in defining the “edge”
of the proximity zone in an inhomogeneous IGM [7]. Fortunately, the shape of
the edge can help disentangle these uncertainties. The third constraint comes
from such a measurement: one quasar (at z = 6.28) shows a significant decline
in the Lyα flux well before Lyβ absorption becomes strong. This suggests a
substantial damping wing, which requires x̄HI & 0.2 [14].

The shape of the IGM Lyα damping wing depends on the total optical depth,
so it provides another sensitive test of the neutral fraction [24]. However, in
practice, measuring the detailed line profile is difficult. For example, the in-
trinsic Lyα lines of quasars compromise its measurement in those systems.
Gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), which result from the deaths of massive stars,
may provide better sources. Their afterglow spectra are (intrinsically) fea-
tureless power laws (see [25] for a review), providing simple templates for
extracting the damping profile [26]. Given that they are associated with star
formation, GRBs also ought to occur at high redshifts (see [27] for one es-
timate), and cosmological time dilation allows the most distant bursts to be
identified with realistic instruments [28,29]. Indeed a GRB was recently iden-
tified at z = 6.3 [30]. Unfortunately, it now appears that most GRB spectra
contain damped-Lyα absorbers (DLAs) at the systemic redshifts of their hosts,
as well as a rich set of other absorption features (e.g., [31,?]), most likely be-
cause the GRBs are embedded in rapidly star-forming regions. Such DLAs
also compromise attempts to measure the IGM absorption. However, it is still
possible to constrain the IGM damping wing, because it has a different shape
than prototypical DLAs. The z = 6.3 GRB has no evidence for IGM absorp-
tion, setting an upper limit of xHI < 0.6 (at 95% confidence) along this line of
sight [19].

The sightline-to-sightline variations toward different quasars provide another
approach. The observations show surprisingly large variations on ∼ 100 Mpc
scales [33,?]. Some authors have argued that these require large-scale fluc-
tuations in the ionizing background, indicative of the IGM during or soon
after reionization [34,?]. However, the statistics of the Lyα forest at low trans-


                                       7
mission are extremely hard to interpret because of aliasing and bias, so the
evidence is not yet conclusive [35,?].

We can also learn about reionization through galaxy surveys. In particular, the
Lyα emission lines of galaxies must vanish as the IGM becomes more and more
neutral, because the enormous Lyα optical depth of a neutral IGM eliminates
even those photons on the red side of the line [37,?,?]. In practice this test
is difficult to make quantitative because of uncertainties in the intrinsic Lyα
line properties of the galaxies (and in particular winds) [40]. But surveys for
Lyα-selected galaxies have proven useful in two ways. First, reasonably large
samples exist at both z ≈ 5.7 and z ≈ 6.5, bracketing the reionization epoch
suggested by SDSS quasars. The narrow range in cosmic time between these
two epochs implies little intrinsic evolution between these two samples, so any
observed differences between the populations may be due to evolution in x̄i .
However, the observed samples have no statistically significant difference in
number density [16]. Unfortunately, turning this into a quantitative constraint
on x̄HI is difficult because of questions about the intrinsic galaxy population.
Treating each galaxy in isolation implies x̄HI . 0.3 [16,?]; including clustering
weakens the constraint to x̄HI . 0.5 [17]. A complementary second constraint
comes from requiring each observed z ∼ 6.6 galaxy to be surrounded by a
sufficiently large HII region to allow transmission. This again implies x̄HI . 0.5
[18], although it is also subject to uncertainties about clustering and the bubble
size required for transmission.

Finally, reionization affects the CMB. Thomson scattering of CMB photons by
free electrons washes out temperature fluctuations and generates large-scale
polarization anisotropies [42]. The first-year measurements of the Wilkinson
Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) detected a substantial large-scale cor-
relation between their temperature and polarization maps, indicating a large
optical depth for this scattering process (τes ∼ 0.17) and correspondingly
early reionization [43,?]. However, the three-year data now available yields a
much smaller optical depth, τes = 0.088+0.028
                                           −0.034 from the WMAP data alone or
             +0.026
τes = 0.069−0.029 when combined with a suite of other cosmological measure-
ments [45,?]. With better data, the temperature-polarization cross-correlation
is no longer detected and the constraints rely instead on the actual polarization
power spectrum, which is only detected at about the 3σ level. This illustrates
the difficulty of removing strong foregrounds – a lesson which should be noted
for our later discussion. Nevertheless, at least when taken at face value these
lower measurements still imply a prolonged reionization epoch. In Figure 1,
the shaded box shows the WMAP constraints on the reionization redshift,
assuming an instantaneous transition. Of course this is an approximation: be-
cause the optical depth provides only an integral measurement, it is difficult
to apply it directly to a plot of x̄i (z).

Although these observations are beginning to constrain reionization, countless


                                       8
questions remain. Most importantly, what sources drove it? The standard as-
sumption is that ionizing photons from massive, hot stars inside small galaxies
leaked into the IGM, producing HII regions that grew with the galaxies until
they merged and filled the Universe. Although theoretically attractive, direct
evidence for such a process is still lacking. Could accreting black holes have
played a part? Did metal-free Population III stars contribute significantly?
Did recombinations in the IGM significantly delay reionization? Did reioniza-
tion itself suppress subsequent structure formation? The range of unanswered
questions is illustrated by the proliferation of theoretical papers over the past
several years; we refer the interested reader to [46,?,?,?] for detailed reviews
of these issues.

Unfortunately, existing techniques all have intrinsic drawbacks that ultimately
limit their utility for studying structure formation at high redshifts (much less
the dark ages). CMB polarization primarily provides an integrated measure
of the column depth of ionized gas; information about the reionization history
(much less about spatial fluctuations at any given time) is difficult to extract
(see §11.3). The patchiness of reionization also imprints small-scale tempera-
ture anisotropies on the CMB, but again the resulting constraint is an integral
along the line of sight (see §11.4). Quasar spectra obviously do provide redshift
information, but they suffer from saturated absorption at z & 6 and can shed
light only on the late stages of reionization (see §11.2). Finally, galaxy sur-
veys will undoubtedly be tremendously useful for understanding high-redshift
galaxies, but they are less than ideal for studying reionization. First, these
galaxies are so distant and faint that collecting substantial numbers of objects
at z & 8 must await new instruments such as the James Webb Space Tele-
scope or a 30-meter near-infrared telescope. Second, the objects themselves
will only offer indirect information on the IGM (see §11.1) and reionization,
so such surveys will still leave many questions unanswered.

Thus, new probes of the high-redshift Universe – including reionization, ear-
lier phases of nonlinear structure formation, and the dark ages – are urgently
needed. Our purpose is to review arguably the most promising of these tech-
niques: the redshifted 21 cm line of HI. This transition, in which the electron
flips its spin relative to the nucleus, has a long and successful history in as-
tronomy, and in fact its cosmological implications were realized nearly half a
century ago (see §1.2). Put simply, the goal is to use this line to map the neutral
gas before and during reionization. The 21 cm transition has three enormous
advantages. First, as a spectral line, redshift information can be used to trace
the entire three-dimensional history. Second, it directly probes IGM gas, which
contains the vast majority of baryonic matter. (Of course, this is actually a
disadvantage if one is interested in studying the galaxies themselves.) Finally,
as a forbidden transition with a mean lifetime of ∼ 3 × 107 yr, the 21 cm line
is far from saturation and is thus sensitive to the (most interesting) middle
stages of reionization.


                                        9
Although these advantages have long been recognized (e.g., [50,?,?]), only re-
cently has technology improved to the point where high-redshift 21 cm line
observations 4 are feasible. As a result, recent years have seen a substantial ef-
fort in theoretically modeling the expected signals and in planning or building
instruments to observe them. These efforts include CoRE (Cosmic Reioniza-
tion Experiment) at ATNF (Australia Telescope National Facility), designed
to measure the mean background as a function of frequency, and a suite of
antenna arrays designed to search for small-scale fluctuations in the 21 cm
background. The latter set includes the 21 Centimeter Array (21CMA), LO-
FAR (Low Frequency Array), the Precision Array to Probe Epoch of Reion-
ization (PAPER), the Mileura Widefield Array Low Frequency Demonstrator
(which we will refer to as the MWA), and the Square Kilometer Array (SKA).
All of these experiments (except for the last one) should begin gathering data
within the next several years. They hope to constrain the reionization epoch
itself at z . 12; observing the higher-redshift Universe at lower frequencies,
where foregrounds are much stronger, will require much larger instruments.

This review will focus on theoretical predictions of the 21 cm signal over a
range of cosmic time – from z & 50, when it allows us to probe the growth of
the earliest structures, to z ∼ 6, when reionization ends. As we will see, such
predictions will be crucial to interpreting the data once it arrives, because the
signals will (at least with the first generation of experiments) be buried within
the huge foreground noise. The models described here can help to isolate the
cosmological signal, and they also illustrate the potential rewards of these
observations – at least those we know of today.

This paper is organized as follows. The remainder of this section provides a
brief historical overview of 21 cm line cosmology (§1.2) and presents some
basic notation and formulae (§1.3). The next three sections review the funda-
mentals necessary for understanding the 21 cm signal. We then describe the
relevant physics of the 21 cm transition in §2. From there, we forge ahead
applying this knowledge to the high-redshift Universe. First, in §3 we examine
the mean evolution of the 21 cm background. In §4 we shift gears to describe
the power of statistical measurements of fluctuations in the 21 cm background;
we then explore applications of this technique to the dark ages (§5), the forma-
tion of the first nonlinear structures (§6), the first luminous sources (§7), and
finally to reionization itself (§8). These four sections are (for the most part)
independent of each other and need not be read sequentially. We put these
efforts in an observational context in §9 and discuss instrumental sensitivities
and the expected systematic challenges. We then describe a complementary
approach that uses bright background sources to illuminate the “21 cm forest”

4 Note that here, and throughout this review, we will abuse the phrase “21 cm”
by applying it to this high-redshift regime without qualification, even though the
observed wavelengths are of course 21(1 + z) cm.


                                       10
of absorption features in §10. Finally, we connect 21 cm experiments to other
observational probes in §11, and we offer some concluding thoughts in §12.


1.2 Historical Overview


The 21 cm transition is a rare example (for astronomy) of a successful theo-
retical calculation driving observational effort: 5 Indirectly inspired by Oort’s
hope that then-unknown radio lines would help in studying our Galaxy, the
physicist van de Hulst [53,54] first computed the transition frequency of the
hyperfine transition of HI during the Second World War and immediately
realized its usefulness for tracing Galactic structure and kinematics. Several
groups of physicists, astrophysicists, and engineers subsequently detected the
line in 1951 [55–57], followed shortly by observations of spiral structure in the
Milky Way [58] and the measurement of the rotation curve of M31 [59]. At the
same time, theoretical understanding of the atomic physics of the hydrogen
atom itself continued to improve [60].

The 1960s saw a number of observational programs aiming to detect hydro-
gen in the nearby IGM, through both emission and absorption against bright
extragalactic radio sources [50,61–65]. It is interesting to note, in fact, that
searches for IGM absorption along lines of sight to radio galaxies (what we
call the “21 cm forest” in §10, although then expected to be much more uni-
form) preceded the discovery of both quasars and the Lyα forest. These placed
non-trivial limits on cosmology (ruling out a closed universe full of neutral
hydrogen, for example) but of course were doomed to failure given the highly-
ionized IGM we now know to exist. At the same time, there was a theoretical
assessment of excitation conditions in a dilute, neutral IGM [66–68], a topic
crucial for interpreting observations and that will receive detailed treatment
in this review (see §2). Field reviewed the status of IGM studies (as of 1972)
in [69].

The great leap to studying the 21 cm line at cosmological distances occurred
soon after. Zel’dovich’s proposal that large-scale structure develops from the
IGM through collapse of cluster-sized masses [70,?,?,72], with subsequent frag-
mentation into galaxies, inspired a number of efforts to observe the 21 cm
line from z > 3. This “top-down scenario” implied the existence of high-
redshift“Zel’dovich pancakes” containing ∼1014 M⊙ of neutral gas that would
have been detectable with existing radio telescopes at z & 3–4; the predicted
brightness temperatures were δTb ∼ 0.1–1 K. Table 1 summarizes the obser-
vational programs driven (at least in part) by these predictions. None were
successful, though many reached limiting HI masses comparable to predictions
5 We regard this episode as inspiration for our review and hope that the theory
presented here proves even a fraction as useful!


                                      11
         z    ν( MHz)              Telescope              Year   Reference
        8.4     151                6C Array               1986      [79]
        5.1     235                 Arecibo               1995      [80]
        4.9     240              Jodrell Bank             1978      [81]
        3.4     322                  VLA                  1994      [82]
        3.4     323          Arecibo, VLA, Ooty           1997    [83,84]
        3.4     323     VLA, Arecibo, WSRT, GMRT          1991    [85–88]
        3.3     326                 WSRT                  1992      [89]
        3.3     327                  Ooty                 1990      [90]
        3.3     328              Jodrell Bank             1978      [81]
        3.3     331                  VLA                  1988      [91]
        3.3     333                  VLA                  1990      [92]
        3.3     333                  VLA                  1990      [73]
        3.1     349                  VLA                  1995      [93]
Table 1
Surveys for high-redshift HI 21 cm line emission. We list the emission redshift,
the observed frequency, the telescopes used to observe the field, the date of first
publication, and references. Here the VLA is the Very Large Array, the WSRT is
the Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope, and the GMRT is the Giant Metrewave
Telescope.

(and a tentative detection [73] did spur a brief flurry of excitement from theo-
rists [74,?]). They also encountered many of the same difficulties that modern
experiments will face, particularly terrestrial interference and foreground sub-
traction, and pioneered many of the strategies to overcome these challenges.

There was also some observational motivation for expecting an increased HI
content at z > 3, because the early results from surveys for DLA absorp-
tion lines against high-z quasars [76] appeared to indicate a factor ∼10 over-
abundance of HI compared to the present epoch. This has proved to be a red
herring, because better measurements of the DLA statistics [77] and refine-
ments to the cosmological model now make it clear that the HI content at
z ∼ 3 is unlikely to be more than a factor two above the z ≈ 0 value [78].

Of course, we are now convinced that structure forms “bottom-up,” with the
smallest halos collapsing first and subsequently merging into larger objects. In
these kinds of scenarios, massive, neutral pancakes would not form at high red-
shifts, and the lack of success in the surveys listed in Table 1 is not surprising.
The first predictions in the context of this kind of model came in 1979 [52],
but they received little attention over the next decade (largely because, in


                                       12
contrast to the pancake scenario, observations could not yet constrain them).
Scott & Rees [94] returned theoretical attention to 21 cm emission from high
redshifts, examining the signals expected at z = 8.4 in a variety of galaxy for-
mation models. They pointed out that, although the structures in a cold dark
matter (CDM) model would be extremely faint at high redshifts, statistically
measuring their scale-dependent fluctuations could constrain the matter power
spectrum (remarkably similar to the strategies now under development).

During the remainder of the 1990s, the Cosmic Background Explorer ’s mea-
surements of the CMB, together with a wide array of other observations,
cemented our cosmological paradigm. Thus during this time, 21 cm predic-
tions based on the CDM model began to appear [95,?,?], although most still
focused on imaging rare, massive objects at high redshift. The prospects for
existing telescopes looked bleak in this model. At the same time, Lyα forest
measurements at z & 5 showed that the Universe remained highly ionized to
quite large redshifts. Interest in these cosmological applications declined, be-
cause radio astronomers viewed the z > 5 Universe with trepidation, given the
brightness of the radio sky and the increasing levels of terrestrially-generated
radio frequency interference.

Interest in the 21 cm signal grew again when theorists began to study reioniza-
tion and the nature of the first ionizing sources. Madau, Meiksin, & Rees [98]
were the first to consider explicitly the effect of luminous sources on the 21 cm
signal, emphasizing the role these sources played in setting the spin tempera-
ture of the IGM. Since then, work has focused less on measuring cosmological
parameters and more on understanding the interplay between luminous galax-
ies and the IGM. These questions have become particularly interesting in light
of the rich but confusing observational constraints on reionization described
in §1.1. At the same time, technological improvements are bringing the z > 6
Universe within our grasp. The remainder of this review will describe the cur-
rent state of theoretical predictions for the 21 cm signal within this “modern”
approach.


1.3 Some Preliminaries


We take this opportunity to summarize some useful parameters and relations.
In the numerical calculations made specifically for this review, we assume a
cosmology with Ωm = 0.26, ΩΛ = 0.74, Ωb = 0.044, H0 = 100h km s−1 Mpc−1
(with h = 0.74), n = 0.94, and σ8 = 0.8. Here Ωi is the density in component i
relative to the critical value, ρc (z) = 3H(z)2 /8πG, H0 is the Hubble constant
at the present day, n is the spectral index of the matter power spectrum at
inflation, and σ8 normalizes the power spectrum; it is the amplitude of the
rms fluctuations smoothed on 8h−1 Mpc scales. These are consistent with the


                                      13
most recent WMAP results [20]. Note , however, that we have increased σ8
to improve agreement with other observations [99,?]. For figures taken from
other sources, we refer the reader to the referenced works for their assumed
parameters. Within the existing uncertainties, the choices for these parameters
do not significantly affect our predictions. The exception is σ8 , which shifts
the structure formation timetable but otherwise has no qualitative impact.

In this cosmology, the hydrogen density at z = 0 is nHI = 2.06 × 10−7 [(1 −
Yp )/0.76] cm−3 , where Yp is the mass fraction of helium. The Hubble constant
evolves as H(z) = H0 [Ωm (1 + z)3 + ΩΛ ]1/2 or, at the high redshifts in which we
                             1/2
are interested, H(z) ≈ H0 Ωm     (1 + z)3/2 . In this regime, the age of the universe
is
                        Zz                                                   −3/2
                                  dz ′                                 1+z
                                                                   
             t0 (z) =                           ≈ 5.46 × 108                         yr.   (1)
                             (1 + z ′ ) H(z ′ )                         10
                        0



Unless otherwise specified, we quote distances in comoving units, rcom = (1 +
z)rprop , defined by

                                       drcom    c
                                             =      .                                      (2)
                                        dz     H(z)


The angular diameter distance is DA (z) = rcom /(1 + z), and the luminosity
distance is DL (z) = rcom (1 + z). For convenience, a useful conversion between
observed angular scale ∆θ and comoving size at z & 10 is
                                             !            0.2
                                        ∆θ           1+z
                        rcom ≈ 1.9                                h−1 Mpc.                 (3)
                                        1′            10


A similar approximation for the relation between observed bandwidth ∆ν and
the radial distance is
                                                      1/2                !−1/2
                                    ∆ν          1+z               Ωm h2
                                          
             rcom ≈ 1.7                                                           Mpc.     (4)
                                 0.1 MHz         10               0.15


We also note that, according to common usage, we use h to denote both the
normalized Hubble constant and Planck’s constant. The desired meaning will
normally be clear from context.

Throughout much of our theoretical discussion, we will require the dark matter
halo mass function. For simplicity, we will generally use the Press-Schechter
form [101] (see [102] for a pedagogical review of the halo mass function and its


                                                14
derivation). The comoving number density of halos with masses in the range
(m, m + dm) is
                            s
                                                          δc2 (z)
                                                             "                   #
                                2 ρ̄ d ln σ δc (z)
            n(m)dm =                               exp −          dm,                (5)
                                π m2 d ln m σ(m)         2σ 2 (m)


where ρ̄ is the mean comoving mass density and σ 2 (m) is the variance of the
density field at z = 0 when smoothed in top-hat spheres of mass m:

                                    Z∞                  "           #2
                       2                 dk 2            3j1 (kR)
                      σ (m) =               2
                                              k Plin (k)                 .           (6)
                                         2π                kR
                                    0




Here Plin (k) is the linear matter power spectrum (we use the transfer function
of [103]), j1 (x) = (sin x − x cos x)/x2 , and m = 4π ρ̄R3 /3. Finally, δc (z) ≈
1.69/D(z) is the linearized density threshold for collapse in the spherical top-
hat model and D(z) is the linear growth factor, normalized so that D(z =
0) = 1. Note that we use the convention in which σ 2 is always evaluated at a
fixed time, so that δc increases toward higher redshifts. Of course this is only
for notational convenience; in reality, the threshold for virialization is a fixed
physical density.

In detail, equation (5) is not an ideal fit to the halo mass function found in
numerical simulations at low redshifts, and more accurate forms exist in the
literature [104,?]. The high redshift case is less clear; the mass function seems
to lie in between the Press-Schechter and Sheth-Tormen forms [106,?,?,?].
Nevertheless, equation (5) suffices for our purposes because the existing an-
alytic models have many other uncertainties and approximations. It has the
enormous advantage of being easy to manipulate analytically. For example,
the collapse fraction, or fraction of the mass in halos more massive than mmin ,
is simply

                             Z∞                          "                   #
                                                       δc (z)
                  fcoll =          dm m n(m) = erfc √           .                    (7)
                            mmin
                                                      2σ(mmin )


We will use fcoll in numerous calculations throughout this review.

Our Fourier transform conventions follow
                                           Z
                                                d3 k ˜
                                 f (x) =             f(k) eik·x                      (8)
                                               (2π)3


                                               15
and
                                       Z
                              ˜
                              f(k) =       d3 x f (x) e−ik·x .               (9)


Finally, for convenience we present a summary table of many of the more
common symbols in this review, together with references to their definitions
and brief definitions.

              Table 2: Symbol dictionary. Middle column shows the
              equation or section in which the symbol is first used or
              defined.

   Symbol          Ref.   Definition

      A10          (14)   Spontaneous decay rate of 21 cm transition
      Ae          (148)   Effective area of one antenna element
      Atot          §9    Total effective collecting area
       B          (150)   Total bandwidth of observation
       bx         (123)   Bias of HII region
       C           (84)   Clumping factor
  C01 , C10        (19)   Collisional spin excitation, de-excitation rates
      Cl21        (102)   Angular power spectrum of δ21
      CN          (152)   Covariance matrix of noise
      C SV        (153)   Covariance matrix of sample variance
      D(z)         (6)    Linear growth factor
      DA           (2)    Angular diameter distance
      DL           (2)    Luminosity distance
  D(min,max)        §9    Minimum/maximum baseline in interferometer
      fcoll        (7)    Collapse fraction
      fesc         (83)   Escape fraction for ionizing photons
      fHe          (63)   Helium fraction (by number)
   frec (n)        (57)   Recycling fraction for Lyn → Lyα photons
      fsh          (78)   Fraction of gas shock-heated above Tγ
      fX           (68)   X-ray luminosity per SFR relative to local value



                                           16
                   Table 2: Symbol dictionary (continued).

  Symbol        Ref.    Definition

fX,h , fX,ion   (69)    Fraction of X-ray energy in heating and ionization
     f⋆         (70)    Star formation efficiency
    g(z)        (112)   Coefficient in approximation δT = g(z)δ
     gi         (11)    Statistical weight of level i
     Iν         §2.1    Specific intensity
     Jα         (40)    Jν near Lyα ignoring radiative transfer effects
     Jν         §2.1    Angle-averaged specific intensity
     Jνc        (40)    Fiducial Jν for xα = Sα
      ℓ         (153)   Distance to 21 cm screen
   n(m)          (5)    Halo mass function
  nb (m)        (122)   Mass function of HII regions
     n̄cb       (79)    Comoving baryon number density
  n(u⊥ )        (151)   Baseline distribution [also n(k, µ)]
     nν         (41)    Photon occupation number
    Na           §9     Number of elements in interferometer
    NB          §9.1.5 Number of baselines in interferometer
    Nc          (157)   Number of measurements in k bin
    Nα          (79)    Number of (10.2, 13.6) eV photons per stellar baryon
    Nion        (83)    Number of ionizing photons per stellar baryon
  P21 (k)       (91)    Power spectrum of δ21 (units: volume)
 P01 , P10      (19)    Spin (de-)excitation rate from Lyα absorptions
  PV (δnl )     (127)   Volume-weighted distribution of δnl
    Pxx         (132)   Power spectrum of ionized fraction
    Pxδ         (132)   Cross-power spectrum of xi , density
    Pα          (37)    Total Lyα scattering rate
    Pδδ          §4     Matter power spectrum
    P∆T         (157)   Power spectrum of δ21 (units: mK2 volume)


                                       17
             Table 2: Symbol dictionary (continued).

Symbol    Ref.    Definition

  Sα      (40)    Correction to xα from radiative transfer
  Sν      §2.1    Flux density
  tint    (135)   Integration time
 t(k,u)   (151)   Integration time for the single mode k (or u)
  tγ      (63)    Compton cooling time
  Tb      §2.1    Brightness temperature
  Tc      (42)    Color temperature of Lyα background
  TK      (20)    Gas kinetic temperature
  TS      (11)    21 cm spin temperature
 Tsky     (136)   Sky temperature
 Tsys     (135)   System temperature
Tγ (z)    §2.1    CMB temperature at redshift z
  T⋆      (11)    Energy defect of 21 cm transition (0.068 K)
(u, v)    (144)   Sky coordinates (in units of λ)
  V       (143)   Visibility
  vk      (15)    Proper velocity along line of sight
  Wν      §9.1.3 Primary beam of antenna
  xc      (24)    Collisional coupling coefficient for TS
 xtot     (93)    Total coupling coefficient for TS
  xα      (40)    Wouthuysen-Field coupling coefficient for TS
 xHI      §1.1    Neutral fraction
 x̄HI     §1.1    Globally-averaged neutral fraction
  xi      §1.1    Ionized fraction
  x̄i     §1.1    Globally-averaged ionized fraction
  zc      §3.5.1 Redshift at which xα = 1
  zh      §3.5.1 Redshift at which TK = Tγ in the IGM
  zr      §3.5.1 Reionization redshift


                                 18
             Table 2: Symbol dictionary (continued).

Symbol    Ref.    Definition

α(A,B)    §3.4.1 Recombination coefficient (case-A,B)
   β      (93)    Expansion coefficient for δ in δ21
  βT      (96)    Expansion coefficient for δT in δ21
  βx      (94)    Expansion coefficient for δx in δ21
  βα      (95)    Expansion coefficient for δα in δ21
   γ      (47)    Sobolev parameter
   γ′     (50)    Sobolev parameter including spin exchange
   δ      (15)    Fractional matter overdensity
  δ21     (91)    Fractional perturbation to δTb
 δc (z)    (5)    Linear critical density for halo collapse
 δcoll    (67)    Critical overdensity for collisional coupling
  δ̃iso   (106)   Isotropic component of δ̃21
  δnl     (127)   Nonlinear density field
  δT      (92)    Fractional perturbation to TK
  δx      (92)    Fractional perturbation to neutral fraction
  δα      (92)    Fractional perturbation to xα
  δA      (148)   Physical area of one antenna element
δP∆T      (157)   Error on power spectrum
 δTb      (17)    21 cm brightness temperature relative to CMB
  ¯b
 δT       (17)    Globally-averaged δTb
  δη      (150)   Inverse bandwidth of measurement
∆T N      (135)   Telescope noise
 ∆221     (91)    Variance of 21 cm brightness temperature
  ∆ℓ      (153)   Radial width of 21 cm screen
  ∆ν      (135)   Channel width of observation
 ∆νD      (38)    Doppler width of Lyα transition
 ǫ(ν)     (79)    Comoving emissivity at frequency ν


                                 19
                  Table 2: Symbol dictionary (continued).

    Symbol     Ref.     Definition

      ǫap      (140)    Aperture efficiency
     ǫcomp     (63)     Heating rate from Compton scattering
      ǫX       (70)     Heating rate from X-rays
      ǫα       (71)     Heating rate from Lyα scattering
      ζ        (83)     Ionizing efficiency parameter
      η        (48)     Recoil parameter
      η′       (51)     Recoil parameter including spin exchange
      ηf       (139)    Array filling factor
      θD       §9.1     Diffraction-limited angular resolution
     κ10       (24)     Collisional spin de-excitation rate coefficient
      µ        (106)    Cosine of angle between k and line of sight
      ν0       §2.1     Rest frequency of 21 cm line
      να       (38)     Rest frequency of Lyα transition
      σ2        (6)     Variance of density field at z = 0
      τes      §1.1     CMB electron scattering optical depth
     τGP       (43)     Gunn-Peterson optical depth in Lyα
      τν       (10)     Optical depth at frequency ν
      φα       (37)     Profile of Lyα line
      φν       (12)     Profile of 21 cm line
      χα       (37)     Line center Lyα absorption cross section




2   Fundamental Physics of the 21 cm Line


2.1 Basic Definitions


We begin with some basic definitions necessary for what follows. The funda-
mental quantity of radiative transfer is the brightness (or specific intensity)


                                       20
Iν of a ray emerging from a cloud at frequency ν. This conventionally ex-
presses the energy carried by rays traveling along a given direction, per unit
area, frequency, solid angle, and time; it thus normally has dimensions ergs s−1
cm−2 sr−1 Hz−1 (see [110] for a pedagogical introduction to radiative transfer).
However, for many applications of radiative transfer in an expanding universe,
the units cm−2 s−1 Hz−1 sr−1 are more convenient, because photon number
is conserved during the expansion but energy is not; we will often work in the
latter units in this review. We will also usually slightly simplify the problem
by using the angle-averaged specific intensity Jν = Iν dΩ.
                                                      R


For convenience, we will quantify Iν by the equivalent brightness temperature,
Tb (ν), required of a blackbody radiator (with spectrum Bν ) such that Iν =
Bν (Tb ). Throughout the range of frequencies and temperatures relevant to the
21 cm line, the Rayleigh-Jeans formula is an excellent approximation to the
Planck curve, so that Tb (ν) ≈ Iν c2 /2kB ν 2 , where is c is the speed of light and
kB is Boltzmann’s constant.

We will be almost exclusively interested in the brightness temperature of the
HI 21 cm line, which has rest frequency ν0 = 1420.4057 MHz. Because of the
cosmological redshift, the emergent brightness Tb′ (ν0 ) measured in a cloud’s
comoving frame at redshift z creates an apparent brightness at the Earth
of Tb (ν) = Tb′ (ν0 )/(1 + z), where the observed frequency is ν = ν0 /(1 + z).
Similarly, the brightness temperature of the CMB in a comoving frame at
redshift z scales from the presently observed value of Tγ (0) = 2.73 K to Tγ′ (z) =
2.73 (1 + z) K. 6

An individual gas cloud produces a flux (erg cm−2 s−1 ) at the Earth of S =
 cloud Iν cos θ dΩ dν, where the integral extends over the solid angle subtended
R

by the cloud and the frequency spread of the signal. In most of our applications
we will instead consider the frequency-dependent incident energy flux. Radio
astronomers typically measure this frequency-dependent flux density, Sν , in
Janskys (1 Jy = 10−23 erg s−1 cm−2 Hz−1 ). The apparent angle θ between the
cloud centroid and the element of solid angle dΩ is generally small (sin θ ≈ θ)
in the applications considered here. Thus for uniform brightness clouds with
small apparent angular diameter, a convenient conversion is Sν ≈ Iν ∆Ω =
2kB Tb ν 2 ∆Ω/c2 , where all quantities are measured in the observer’s frame.
Note that, once the cosmological redshift and the variation of dν with distance
are included, the flux scales like S ∝ DL−2 , while the flux density scales as
Sν ∝ (1 + z)DL−2 .

In the Rayleigh-Jeans limit, the equation of radiative transfer along a line of
sight through a cloud of uniform excitation temperature Tex states that the


6   Henceforth we will drop the prime in Tγ (z) for notational convenience.


                                         21
emergent brightness at frequency ν is

                           Tb′ (ν) = Tex (1 − e−τν ) + TR′ (ν)e−τν           (10)


where the optical depth τν ≡ ds αν is the integral of the absorption coefficient
                                     R

(αν ) along the ray through the cloud, TR′ is the brightness of the background
radiation field incident on the cloud along the ray, and s is the proper distance.

For the 21 cm transition, the excitation temperature Tex is referred to as the
spin temperature TS . It quantifies the relative number densities, ni , of atoms
in the two hyperfine levels of the electronic ground state (we will use the
subscripts 1 and 0 to denote the triplet and singlet states, respectively; these
equal the total angular momentum F of the atom). It is defined via
                               n1  g1
                                  = e−E10 /kB TS = 3 e−T⋆ /TS                (11)
                               n0  g0


where gi is the statistical weight (here g0 = 1 and g1 = 3), E10 = 5.9×10−6 eV
is the energy splitting, and T⋆ ≡ E10 /kB = 0.068 K is the equivalent temper-
ature. Because all astrophysical applications have TS ≫ T∗ , approximately
three of four atoms find themselves in the excited state. As a result, the ab-
sorption coefficient must include a correction for stimulated emission (and
hence it depends on TS as well). Note that, in detail, the assumption of a sin-
gle TS applying to the entire hydrogen distribution is not necessarily correct.
Rigorously, one should solve a Boltzmann equation that couples the spin and
velocity distributions [111]. When the collision time is long, this introduces
percent level changes to the brightness temperature.

The optical depth of a cloud of hydrogen is then:

           Z
    τν =       ds σ01 (1 − e−E10 /kB TS ) φ(ν) n0                            (12)
                          !
                   hν          NHI
                                     
        ≈ σ01                            φ(ν),                               (13)
                  kB TS         4

where
                                                  3c2 A10
                                          σ01 ≡           ,                  (14)
                                                   8πν 2

A10 = 2.85 × 10−15 s−1 is the spontaneous emission coefficient of the 21 cm
transition, NHI is the column density of HI (here the factor 1/4 accounts for
the fraction of HI atoms in the hyperfine singlet state), and φ(ν) is the line
profile (defined so that dν φ(ν) = 1). The second factor in equation (12)
                         R



                                                 22
accounts for stimulated emission. The approximate form in equation (13) as-
sumes uniformity throughout the cloud.

In general, the line shape φ(ν) includes natural, thermal, and pressure broad-
ening, as well as bulk motion (which increases the effective Doppler spread).
Our most important application is to IGM gas expanding uniformly with the
Hubble flow. Then the velocity broadening of a region of linear dimension s will
be ∆V ∼ sH(z) so that φ(ν) ∼ c/[sH(z)ν]. The column density along such a
segment depends on the neutral fraction xHI of hydrogen, so NHI = xHI nH (z) s.
A more exact calculation yields, with equation (12), an expression for the 21
cm optical depth of the diffuse IGM,


            3 hc3 A10        xHI nH
    τν0 =            2
                                                                            (15)
          32π kB TS ν0 (1 + z) (dvk /drk )
                                         "              #
                                 3/2 xHI   H(z)/(1 + z)
        ≈ 0.0092 (1 + δ) (1 + z)                          ,                 (16)
                                     TS      dvk /drk

where in the second equality TS is in degrees Kelvin. Here the factor (1 + δ)
is the fractional overdensity of baryons and dvk /drk is the gradient of the
proper velocity along the line of sight, including both the Hubble expansion
and the peculiar velocity. In the second line, we have substituted the velocity
H(z)/(1 + z) appropriate for the uniform Hubble expansion at high redshifts.

The two applications of equation (10) that will be most important here are:

1. The contrast between high-redshift hydrogen clouds and the CMB. Many
of the observational strategies for the 21 cm line involve comparison of lines
of sight through a cloud 7 to (sometimes hypothetical) sightlines with clear
views of the CMB. Thus we hope to measure


              TS − Tγ (z)                 TS − Tγ (z)
    δTb (ν) =             (1 − e−τν0 ) ≈              τν                    (17)
                 1+z                    "
                                             1+z# " 0              #
                                    1/2      Tγ (z)   H(z)/(1 + z)
            ≈ 9 xHI (1 + δ) (1 + z)      1−                          mK.    (18)
                                              TS         dvk /drk

Note that δTb saturates if TS ≫ Tγ , but it can become arbitrarily large (and
negative) if TS ≪ Tγ . The observability of the 21 cm transition therefore
hinges on the spin temperature; we will describe below the mechanisms that
drive TS either above or below Tγ (z), which dictate whether the 21 cm signal
will appear in emission, absorption, or not at all.

7 Here we use “cloud” to refer to any patch of the IGM; it need not be physically
distinct from the surrounding gas.


                                       23
2. Absorption against high redshift radio sources (§ 10). The brightness tem-
peratures of nonthermal radio continuum sources (Tsrc ≈ 106 − 1010 K) far
exceed TS and Tγ , so the flux density received from the direction of a high
redshift radio source is Sν ≈ Ssrc exp(−τν ). High-redshift radio-loud quasars
or radio galaxies would make superb probes of cloud structure in the neutral
or partially reionized IGM through their absorption line spectra.

Three competing processes determine TS : (1) absorption of CMB photons (as
well as stimulated emission); (2) collisions with other hydrogen atoms, free
electrons, and protons; and (3) scattering of UV photons. We let C10 and
P10 be the de-excitation rates (per atom) from collisions and UV scattering,
respectively; they will be examined in detail in the following sections. We also
let C01 and P01 be the corresponding excitation rates. The spin temperature
is then determined in equilibrium by 8

        n1 (C10 + P10 + A10 + B10 ICMB ) = n0 (C01 + P01 + B01 ICMB ) ,     (19)


where B01 and B10 are the appropriate Einstein coefficients and ICMB is the en-
ergy flux of CMB photons. With the Rayleigh-Jeans approximation, equation
(19) can be rewritten as [67]

                                 Tγ−1 + xc TK−1 + xα Tc−1
                        TS−1 =                            ,                 (20)
                                      1 + xc + xα


where xc and xα are coupling coefficients for collisions and UV scattering,
respectively, and TK is the gas kinetic temperature. Here we have used detailed
balance through the relation

                       C01  g1                T⋆
                                                         
                           = e−T⋆ /TK ≈ 3 1 −    .                          (21)
                       C10  g0                TK


We have then defined the effective color temperature of the UV radiation field
Tc via

                               P01       T⋆
                                                  
                                   ≡3 1−    .                               (22)
                               P10       Tc


The goal of the next two sections will be to calculate xc , xα , and Tc . In the
limit in which Tc → TK (a reasonable approximation in most situations of

8 Note that the relevant timescales are all much shorter than the expansion time,
so equilibrium is an excellent approximation.


                                        24
interest, as we will see in §2.3), equation (20) may be written

                            Tγ     xc + xα              Tγ
                                                           
                       1−      =                   1−      .                 (23)
                            TS   1 + xc + xα            TK


2.2 Collisional Coupling


We will first consider collisional excitation and de-excitation of the hyperfine
levels, which dominate in dense gas. The coupling coefficient for species i is
                                     i
                                    C10 T⋆   ni κi10 T⋆
                            xic ≡          =            ,                    (24)
                                    A10 Tγ    A10 Tγ


where κi10 is the rate coefficient for spin de-excitation in collisions with that
species (with units of cm3 s−1 ). The total xc is the sum over all i. We next
show how these rates are calculated. Readers who are not interested in the
details can simply use the final results presented in Figure 2 and Tables 3–4.


2.2.1 H-H Collisions

The role of hydrogen-hydrogen collisions in setting the spin temperature has
received extensive attention in the literature, dating back to the first discus-
sions of the spin temperature [112,?,?,?,?,?,?,?]. The dominant interaction
is electron (and hence spin) exchange in atomic collisions. There are several
types of permissible spin-exchange collisions. Let us label the four hyperfine
states by “a” for F = 0 and “b, c, d” for F = 1, m = (−1, 0, 1), where m is
the projection of the spin. If A and B label the two atoms, electron exchange
must obey the conservation law

                            mA + mB = mA′ + mB′ .                            (25)


One possible set of interactions has ∆F = 2: cc→aa, bd→aa, and db→aa; we
denote their cross sections with σ + . Another set has ∆F = 1: bd→ac, db→ac,
cd→ad, dc→ad, bc→ab, cb→ab (and their inverses), which we denote with
σ − . Finally, we let ∆F = 0 transitions (bd→cc, db→cc, and their inverses)
have cross section σ 0 .

We will now sketch how to compute κHH10 , the effective rate coefficient for these
processes; more rigorous treatments can be found in the literature [113,?,?,?].
Although a semi-classical approach is adequate at high temperatures [112],
a full quantum-mechanical treatment is necessary in the general case. The
problem can be described as a typical scattering event between two identical


                                         25
particles that form an intermediate (virtual) hydrogen molecule before sepa-
rating again.

Actually, an analogous calculation that ignores nuclear symmetry serves to
illustrate the main principles [113]. The Schrödinger equation for the total
wavefunction X of both atoms is
                                 1 2
                                              
                        H−        ∇ − E X(r, R) = 0,                       (26)
                                2M R


where r represents the positions of the two electrons, R is the vector joining
the two nuclei, M is the reduced mass, E is the total energy, and H is the
Hamiltonian of the system when the nuclei are fixed in space. The lowest
energy eigenstates of H are χs and χt , the singlet and triplet states of the
hydrogen molecule (1 Σg and 3 Σu , respectively). For slow collisions, the total
wave function can then be written as a superposition of these two states

                 X(r, R) = Fs (R) χs(r; R) + Ft (R) χt (r; R),             (27)


where Fs,t are determined as follows. As usual for scattering problems, in the
elastic scattering limit (valid for TK ≫ T⋆ ), the asymptotic solutions must
take the form (e.g., [119])

                                               eikR
                        Fs,t (R) ∼ eik·z +          fs,t (θ, φ),           (28)
                                                R


where k is the relative momentum and (R, θ, φ) are the spherical coordinate
components of R. The angular dependence (and hence the functions fs,t ) can
be found by substituting the form (27) into equation (26) and expanding in
Legendre polynomials Pl (cos θ). This reduces the problem to an infinite set of
radial equations, indexed by the order l of the associated Legendre polynomial
and known as partial wave equations. It can be shown that the solution has
the form
                                   ∞
                                1X               s,t
                 fs,t(k, θ) =         (2l + 1)eiδl sin δls,t Pl (cos θ).   (29)
                                k l=0


The phase shifts δls,t quantify the coherence of the scattering amplitudes over
the different partial waves. The particulars of the scattering problem enter the
solution only through these phase shifts, and they are ultimately determined
by the H2 energy potential curves in the singlet and triplet states. The total
cross section averages over the spins of the particles; the spin exchange cross
section, on the other hand, is a coherent sum ∝ |ft − fs |2 .


                                          26
The only difference for identical particles is that the wavefunction X must be
made antisymmetric with respect to interchange of the two nuclei [116]. The
resulting cross sections are [118]
                    ∞
              ±  π X
             σ = 2     (2l + 1) sin2 (δls − δlt )[1 − (−1)l+1/2±1/2 ],    (30)
                4k l=0


and σ 0 = σ + . The factor in square brackets results from nuclear symmetry; it
would be unity for distinguishable particles (and hence there would be only
one cross section). The most recent evaluations of σ ± using state-of-the-art
molecular potentials and the close-coupling method can be found in [118];
they are accurate to . 5% at TK < 3 K (where non-adiabatic effects become
important), with even smaller errors at higher energies. Note that σ − → 0 as
E → 0 because the S-wave scattering term (l = 0) vanishes in equation (30);
this is a result of nuclear symmetry and does not occur in collisions between
distinguishable nuclei.

The cross sections σ ± depend sensitively on E because of resonances with
the molecular potential. But in real-world applications, it is the thermally
averaged cross section that is relevant:
                                       Z
                   σ̄ ± ≡ (kB TK )−2       dE σ ± (E) E e−E/kB TK ,       (31)


which smooths out the structure in σ ± . The corresponding rate coefficients
are
                                       s
                                           8kB TK ±
                                k± =             σ̄ .                     (32)
                                            πM

From detailed balance, the excitation rates are

                                kx± = k ± exp(−ω ± ),                     (33)


where ω − ≡ ω = E10 /kB TK and ω + ≡ 2ω.

With these cross sections in hand, we can compute how the level populations
evolve, assuming that they are independent of atomic velocities. Collecting all
the transitions for each state, the rate equations may be written [118]


    ṅd = ṅb = n2a kx+ + 2na nc kx− − 2nb nd (k + + k − ) + n2c k +
          ṅc = n2a kx+ + 2kx− na (nb − nc + nd ) − 2nb nc k −
                +2nb nd (k − + k + ) − 3n2c k + − 2nc nd k −


                                           27
          ṅa = −3n2a kx+ − 2kx− na (nb + nc + nd ) + 2nb nc k −
                +2nb nd (k − + k + ) + n2c k + + 2nc nd k − ,                  (34)

where we have set k 0 ≈ k + at the temperatures of interest. In most situa-
tions, the level populations will be near thermodynamic equilibrium, so we
can linearize equations (34) about that point. Writing n1 ≡ nb + nc + nd
and n0 ≡ na , and assuming statistical equilibrium among these sublevels, the
linearized form is

                          ṅ1 = n0 κHH           HH
                                    01 nHI − n1 κ10 nHI ,                      (35)


where we have assumed na e−ω ≈ n1 /3 and defined

                         κHH     +   −       HH ω
                          10 = (k + k )/2 = κ01 e /3                           (36)


to be the effective de-excitation rate. Note that the reduction to equation (35)
is not trivial, because equations (34) are nonlinear in the level densities.
Some earlier calculations did not linearize properly and so underestimated
κHH
  10 [116,?]. Fortunately, the linearization is sufficiently accurate that this sin-
gle effective rate equation (as opposed to the full nonlinear system) is accurate
throughout the regime of interest [118]. However, when collisions dominate but
are still relatively weak, the assumption that n1 /n0 is independent of atomic
velocity is not always a good one at the percent level [111].

Table 3 lists values for κHH
                          10 from [118] (for TK ≤ 300 K) and from [120] (for
higher temperatures). For TK & 5000 K, the latter uses an extrapolation for
the cross section at high l, so the values are only approximate in this regime
(however, at such high temperatures collisions with hydrogen atoms rarely
dominate anyway). At even higher temperatures, excitations to higher atomic
levels begin to dominate and this calculation breaks down. Figure 2 shows
the rate coefficient graphically. It decreases rapidly at small temperatures
but varies rather gently with temperature at TK & 50 K. Note that [118] did
not assume elastic collisions and so is valid to smaller energies than previous
estimates.

We end our discussion of H–H interactions with a caveat about the use of
equation (35) [118]. Its derivation requires statistical equilibrium for the F = 1
magnetic sublevels. Unfortunately, collisions cannot establish such an equilib-
rium on their own (for example, ṅb − ṅd = 0 is always obeyed). We must rely
on two other mechanisms to depolarize these populations: radiative transitions
and dipolar spin-spin interactions. The latter are long-range magnetic forces
suppressed by a factor ∼ (v/c)2 and are ineffective in the IGM. Fortunately,
absorption of CMB photons does efficiently mix the levels. The weak primor-
dial polarization of the CMB [121,?,?] may leave the atoms slightly polarized,
but its effects on the spin temperature are likely to be extremely small.


                                        28
                         κHH    3 −1                   κHH    3 −1
               TK (K)     10 (cm s )          TK (K)    10 (cm s )

                  1       1.38 × 10−13          80     1.02 × 10−10
                  2       1.43 × 10−13          90     1.11 × 10−10
                  4       2.71 × 10−13         100     1.19 × 10−10
                  6       6.60 × 10−13         200     1.75 × 10−10
                  8       1.47 × 10−12         300     2.09 × 10−10
                  10      2.88 × 10−12         500     2.56 × 10−10
                  15      9.10 × 10−12         700     2.91 × 10−10
                  20      1.78 × 10−11         1000    3.31 × 10−10
                  25      2.73 × 10−11         2000    4.27 × 10−10
                  30      3.67 × 10−11         3000    4.97 × 10−10
                  40      5.38 × 10−11         5000    6.03 × 10−10
                  50      6.86 × 10−11         7000    6.87 × 10−10
                  60      8.14 × 10−11        10000    7.87 × 10−10
                  70      9.25 × 10−11
Table 3
De-excitation cross sections for H-H collisions. Data for TK ≤ 300 K is from [118];
higher temperature data is courtesy K. Sigurdson (using the methods of [120]). The
cross sections at TK & 5000 K are only approximate (see text).
2.2.2 H–e− Collisions

Collisions between neutral hydrogen atoms and free electrons can also induce
spin exchange. The cross section can be computed by considering the scatter-
ing of a polarized beam of electrons by hydrogen [67]. This scattering problem
can be solved with the same methods as for H-H collisions (eqs. 28–32, but
with distinguishable particles). Of course, in this case the scattering problem
is a three-body one and so is more difficult to solve numerically. But, just
as before, spin exchange is driven by the differing triplet and singlet scatter-
ing amplitudes (ft and fs , respectively), and the spin exchange cross section
is ∝ |ft − fs |2 , which reduces to the form of equation (30) – except for the
absence of the nuclear symmetry factor, of course.

The first cross section calculation [67] used the phase shifts of [123], while the
next [116] used the much more accurate phase shifts of [124] (also see the fit
of [125], which is accurate to ∼ 7%). These early calculations included only
the l = 0 term in equation (30), corresponding to S-wave scattering. Since
then, H–e− scattering has received a great deal of attention in the atomic
physics literature, and updated spin de-excitation rate coefficients including
all the l ≤ 3 partial waves have now been presented [126]. We summarize the


                                         29
Fig. 2. De-excitation rate coefficients for H-H collisions (solid line) and H-e− colli-
sions (dashed line). Note that the net rates are also proportional to the densities,
so H-H collisions still dominate in a weakly-ionized medium.

                TK (K)     κeH    3 −1
                            10 (cm s )          TK (K)   κeH    3 −1
                                                          10 (cm s )

                    1       2.39 × 10−10         1000    5.92 × 10−9
                    2       3.37 × 10−10         2000    7.15 × 10−9
                    5       5.30 × 10−10         3000    7.71 × 10−9
                   10       7.46 × 10−10         5000    8.17 × 10−9
                   20       1.05 × 10−9          7000    8.32 × 10−9
                   50       1.63 × 10−9         10,000   8.37 × 10−9
                  100       2.26 × 10−9         15,000   8.29 × 10−9
                  200       3.11 × 10−9         20,000   8.11 × 10−9
                  500       4.59 × 10−9
Table 4
De-excitation cross sections for H-e− collisions, including only collisions below the
n = 2 threshold. Higher energy collisions become important at TK & 2 × 104 K.
Note that, at TK & 6200 K, the Lyα background generated by collisions can no
longer be neglected. From [126].

results in Table 4 and by the dashed curve in Figure 2. Note that κeH    HH
                                                                   10 ≫ κ10
because (at a fixed temperature) free electrons have much larger velocities
than hydrogen atoms. Moreover, (unlike for H-H) the H-e− cross section does
not cut off at small temperatures.


                                           30
Nevertheless, H-H collisions typically dominate in the early Universe, because
the relic ionized fraction from cosmological recombination is x̄i ∼ 2 × 10−4
(see §3.1). Only if the Universe is significantly heated and ionized can colli-
sions with electrons become a strong coupling mechanism (see §7.2). Thus the
high temperature behavior of κeH10 is relatively important. The usual calcula-
tion (given in Table 4), which neglects scattering at energies above the n = 2
threshold, breaks down at TK & 1.5 × 104 K. Above that point, excitations,
ionizations, and high-energy elastic scattering will all affect κeH
                                                                 10 . However, in
practice κ10 probably becomes irrelevant before that point. H-e− collisions
           eH

begin to excite the 2P level of hydrogen at TK & 6200 K [126]. 9 Because
each Lyα photon generated through this process scatters ∼ 105 times before
redshifting out of resonance, while only ∼ 10% of collisions lead directly to de-
excitation, the radiation background generated by collisional excitation com-
pletely dominates the spin temperature coupling at higher temperatures. Thus
the Wouthuysen-Field effect, to be described in the following section, cannot
be ignored once TK & 6200 K, even in the absence of luminous sources.



2.2.3 Other Species

Neutral hydrogen atoms can also collide with bare protons, deuterium atoms,
and helium atoms or ions. Proton collisions are generally subdominant: κp10 ≈
3.2κHH10 for relatively high temperatures [116], making them somewhat less
efficient than the accompanying free electrons. Neutral helium has a closed
shell of electrons in the ground state, so the Pauli exclusion principle prevents
electron exchange with it from causing spin change unless the helium atom
can be excited to the triplet state (requiring significantly more energy than
the cold neutral IGM can provide; see [111] for a detailed dicussion). Ionized
helium avoids this problem and may be significant in partially ionized gas
(though the accompanying free electrons will still dominate because of their
larger velocities). To our knowledge, these rates have not yet been calculated.

Finally, we have collisions with trace elements. Spin exchange cross sections
in H-D collisions have been evaluated by [120] (see §2.6). Although they are
much larger than the corresponding H-H cross sections at small temperatures,
their rarity means that they still have no significant effect on TS .




9  In the presence of an X-ray background, which produces a non-thermal population
of high-energy photons, this threshold temperature can be much smaller [127,?,?].


                                       31
Fig. 3. Level diagram illustrating the Wouthuysen-Field effect. We show the hy-
perfine splittings of the 1S and 2P levels. The solid lines label transitions that
mix the ground state hyperfine levels, while the dashed lines label complementary
transitions that do not participate in mixing. From [130].
2.3 The Wouthuysen-Field Effect


A less obvious coupling process has become known as the Wouthuysen-Field
mechanism 10 [66,?]. It is illustrated in Figure 3, where we have drawn the
hyperfine sublevels of the 1S and 2P states of HI. Suppose a hydrogen atom in
the hyperfine singlet state absorbs a Lyα photon. The electric dipole selection
rules allow ∆F = 0, 1 except that F = 0 → 0 is prohibited (here F is the
total angular momentum of the atom). Thus the atom will jump to either
of the central 2P states. However, these rules allow this state to decay to
the 1 S1/2 triplet level. 11 Thus atoms can change hyperfine states through
the absorption and spontaneous re-emission of a Lyα photon (or indeed any
Lyman-series photon; see §2.4 below). This is analogous to the well-known
“Raman scattering” process, which often determines the level populations of
metastable atomic states, except that in this case the atom undergoes a real
(rather than virtual) transition to the 2P state.


10 As a guide to the English-speaking reader, “Wouthuysen” is pronounced as
roughly “Vowt-how-sen,” although in reality the “uy” construction is a diphthong
with no precise counterpart in English.
11 Here we use the notation L , where L and J are the orbital and total angular
                            F J
momentum of the electron.


                                       32
2.3.1 An Approximate Treatment

We begin with a relatively simple and intuitive treatment of this process.
Reality is considerably more complicated; we discuss more precise calculations
in §2.3.3 below. The Wouthuysen-Field coupling must depend on the total rate
(per atom) at which Lyα photons are scattered within the gas,
                                       Z
                          Pα = 4πχα        dν Jν (ν)φα (ν),                  (37)


where σν ≡ χα φα (ν) is the local absorption cross section, χα ≡ (π e2 /me c)fα ,
fα = 0.4162 is the oscillator strength of the Lyα transition, φα (ν) is the Lyα
absorption profile, and Jν is the angle-averaged specific intensity of the back-
ground radiation field (by number, not energy). In the simplest approximation,
we simply assume Jν to be constant across the line; we will see in §2.3.3 that
this is often not a valid assumption. The line often has a Voigt profile (if
only thermal and natural broadening are relevant). For concreteness, thermal
broadening yields a Doppler width
                                       s
                                            2kB TK
                              ∆νD =                να ,                      (38)
                                             mH c2


where να = 2.47 × 1015 Hz is the central Lyα frequency.

Our goal here is to relate this total scattering rate Pα to the indirect de-
excitation rate P10 [67,?,?]. In this section we will make the simplifying as-
sumption that Jν is constant across the Lyα transition. We first label the 1S
and 2P hyperfine levels a–f, in order of increasing energy, and let Aij and Bij be
the spontaneous emission and absorption coefficients for transitions between
these levels. We write the background flux at the frequency corresponding to
the i → j transition as Jij . Then

                                     Adb                 Aeb
                  P01 ∝ Bad Jad             + Bae Jae           .            (39)
                                  Ada + Adb           Aea + Aeb


The first term contains the probability for an a→d transition (Bad Jad ), to-
gether with the probability for the subsequent decay to terminate in state b;
the second term is the same for transitions to and from state e. Next we need
to relate the individual Aij to Aα = 6.25 × 108 Hz, the total Lyα sponta-
neous emission rate (averaged over all the hyperfine sublevels). This can be
accomplished using a sum rule stating that the sum of decay intensities (gi Aij )
for transitions from a given nF J to all the n′ J ′ levels (summed over F ′ ) is
proportional to 2F + 1 (e.g., [132]); the relative strengths of the permitted
transitions are then (1, 1, 2, 2, 1, 5), where we have ordered the lines (bc, ad,


                                           33
bd, ae, be, bf) and the two letters represent the initial and final states. With
our assumption that the background radiation field is constant across the in-
dividual hyperfine lines, we then find P10 = (4/27)Pα [67,?] (see [131] for a
detailed derivation).

The coupling coefficient xα may then be written

                                   4Pα T⋆      Jα
                           xα =            = Sα c ,                         (40)
                                  27A10 Tγ     Jν


where in the second equality we evaluate Jν = Jα neglecting radiative transfer
effects and set Jνc ≡ 1.165 × 10−10 [(1 + z)/20] cm−2 s−1 Hz−1 sr−1 . As we
will see below, the background spectrum around Lyα is nontrivial, so we must
include a correction factor Sα that accounts for variations near the line center.
This coupling threshold for xα = Sα can also be written in terms of the number
of Lyα photons per hydrogen atom, which we denote J˜νc = 0.0767 [(1+z)/20]−2 .
As we will see in §3, it is relatively easy to achieve in practice.

The remainder of this section will show how to calculate Tc and Sα . For the
reader who is not interested in the details, equations (52) and (55) provide the
basic results that can be used to compute TS (see also [133]). Note, however,
that both Tc and Sα implicitly depend on TS , so all three must be solved for
simultaneously.


2.3.2 The Color Temperature

The Lyα coupling also depends on the effective temperature Tc of the UV
radiation field, defined in equation (22). This is determined by the shape of
the photon spectrum at the Lyα resonance. That the effective temperature
of the radiation field must matter is easy to see: the energy defect between
the different hyperfine splittings of the Lyα transition implies that the mixing
process is sensitive to the gradient of the background spectrum near the Lyα
resonance. More precisely, the procedure described near equation (39) lets us
write
                                                           !
                   P01   g1 nad + nae            d ln nν
                       =              ≈ 3 1 + ν0               ,            (41)
                   P10   g0 nbd + nbe              dν


where nν = c2 Jν /2ν 2 is the photon occupation number. Thus by comparison
to equation (22), we have [98] (neglecting stimulated emission [134])

                                h       d ln nν
                                     =−         .                           (42)
                               kB Tc      dν


                                      34
Note that much of the literature uses a slightly different definition of the color
temperature (in terms of Jν ) that does not obey detailed balance (e.g., [135,?]).
Obviously the color temperature is a function of frequency; in detail, it should
be harmonically averaged over the line profile [136], but this makes only a tiny
difference in practice [135]. Note as well that slightly different definitions of
Tc can be useful for certain applications [136].

Simple arguments show that Tc ≈ TK : all boil down to the observation that,
so long as the medium is extremely optically thick, the enormous number of
Lyα scatterings must bring the Lyα profile to a blackbody of temperature TK
near the line center [66]. This condition is easily fulfilled in the high-redshift
IGM, where in our cosmology the mean Lyα optical depth experienced by a
photon that redshifts across the entire resonance is [137]
                                                               3/2
                       χα nHI (z) c                      1+z
                                                     
                 τGP =              ≈ 3 × 105 x̄HI                    .      (43)
                        H(z)να                            7


Field [138] showed that atomic recoil during scattering, which tilts the spec-
trum to the red, is primarily responsible for establishing this equilibrium.
However, as we will see, spin exchange slightly modifies this expectation. We
will examine the solution in more detail below (see eq. 52).


2.3.3 The Radiation Field

The scattering process is actually much more complicated than naively ex-
pected for two basic reasons: (1) scattering itself modifies the shape of Jν ,
and (2) the hyperfine sublevels must be taken into account. Recent treat-
ments have incorporated both these effects; the former is particularly impor-
tant [135,?,?,?,?,?]. Intuitively, a flat input spectrum develops an absorption
feature because of the increased scattering rate near the Lyα resonance. Pho-
tons everywhere continually lose energy by redshifting, but they also lose en-
ergy through recoil and spin excitation whenever they scatter. If the drift is
denoted A, continuity would require nν A=constant (assuming photons are
neither created nor destroyed in the line and neglecting diffusion from re-
emission); when A increases near resonance, the number density must fall. On
average, the energy loss (or gain) per scattering is [134]

                          ∆Erecoil    hν        TK
                                                    
                                   =         1−    ,                         (44)
                            E        mp c2      Tc


where the first factor comes from recoil off an isolated atom [98] and the second
factor corrects for the distribution of initial photon energies [135,?]; note that
it vanishes as Tc → TK , which also separates the heating and cooling regimes.


                                       35
The small energy defect between the hyperfine levels provides another (weak)
source of energy exchange [133,?]. The latter process can be incorporated into
the scattering in nearly the same way as recoil.

Our main goal in this section is to show how to compute the photon spectrum
near Lyα. We begin with the radiative transfer equation in an expanding
universe (written in comoving coordinates, neglecting stimulated emission,
and using photon number rather than energy for Jν ) [141,?]:

        1   ∂Jν                    ∂Jν
                                                 Z
                = −φα (ν) Jν + Hνα     +             dν ′ R(ν, ν ′ ) Jν ′ + C(t)ψ(ν).(45)
     cnH χα ∂t                     ∂ν


Here the first term on the right-hand side describes absorption, the second
the Hubble flow, and the third re-emission following absorption. R(ν, ν ′ ) is the
“redistribution function” that describes the frequency of an emitted photon,
which depends on the relative velocities and directions of the absorbed and
emitted photons as well as the absorbing atom [142]. The last term describes
injection of new photons: C is the rate at which they are produced and ψ(ν)
is their frequency distribution.

The redistribution function R is the complicated aspect of the problem, and
general solutions to equation (45) are not available. Fortunately, it can be
simplified if the frequency change per scattering (typically of order ∆νD [142])
is “small” (see below). In that case, we can expand Jν ′ to second order in (ν −
ν ′ ) and rewrite equation (45) as a diffusion problem in frequency. The steady-
state version of equation (45) becomes, in this Fokker-Planck approximation
[133,?], 12
                                            !
                       d          dJ
                         −A J + D               + Cψ(x) = 0,                        (46)
                      dx          dx


where x ≡ (ν −να )/∆νD , A is the frequency drift, and D is the diffusivity. The
problem is not, unfortunately, completely specified, because D is constructed
from an approximation to R and so depends on the physical processes incorpo-
rated. The resulting freedom can be dealt with in a number of ways [143,?,?,?].
One important caveat (in this particular application) is that the approxima-
tion, just like the original problem, should obey detailed balance [144], which
ensures microscopic reversibility. This was not satisfied by the diffusivity cho-
sen in [141], which has been used in most recent work [98,?,?,?]. A “corrected”
form was recently presented by [134]. An alternative approach is to expand the
scattering probability itself, rather than Jν or nν [136]. This appears to give
somewhat less accurate results but has some formal advantages. In general,
12 Note that we neglect stimulated emission here, which adds a term ∝ J 2 inside

the brackets [134].


                                       36
these Fokker-Planck approximations are valid when (i) the frequency change
per scattering (∼ ∆νD ) is much smaller than the width of any spectral fea-
tures, and either (iia) we are outside the line core, where dφα /dx is small, or
(iib) we are in equilibrium with Tc ≈ TK . Fortunately, Monte Carlo simula-
tions have verified the utility of equation (46) even when these conditions are
marginally violated [133].

Solving for the background spectrum thus reduces to specifying A and D for
each of several processes. The first is the Hubble flow, which causes a drift
AH = −γ (without any associated diffusion), where γ is the Sobolev parame-
ter that parameterizes the bulk velocity of the medium. In our case, neglecting
                            −1
peculiar velocities, γ = τGP   . The remaining terms come from expanding R,
which must incorporate all the physical processes relevant to energy exchange
in scattering. The commonly used RII , which describes frequency redistribu-
tion if the scattering is coherent in the rest frame of the atom [145,?], will not
suffice, because we must include recoil and spin exchange as well. The drift
from recoil is [143,?,?,?,?]


    Dscatt = φα (x)/2,                                                        (47)
    Ascatt = −(η − x−1
                     0 )φα (x),                                               (48)

where x0 ≡ να /∆νD and η ≡ (hνα2 )/(mp c2 ∆νD ). The latter is the recoil pa-
rameter measuring the average loss per scattering in units of the Doppler
width. The second term in equation (48) follows from detailed balance and
ensures the proper approach to thermal equilibrium [134]. When TK is small,
we must also include energy loss during spin exchange [133,?], which has
                2
Dse ≈ (2ν02 /9∆νD ) Dscatt because the frequency change from spin exchange is
±ν0 and only a fraction 2/9 of absorptions actually lead to spin exchange.
When TK is extremely small, each hyperfine transition should be treated
separately, with distinct Lyα line profiles φ10 (ν) and φ01 (ν) for indirect de-
excitations and excitations of the ground state hyperfine levels.

To solve equation (46) we must specify the boundary conditions, which es-
sentially correspond to the input photon spectrum (ignoring scattering) and
the source function. Because the frequency range of interest is so narrow, two
cases suffice (e.g., [135,?]). These are a flat input spectrum (which describes
photons that redshift through the Lyα resonance) and a step function, where
photons are “injected” at line center (through cascades or recombinations; see
§2.4 below) and redshift away. In either case, the first integral over x is trivial
and we can write [146]
                              dJ
                          φ      + 2(η ′φ + γ ′ )J = 2γ ′ K                   (49)
                              dx

where [139]


                                         37
    γ ′ = γ (1 + Tse /TK )−1 ,                                                  (50)
                          !
      ′       1 + Tse /TS
    η =η                     − (x + x0 )−1 ,                                    (51)
              1 + Tse /TK
                       2      2
where Tse = (2/9)TK ν21  /∆νD   = 0.40 K. The terms involving Tse are added
by spin exchange; note that they become unimportant when the temperature
is large and are often neglected. The integration constant K equals J∞ , the
flux far from resonance, for photons that redshift into the line and for injected
photons at x < 0; it is zero for injected photons at x > 0. This form is not
accurate when TK ∼ T⋆ , in which case a numerical solution must be used [133].

When γ is small (or in the limit of large optical depth, an excellent approxi-
mation for our purposes) it follows from equations (42) and (49) that
                                                         !
                                           1 + Tse /TK
                               Tc = TK                       ,                  (52)
                                           1 + Tse /TS

agreeing with the qualitative arguments of §2.3.2 when spin exchange is ne-
glected (in the limit TS , TK ≫ Tse ). The spin temperature affects the rate at
which photons lose energy during scattering (because it determines the level
populations and hence the probabilities of excitation and de-excitation) and
so the background spectrum near the Lyα resonance, which in turn affects
the spin temperature itself. Thus TS must actually be determined iteratively,
beginning with a guess for TS , calculating Tc and the effective Wouthuysen-
Field coupling strength, computing TS , and repeating. Fortunately the process
converges rapidly [133].

Several solutions to equation (46) have been presented in the literature. We
begin with the formal analytic solution [146,?]. When K 6= 0, it is most
compactly written in terms of δJ ≡ (J∞ − J)/J∞ :
                                                                          
                               Z∞                            Zx        ′
                                               ′       ′           dx 
                 δJ (x) = 2η               −2η y − 2γ
                                    dy exp                                .   (53)
                                                                  φα (x′ )
                               0                           x−y



An analogous form to equation (53) exists for photons injected at line center.
To include the full Voigt profile, equation (53) must be solved numerically
[135,?]. But these equations can be further simplified by approximating the
full line profile with the Lorentzian wings from natural broadening [147,?];
in that case the inner integral is trivial. This assumption is quite accurate
when TK . 1000 K; at higher temperatures, collisional broadening affects the
equilibrium spectrum at the several percent level [140].

The crucial point of equation (53) is that (as expected from the qualitative ar-
gument above) an absorption feature appears near the line center; its strength


                                           38
Fig. 4. Background radiation field near the Lyα resonance at z = 10, assuming a
Voigt line profile. The upper and lower sets are for continuous photons and photons
injected at line center, respectively. (The former are normalized to J∞ ; the latter
have arbitrary normalization.) The solid and dashed curves take TK = 10 and
1000 K, respectively. From [140].


is roughly proportional to η ′ , our recoil parameter. The feature is more sig-
nificant when TK is small (or the average effect of recoil is large). Figure 4
shows some example spectra (both for a continuous background and for pho-
tons injected at line center). Note that the feature is asymmetric; this will be
important in §3.2.2.

For now, the most important result is the suppression of the radiation spec-
trum at line center compared to the (flat) solution without radiative trans-
fer. This decreases the total scattering rate of Lyα photons (and hence the
Wouthuysen-Field coupling) below what one naively expects. The suppression
factor is [135]

                          Z∞
                   Sα =        dx φα (x) J(x) ≈ [1 − δJ (0)] ≤ 1,              (54)
                          −∞




where the second equality follows from the narrowness of the line profile. For
a full Voigt profile, the integral must be performed numerically [135,?]. But
the wing approximation turns out to be an excellent one; when spin exchange


                                         39
can be neglected, the suppression is [139,?]
                                   !1/3                              !1/3 
                             3a           ∼ exp −0.803T −2/3
                                                                 10−6
      Sα ≈ exp −1.12η ′                                    K
                                                                             ,   (55)
                            2πγ ′                                 γ


where a = Aα /(4π∆νD ) is the Voigt parameter and in the second equality we
have neglected spin exchange and expressed TK in degrees Kelvin. Note that
this form applies to both photons injected at line center and those that redshift
in from infinity. As we can see in Figure 4, the suppression is most significant
in cool gas. This is convenient because the Lorentzian wing approximation
is least accurate at large temperatures; fortunately in that regime Sα ≈ 1
anyway, so equation (55) is accurate to a few percent at all TK & 1 K [140].
At smaller temperatures, a numerical solution including the Voigt profile, the
full integral over φα , and spin exchange, is necessary [133].


2.4 The Lyman Series


The Wouthuysen-Field mechanism describes how Lyα photon scattering af-
fects TS . Of course, the neutral IGM has so much hydrogen that any photon
redshifting into a Lyman series resonance will be absorbed almost immediately.
In this section, we will compute the coupling induced by photons that enter
n > 1 Lyman lines [133,130]. Note that earlier work often ignored the detailed
atomic physics of these transitions and incorrectly assumed their coupling to
be identical to Lyα photons.

Suppose that a photon redshifts into the Lyn resonance. After absorption, it
can either scatter (through a decay directly to the ground state) or can vanish
if the atom instead decays to an intermediate level. The scattering probability
PnP →1S follows directly from the Einstein coefficients,
                                              Aif
                                Pif = P                 ,                         (56)
                                              f ′ Aif ′



where i and f denote the initial and final states, respectively, and the sum
is over all allowed final states. Table 5 shows the direct decay probabilities.
Typically, a Lyn photon will scatter Nscatt ≈ (1 − PnP →1S )−1 ∼ 5 times before
being consumed by a decay cascade. As a result, coupling from the direct
scattering of Lyn photons is unimportant relative to Lyα photons [130], which
vanish only when they redshift across the line. Thus the coupling from Lyn
scattering is suppressed by a factor ∼ Nscatt /τGP . 10−6 .

However, Lyn photons can still be important because of their cascade prod-
ucts. Consider the decay chains shown in Figure 5. For Lyβ, the only permitted


                                         40
                   n    frec (n)   PnP →1S        n    frec(n)   PnP →1S
                                                  16   0.3550    0.7761
                   2       1          1           17   0.3556    0.7754
                   3       0       0.8817         18   0.3561    0.7748
                   4    0.2609     0.8390         19   0.3565    0.7743
                   5    0.3078     0.8178         20   0.3569    0.7738
                   6    0.3259     0.8053         21   0.3572    0.7734
                   7    0.3353     0.7972         22   0.3575    0.7731
                   8    0.3410     0.7917         23   0.3578    0.7728
                   9    0.3448     0.7877         24   0.3580    0.7725
                   10   0.3476     0.7847         25   0.3582    0.7722
                   11   0.3496     0.7824         26   0.3584    0.7720
                   12   0.3512     0.7806         27   0.3586    0.7718
                   13   0.3524     0.7791         28   0.3587    0.7716
                   14   0.3535     0.7780         29   0.3589    0.7715
                   15   0.3543     0.7770         30   0.3590    0.7713
Table 5
Recycling fractions frec (n) and direct decay probabilities to the ground state PnP →1S
for the first 29 Lyman-series transitions. From [133,130].




decays are to the ground state (regenerating a Lyβ photon and starting the
process again) or to the 2S level. The Hα photon produced in the 3P → 2S
transition (and indeed any photon produced in a decay to an excited state)
escapes to infinity. Thus the atom will eventually find itself in the 2S state,
which decays to the ground state via a forbidden two photon process with
A2S→1S = 8.2 s−1 (other processes, such as collisional excitation, are much
slower [133]). These photons too will escape to infinity. Thus coupling from
Lyβ photons can be completely neglected.


But now consider excitation by Lyγ, also shown in Figure 5. This too can decay
directly to the ground state or to 2S. But it can also cascade (through 3S or
3D) to the 2P level, in which case the original Lyn photon is “recycled” into
a Lyα photon. This photon contributes to the background responsible for the
Wouthuysen-Field effect just as any other Lyα photon would (it is an injected
photon in the terminology of [135]). Thus the key quantity for determining
the coupling induced by Lyn photons is the fraction frec (n) of cascades that


                                             41
Fig. 5. Decay chains for Lyβ and Lyγ. We show Lyn transitions by dashed curves,
Lyα by the dot-dashed curve, cascades by solid curves, and the forbidden 2S → 1S
transition by the dotted curve. From [130].

terminate in Lyα photons. This can be computed iteratively from [133,130]
                                         X
                            frec (i) =        Pif frec (f ),                (57)
                                         f



where the sum is again over all allowed final states. (Note that the sum should
exclude transitions directly to the ground state, because such decays regener-
ate the Lyn photon and start the whole process again.) Table 5 lists frec (n) for
n ≤ 30. The recycling fractions rapidly approach frec ≈ 0.36 at large n. Thus
the Wouthuysen-Field coupling from Lyn photons is about one-third as effi-
cient as that from Lyα photons, with the important exception that frec (3) = 0.
We show how to compute the total coupling from all Lyman-series photons in
§3.3.


2.5 Polarization


There are two mechanisms that could induce polarization in the 21 cm line.
The first is anisotropic excitation of the triplet state. For example, if a sin-
gle source of Lyα photons dominated the Wouthuysen-Field coupling, the
resulting level populations would be polarized. However, because τGP & 105 ,
the coupling is actually produced through repeated scatterings of each Lyα


                                         42
photon. This efficiently isotropizes the Lyα radiation field, and this kind of
polarization is unlikely to be important in practice [148].

Magnetic fields can also induce polarization. The Zeeman effect splits the 21
cm transition into three parts [149,150]: an unpolarized central component
with frequency ν0 and two components with frequencies ν0 ± ∆νZ , where
                                                    !
                              eBk         Bk
                       ∆νZ =        = 14       Hz                           (58)
                             4πme c      10 µG

and Bk is the magnetic field strength along the line of sight. Zeeman split-
ting leaves the two states with momenta ±~, so conservation of angular mo-
mentum demands that the higher and lower frequency states be right- and
left-circularly polarized, respectively. This frequency difference is, of course,
much too small to be observed directly, but a net signal will be present if
the difference in the polarized intensities exceeds the detector noise. Because
the two components are proportional to δTb (ν0 + ∆ν) (for right circular) and
δTb (ν0 − ∆ν) (for left circular), this can happen if there is a strong gradient
in δTb : then observations corresponding to ν0 receive a strong signal in one
polarization and negligible in the other. Let δTdiff (ν) = |δTL (ν) − δTR (ν)| be
the difference in brightness temperature between the left- and right-handed
components. Then
                                            !            !
                                     Bk         dδTb /dν
                    δTdiff (ν) = 28                      ,                  (59)
                                    10 µG       mK Hz−1


where dδTb /dν is the derivative of the brightness temperature (in this patch of
the sky) with observed frequency. This technique has been used to constrain
the Milky Way magnetic field [151].

Intrinsically polarized 21 cm emission or absorption is one of the few pos-
sibilities for measuring magnetic fields in the high-redshift IGM (another is
Faraday rotation of radio-loud quasars). It is an interesting prospect because
the origin of intergalactic magnetic fields is controversial and essentially un-
constrained [152]. There are two kinds of possible measurements. First, tar-
geted observations of regions with strong gradients in the underlying δTb can
constrain their local magnetic fields [153]. For example, quasar HII regions
typically have edges of width ∼ 1.5x̄−1HI (1 + z)
                                                  −3
                                                     proper Mpc, corresponding
to ∆ν ∼ 2 kHz; the softer spectra of stars yield even narrower edges. Any
coherent magnetic field across these edges will yield a residual polarization.
SKA-class instruments could (in the absence of systematics) detect magnetic
fields of order ∼ 100 µG in these systems [153].

A second possibility is a statistical search for large-scale fluctuations in the
polarized emission or absorption. In this case the constraints are strongest


                                      43
during epochs in which the globally-averaged brightness temperature changes
rapidly (see §3 for a discussion of the requisite conditions). However, realis-
tically the gradients will be modest, so the limits from SKA-class telescopes
will lie well above theoretical expectations [153]. Moreover, such statistical
techniques will likely be compromised by the much larger polarization from
Thomson scattering in the post-reionization Universe (see §4.3).


2.6 Other Hyperfine Transitions


Of course, the HI 21 cm line is only one of many hyperfine transitions. Two
others may be of particular interest for studying the IGM: the λ = 91.6 cm
transition of deuterium (only recently measured in the Milky Way ISM with
high statistical signifiance [154]) and the λ = 3.46 cm transition of 3 He+ (note
that 4 He has a zero nuclear spin, and neutral 3 He has a closed shell of electrons;
thus neither has any hyperfine structure). Of course, both of these transitions
are exceedingly weak because [D/H] ≈ 3 × 10−5 and [3 He/H] ≈ 10−5 according
to big bang nucleosynthesis [155]. The brightness temperatures corresponding
to equation (18) are then

                                             !            !
                                    [D/H]        Tγ
     δTb,D ≈ 0.079 xHI (1 + δ)           −5
                                             1−         (1 + z)1/2 µK,         (60)
                                  3 × 10        TS,D
                                   3
                                           !          !
                                  [ He/H]        Tγ
    δTb,3 He ≈ 0.53 xHeII (1 + δ)            1−         (1 + z)1/2 µK,         (61)
                                     10−5       TS,He

where of course TS must be defined separately for D and 3 He and need not
equal the HI value. For example, the de-excitation rate in D-H collisions is
many orders of magnitude larger than the corresponding rate for H-H collisions
at TK . 10 K [120], so D has a much easier time maintaining TS,D 6= Tγ than
H; note that earlier treatments incorrectly ignored this effect [67]. Lyman-
series coupling also differs between the three species [144] and can lead to
some surprising effects [139]. These brightness temperatures are so small that
detecting IGM fluctuations through either of these isotopes will require a truly
heroic effort.

However, detecting deuterium before reionization is not completely hopeless,
because density fluctuations in δTb,D precisely trace those of hydrogen. Thus
a 21 cm map could be used as a “template,” and the correlation coefficient
between H and D maps could be used to measure their abundance ratio [120].
By averaging over the a large fraction of the sky and a large redshift interval
(and with a significantly larger instrument than any currently planned), we
could, in principle, detect the deuterium signal at the expected level, although
systematics may in the end prevent us from reaching the necessary precision.


                                        44
On the other hand, this is the only known method to measure the truly pri-
mordial [D/H] ratio and would provide an important confirmation of big bang
nucleosynthesis [156,?].
3
 He+ is also potentially interesting. HeI was likely reionized with HI, but ob-
servations indicate that HeII is not reionized until z ∼ 3 (e.g., [157]). Thus
it probably emits over a substantial frequency range, ν ∼ 0.8–2.2 GHz. In
principle, the 3 He+ transition could be detected through its anti-correlation
with HI during hydrogen reionization; unfortunately, this carries much less in-
formation than the D-H correlation, because only the ionization pattern (and
not small-scale density fluctuations) contribute. On the other hand, the sky is
significantly quieter at these higher frequencies, so (depending on the details
of reionization) it may end up being an easier experiment [120]. In principle, it
would also be possible to study HeII reionization with this transition. Unfor-
tunately, simple sensitivity estimates following [158] show that such attempts
are well beyond any planned telescope.



3   The Global Evolution of the IGM


Now that we have reviewed the underlying physics of the 21 cm transition, we
will consider how global properties of the IGM evolve through time. These may
or may not be directly observable (see §3.6), but in any case they constitute
the background against which the fluctuating signals discussed in the next five
sections occur.


3.1 The Dark Ages


We begin by examining the cosmic dark ages, when the physics is rather
simple. The first step is to compute how TK evolves with time. Energy con-
servation in the expanding IGM demands

                        dTK              2 X ǫi
                            = −2H(z)TK +          ,                         (62)
                         dt              3 i kB n


where the first term on the right hand side is the pdV work from expansion
and ǫi is the energy injected into the gas per second per unit (physical) volume
through process i. Before the first nonlinear objects appear, the only relevant
heating mechanism is Compton scattering between CMB photons and residual
free electrons in the IGM. The heating rate from this process can be calculated
from the drag force exerted by the isotropic CMB radiation field on a thermal


                                      45
distribution of free electrons. It is [159,?]

                       2 ǫcomp        x̄i      (Tγ − TK )
                               =                          ,                  (63)
                       3 kB n    1 + fHe + x̄i     tγ


where tγ ≡ (3me c)/(8σT uγ ) is the Compton cooling time, uγ ∝ Tγ4 is the
energy density of the CMB, fHe is the helium fraction (by number), and σT is
the Thomson cross section. The first factor on the right hand side accounts for
the distribution of the energy over all free particles. Compton heating drives
TK → Tγ when uγ and x̄i are large; thus at sufficiently high redshifts the gas
can cool no faster than the CMB, TK ∝ (1 + z).

Eventually, however, the gas does thermally decouple from the CMB. The
decoupling redshift can be computed precisely from the publicly available
RECFAST code [160,161], but a simple estimate provides the main result.
The recombination rate is ṅe = −αB x̄2i n2b , where αB ∝ TK−0.7 is the case-B
recombination coefficient (see §3.4.1 below). The fractional change in x̄i per
Hubble time is therefore
                       1    dne                      Ωb h2
                                ≈ 100x̄i (1 + z)0.8 √       ,                (64)
                     H(z)ne dt                        Ω0 h2


where we have assumed that TK ∝ (1 + z) (i.e., coupling to the CMB is still
strong). Freeze-out occurs when this is of order unity; at later times x̄i remains
roughly constant because the recombination time then exceeds the expansion
timescale. Numerical calculations with RECFAST yield x̄i = 3.1 × 10−4 at
z = 200 (which is past freeze-out). Inserting this into equation (63), we find

                    1    dTK   10−7
                             ∼     2
                                     (Tγ /TK − 1) (1 + z)5/2 .               (65)
                  H(z)TK dt    Ωb h


Thus thermal decoupling occurs when

                         1 + zdec ≈ 150 (Ωbh2 /0.023)2/5 .                   (66)


Figure 6a shows a more detailed calculation (from RECFAST). The dashed
curve shows Tγ and the dotted curve TK . We see that Compton heating begins
to become inefficient at z ∼ 300 and is negligible by z ∼ 150. Past this point,
TK ∝ (1 + z)2 , as expected for an adiabatically expanding non-relativistic gas.

We must next determine the spin temperature. Obviously xα = 0 during this
epoch (barring any exotic processes [162]). But at sufficiently high redshifts,
the Universe was dense enough for collisions with neutral atoms to be efficient
in the mean density IGM. The effectiveness of collisional coupling can be


                                        46
Fig. 6. (a): IGM temperature evolution if only adiabatic cooling and Compton
heating are involved. The spin temperature TS includes only collisional coupling.
(b): Differential brightness temperature against the CMB for TS shown in panel a.


computed exactly for any given temperature history from the rate coefficients
presented in §2.2. A convenient estimate of their importance is the critical
overdensity, δcoll , at which xc = 1:

                               "             #                        2
                                κ10 (88 K)         0.023          70
                                                            
               1 + δcoll = 1.06                                             ,   (67)
                                 κ10 (TK )         Ωb h2         1+z



where we have inserted the expected temperature at 1 + z = 70. Thus for
redshifts z . 70, TS → Tγ ; by z ∼ 30 the IGM essentially becomes invisible.
It is worth emphasizing that κ10 is extremely sensitive to TK in this regime
(see Fig. 2). If the universe is somehow heated above the fiducial value, the
threshold density can remain modest: δcoll ≈ 1 at z = 40 if TK = 300 K. The
solid line in Figure 6a shows the spin temperature TS during the dark ages,
and Figure 6b shows the corresponding brightness temperature. The signal
peaks (in absorption) at z ∼ 80, where TK is small but collisional coupling
still efficient. Because of the simple physics involved in Figure 6, the 21 cm
line offers a sensitive probe of the dark ages [2], at least in principle.




                                      47
3.2 The Thermal History of the IGM


Figure 6b also shows that the z . 30 Universe would remain invisible with-
out luminous sources. Our next task is to consider their effects on the 21
cm background. We will begin by examining several processes that affect the
temperature evolution.


3.2.1 X-ray Heating

Because they have relatively long mean free paths, X-rays from galaxies and
quasars are likely to be the most important heating agent for the low-density
                                              1/3
IGM. In particular, photons with E > 1.5x̄HI [(1 + z)/10]1/2 keV have mean
free paths exceeding the Hubble length [163]. Given our enormous uncertain-
ties about the nature of high-redshift objects it is of course impossible to
describe the high-redshift X-ray background with any confidence (see §7.2 for
a discussion of current constraints). Our strategy (here and in the remainder
of this chapter) must therefore be to construct simple, but plausible, models to
examine the range of possibilities. The most conservative assumption is that
the local correlation between the star formation rate (SFR) and the X-ray
luminosity (from 0.2–10 keV) can be extrapolated to high redshift [164,?,?,?]
                                                    !
                                 40        SFR
                  LX = 3.4 × 10 fX                      erg s−1 ,           (68)
                                        1 M⊙ yr−1


where fX is an unknown renormalization factor at high redshift. Note that the
numerical factor depends on the photon energy range assumed to contribute to
IGM heating; soft photons probably carry most of the energy, but they do not
penetrate far into the IGM (and hence induce reasonably strong fluctuations
[168,?]).

We can only speculate as to the accuracy of this correlation at higher red-
shifts. Certainly the scaling is appropriate so long as stars dominate, but fX
will likely evolve with redshift. The X-ray emission has two major sources.
The first is inverse-Compton scattering off of relativistic electrons accelerated
in supernovae. In the nearby Universe, only powerful starbursts have strong
enough radiation fields for this to be significant; however, at high-redshifts it
probably plays an increasingly important role because uγ ∝ (1 + z)4 [163]. As-
suming that ∼ 5% of the supernova energy is released in this form [169] yields
fX ∼ 0.5 if ∼ 1051 ergs are released in supernovae per 100 M⊙ in star forma-
tion. The second class of sources, which dominate in locally observed galaxies,
are high-mass X-ray binaries, in which material from a massive main sequence
star accretes onto a compact neighbor. Such systems are born as soon as the
first massive stars die, only a few million years after star formation commences.


                                      48
So they certainly ought to exist in high-redshift galaxies [167], although their
abundance depends on the metallicity and stellar initial mass function, and it
could be especially large if very massive Population III stars 13 dominate.

X-rays heat the IGM gas by first photoionizing a hydrogen or helium atom.
The hot “primary” electron then distributes its energy through three main
channels: (1) collisional ionizations, producing more secondary electrons, (2)
collisional excitations of HeI (which produce photons capable of ionizing HI)
and HI (which produces a Lyα background), and (3) Coulomb collisions with
free electrons. The relative cross sections of these processes determine what
fraction of the X-ray energy goes to heating (fX,h ), ionization (fX,ion ), and
excitation (fX,coll ); clearly it depends on both x̄i and the input photon energy.
Monte Carlo simulations can be used to estimate these fractions, and an ac-
curate fitting function exists in the high-energy limit [170]. However, a crude
approximation often suffices [171]:


              fX,h ∼ (1 + 2x̄i )/3
    fX,ion ∼ fX,coll ∼ (1 − x̄i )/3.                                          (69)

In highly ionized gas, collisions with free electrons dominate and fX,h → 1; in
the opposite limit, the energy is split roughly equally between these processes.

X-rays directly heat a small fraction of electrons, which must then transfer
energy to the other particles [98]. The primary photoelectrons, with T ∼
106 K, rapidly cool to energies just below the Lyα threshold, . 10 eV, by
collisionally ionizing and exciting hydrogen atoms before equilibrating with
the other electrons. After that, the electrons and neutrals equilibrate through
elastic scattering on a timescale teq ∼ 5[10/(1 + z)]3 Myr. Because teq ≪
H(z)−1 , the assumption of a single temperature fluid is an excellent one.

Finally, to relate the X-ray emissivity to the global SFR we will assume (again
for simplicity) that the SFR is proportional to the rate at which gas collapses
onto virialized halos, dfcoll /dt (see eq. 7). In that case, we can write
                                                                  !
             2    ǫX                     f⋆ fX,h dfcoll /dz 1 + z
                        = 103 K fX                                ,           (70)
             3 kB nH(z)                  0.1 0.2   0.01       10


where f⋆ is the star formation efficiency. It is immediately obvious that X-ray
heating is quite rapid; we will examine this in more detail in §3.5.

Of course, even if equation (68) is accurate, there may be other contributions
to the X-ray background. Quasars are one obvious example, although their
13 Henceforth we will abbreviate “Population III” with “Pop III,” and similarly for

Pop II.


                                       49
relevance is far from clear. The known population of bright quasars, extrap-
olated to higher redshifts, causes negligible heating [172]. But these bright
quasars may be only the tip of the iceberg: “miniquasars,” which are rapidly
accreting intermediate-mass black holes that may form from the remnants of
Pop III stars, can strongly affect the thermal history [163,?,?,?]. For exam-
ple, if the “Magorrian relation” between black hole and stellar mass [175] (see
also [176,?]) holds at high redshifts, the equivalent normalization factor would
be fX ∼ 10. We review existing limits on the X-ray background in §7.2.


3.2.2 Lyα Heating

In addition to setting the spin temperature, resonant scattering of Lyα photons
can also heat the gas through atomic recoil. The typical energy exchange per
scattering is small (see eq. 44), but the number of scatterings is large. If the
net heating rate per atom were ≈ Pα × (hνα )2 /mp c2 , the gas temperature
would exceed Tγ soon after Wouthuysen-Field coupling becomes efficient [98].

However, the details of radiative transfer radically change these expectations.
In a static medium, the energy exchange must vanish in equilibrium even
though scattering continues at (nearly) the same rate. Scattering induces an
asymmetric absorption feature near να (Fig. 4) whose shape depends on the
combined effects of atomic recoils and the scattering diffusivity (see the first
paragraph of §2.3.3). In equilibrium, the latter exactly counterbalances the
former. Without scattering, the absorption feature would redshift away; thus
the equilibrium energy exchange rate is simply that required to maintain the
feature in place [135]. For photons redshifting into resonance, the absorption
trough has total energy ∆uα = (4π/c) (J∞ − Jν )hνdν, where J∞ is the input
                                       R

spectrum (thus the integration extends over the dip in Fig. 4). The radiation
background loses ǫα = H∆uα per unit time through redshifting; this energy
goes into heating the gas. We therefore have

                    2       ǫα        8π hνα J∞ ∆νD
                                    =               Ic                     (71)
                    3 kB TK nH H(z)    3 kB TK cnH


where (using ν ≈ να throughout the region of interest)

                                      Z∞
                               Ic =        dxδJ (x).                       (72)
                                      −∞



Analogous expressions exist for photons injected at line center, except that
here the corresponding integral Ii measures the difference between the actual
spectra shown in Figure 4 and a spectrum with a step function at line center.


                                       50
For an arbitrary line profile these integrals must be performed numerically
(see [135], although that does not include spin exchange [133,?] or the detailed
balance correction [134], so it is only accurate to a few percent). However,
approximating the line profile with the Lorentzian wings of natural broadening
turns out to be an excellent one [147,?] and allows an analytic expression (in
terms of Airy functions) for Ic and a power series expansion for Ii [140]. The
first few terms are

                         5/3         !1/3 "
                                                           31/3 β 2   32/3 β 3
                                                                                 #
                    2π           a                 β
                
    Ic ≈ 31/3                                          −            +                (73)
                     3           γ′            Γ2 (2/3) Γ(1/3)Γ(2/3) Γ2 (1/3)
                !1/3
          a
     Ii ≈ ′              (−0.6979 + 2.4138β − 2.7755β 2 + 2.2724β 3)                 (74)
          γ
where a = A21 /(4π∆νD ), A21 is the spontaneous emission coefficient for the
                                                 −2/3
Lyα transition, and β ≡ η ′ (4a/πγ ′ )1/3 ≈ 0.99TK (τGP /106 )1/3 (here the ap-
proximate form ignores spin exchange and the correction for detailed balance).
When β is small and only the first terms contribute (reasonably accurate at
                                                               −5/6
TK & 10 K for Ic but not as good for Ii ), we expect Ic ∝ TK (1 + z) and
      −1/6
Ii ∝ TK (1 + z).

Although Ic is always positive (an absorption trough always forms), Ii is neg-
ative at most temperatures (TK & 4 K) [135]. Given enough time, the gas
would therefore approach an equilibrium temperature determined by com-
petition between heating from continuum photons and cooling from injected
photons [178]. The relevant parameter is the fraction of injected photons at
the Lyα resonance; for Pop II and very massive Pop III stars, this is 6% and
12%, respectively [130]. However, both heating and cooling turn out to be
extremely slow and this equilibrium is never reached in practice. We find that
the continuum heating rate is [140]
                                2    ǫα      0.80 xα            10
                                                                 
                                            ≈ 4/3                  ,                 (75)
                                3 HnH kB TK  TK Sα             1+z


which is usually negligibly small compared to X-ray heating. The reason is that
the scattering diffusivity acts to cancel the effects of recoil. From Figure 4, it
is obvious that the background spectrum is weaker on the blue side of the
line than on the red. Scattering tends to return the photon toward line center,
with the extra energy deposited in or extracted from the gas. Because more
scattering occurs on the red side, this tends to transfer energy from the gas
back to the photons, canceling the recoil exchange. We refer the interested
reader to [134,?] for a more formal explanation.

Of course, so far we have assumed steady-state (∂Jν /∂t = 0); obviously the
heating rate will be much faster before equilibrium is established. But the total


                                                   51
energy transferred to the gas during this period is simply ∆uα , the energy lost
in producing the absorption feature of Figure 4. Thus the total energy transfer
is essentially the same as in our equation (75): this is because, although the
heating rate itself is large, only a few scattering times are required to estab-
lish a steady-state [136]. This may seem a bit puzzling, because the Hubble
expansion used in deriving equation (71) should not affect the approach to
equilibrium. But note that the redshift continually brings entirely new pho-
tons into the line. Equilibrium must be re-established for these photons, so
the two calculations are actually identical.

As described in §2.4, higher Lyman-series photons also scatter resonantly.
They rapidly cascade to lower levels, so the radiation field around these lines
never assumes a distribution like Lyα. Thus the energy exchange is more
subtle. Because the medium is so optically thick at these resonances, the few
scatterings per photon that do occur take place at frequencies well blueward
of resonance. In that case the photon is generally re-emitted closer to line
center; the remaining energy – much larger than that provided through recoil
– is deposited in the gas. This can increase the heating efficiency above what
recoil would predict, but it is still much smaller than the Lyα heating [140].

The energy exchange through this frequency drift is maximal when scattering
occurs near the line center, which requires the line to have a relatively small
optical depth. 14 As a result, scattering across the Lyβ deuterium resonance
(which has τGP & 2, and which also destroys photons and so produces an asym-
metric background) is the most important of all the upper level transitions
(including those of hydrogen itself) [178]. However, this energy is deposited in
the rare deuterium atoms and must then be shared with the hydrogen atoms
through collisions, which are relatively inefficient; the resulting heating rate is
usually (though not always) slower than direct Lyα heating.


3.2.3 Shock Heating

The final heating mechanism is purely hydrodynamic: thermal energy injec-
tion through IGM shocks. This is an integral part of our modern view of
structure formation. The initially tiny density fluctuations seen in the CMB
grow through gravitational instability. Because these fluctuations are not per-
fectly spherical, different directions grow at different rates [70]. Collapse along
the shortest axis produces sheets (or “Zel’dovich pancakes,” part of the origi-
nal motivation for 21 cm experiments in the 1970s; [51,71]), collapse along the
middle filaments, and along the third virialized halos. At each stage in this
14 In the Doppler core, photons are preferentially absorbed by atoms moving oppo-

site the photon; the isotropic re-emission imparts ∼ h∆νD to the gas. In the high
optical depth case, absorption occurs in the Lorentz wings of the line, where the
direction of the absorbing atom is much less significant.


                                       52
process, some of the gravitational infall energy is transformed into thermal
energy through shocks, creating complex networks bounding and penetrating
the sheets and filaments [179,?]. This paradigm of the “cosmic web” emerges
naturally in cosmological simulations and nicely explains both the large-scale
distribution of galaxies in redshift surveys and the distribution of IGM gas in
the Lyα forest.

Simulations show that such shocks dominate the thermal energy budget of the
IGM at z ∼ 0 [181,?]. Fortunately, their characteristic properties are easy to
estimate. Each cosmic web shock is part of the ongoing (but recent) collapse
of a nonlinear structure. Thus the peculiar velocity of the shocked gas must
be [181]

                               vsh ≈ H(z)Rnl (z),                           (76)


        3
where Rnl  = 3Mnl /(4π ρ̄) and Mnl is the mass scale that is just entering the
nonlinear regime: in other words, its velocity is simply the distance it has col-
lapsed (Rnl ) divided by the age of the universe. The corresponding postshock
temperature is then (assuming strong shocks and a monatomic gas)

                                        3µmp 2
                                Tsh =       v ,                             (77)
                                        16kB sh


where µ is the mean molecular weight in atomic units. This simple argument
reproduces the typical shock temperature Tsh ∼ 107 K at the present day [181]
and also quantifies their importance at higher redshifts.

Of course, a shock will only form if TK < Tsh (which depends on the typical
mass of a collapsing object Mnl ). At the present day, photoheating sets TK ≈
104 K, and infall shocks are quite strong. At moderate redshifts z & 3, the
typical nonlinear object is much smaller while TK (again set by photoheating)
is about the same. Thus Tsh ∼ TK and shock-heating is insignificant [183].

However, we have already seen that before reionization TK can be quite small.
Both analytic models [183] and simulations [184,?,?] predict that shock heat-
ing significantly affects the thermal structure of the IGM at high redshifts.
A simple analytic description of cosmic web shocks will suffice to build intu-
ition [187,?,?]. The model associates these shocks with the “turnaround” of
spherical perturbations, where the flow breaks off from the Hubble expansion
and begins to converge on itself; at this point, perturbations in the flow can
easily induce shocks. Turnaround occurs at a linearized overdensity δsh = 1.06
– just when perturbations become nonlinear. So the model reproduces equa-
tion (76) and hence the characteristic temperature of z = 0 shocks. We will
use it to estimate the mass fraction inside cosmic web shocks in an analogous


                                        53
way to the collapse fraction [101,?]. The fraction of gas that has been shocked
to a temperature T > Tγ is (cf. eq. 7)
                                              "              #
                                             δsh (z)
                         fsh (> Tγ ) = erfc √         ,                      (78)
                                              2σ(Tγ )


where Tγ corresponds to a mass mγ ≈ 4.3 × 105 M⊙ via equations (76) and
(77). This yields fsh ∼ (0.1%, 3%, 25%) at z = (30, 20, 10): like halos, the
cosmic web accretes gas rapidly in this regime. Note that turnaround occurs
at a physical overdensity δta = 5.55, so this gas is overdense and has relatively
efficient collisional coupling. In the calculations shown below, we will therefore
assume for simplicity that it all emits 21 cm radiation relative to the CMB.

This model agrees reasonably well with simulations [174,?], but two caveats
are necessary. First, we have ignored X-ray heating in equation (78), which
will smooth out these shocks. Fortunately, when X-rays are important shocks
do not affect the 21 cm signal anyway, because all the gas is hot. Second, in
the absence of X-ray heating, the IGM sound speed is so low that even tiny
peculiar velocities could potentially source shocks. In a cold IGM, such slow
shocks could form even before turnaround and would therefore be missing
from our model. If so, they could dramatically affect the predictions when
TK ≪ Tγ . There is some indirect evidence for such shocks [184], but they are
difficult to resolve in simulations and have not yet been studied in detail.


3.3 The Spin Temperature


With the thermal evolution in hand, we now turn to the spin temperature.
Recall from equation (67) that collisions are totally inefficient at z . 30 (ex-
cept inside filaments, or if xi is large enough for collisions with electrons to
dominate; see §7.2), so we must rely on the Wouthuysen-Field effect. Of course
(as for the X-ray background), we cannot yet predict the detailed evolution
of Jα , because it depends on the star formation history as well as any other
radiation background (quasars, etc.). But we can make an educated guess by
assuming that it traces the star formation rate, which is again proportional
to the rate at which matter collapses into galaxies. We therefore write the
comoving emissivity at frequency ν as

                                                      dfcoll
                           ǫ(ν, z) = f⋆ n̄cb ǫb (ν)          ,               (79)
                                                       dt

where n̄cb is the comoving number density of baryons and ǫb (ν) is the number of
photons produced in the frequency interval ν ± dν/2 per baryon incorporated


                                         54
into stars. Here we are only interested in photons between Lyα and the Lyman-
limit. Although real spectra are rather complicated, a useful quantity is the
total number Nα of photons per baryon in this interval. For low-metallicity
Pop II stars and very massive Pop III stars, this is Nα = 9690 and Nα = 4800,
respectively. More detailed spectra (and fits) appear in [190,?,?].

Although only Lyα photons efficiently couple to TS , higher Lyman-series pho-
tons contribute by cascading to Lyα (see §2.4). The average background at να
is 15

               nX
                max

    Jα (z) =          Jα(n) (z)
               n=2
                                  zmax
                                    Z (n)
               nX
                max
                                               (1 + z)2 c
           =          frec (n)          dz ′                   ǫ(νn′ , z ′ ),                  (80)
               n=2                 z
                                                  4π   H(z ′ )

where νn′ is the frequency at redshift z ′ that redshifts into the Lyn resonance
at redshift z, zmax (n) is the largest redshift from which a photon can redshift
into the Lyn resonance, and frec (n) is the fraction of Lyn photons that actually
cascade through Lyα and induce strong coupling (see §2.4). The sum must be
truncated at some large nmax , but its precise value does not matter because
the high-n lines are so closely spaced. Once we know Jα , we can compute the
coupling coefficient xα from equation (40).

Of course, processes other than star formation can also create a Lyα back-
ground. These include UV photons from quasars, recombinations in a partially
ionized medium, and collisional excitation from X-rays [98]. In the latter, a
fraction fX,coll ∼ 1/3 of the energy is typically lost to excitations (see eq. 69);
the fraction of this that eventually winds up in Lyα photons is ≈ 0.8 [129].
The coupling coefficient induced by these line photons is [127,?]
                                                                        !            3
                                                fX,coll f⋆ dfcoll /dz           1+z
               xαX−ray ∼ 0.05 Sα fX                                                        .   (81)
                                                 1/3 0.1 0.01                    10


Here we have substituted the same emissivity as in equation (70); thus heating
is accompanied by a small, though far from negligible, Lyα background. This
process is particularly important near star-forming galaxies, where most soft
X-rays are absorbed [127,?,?]. Recombinations in a partially ionized medium
can also produce a weak background [98].
15 Note that we neglect absorption by the higher Lyman series resonances of deu-

terium here, which reduce the spectrum just blueward of the hydrogen resonances
[139]. Some of the scattered photons are re-injected at the deuterium Lyα line and
then redshift into hydrogen Lyα.


                                                   55
3.4 The Ionization History


The next step is to compute the evolution of the ionization fraction x̄i . This,
of course, has been the subject of extensive study in the past three decades
(see, e.g., [46–48,?] for recent reviews). As such, we will not attempt to explore
all of its aspects but only to describe its principal components. In §8 we will
consider the spatial fluctuations in the ionization fraction that will be the
main focus of most 21 cm measurements.

The usual assumption (and the one we will make here) is that ionizing photons
are produced inside of galaxies, so that their production rate can be associated
with the star formation rate in a similar way to the Lyα radiation background
and our X-ray heating model (see eqs. 70 and 79). In the most basic approxi-
mation, we simply assign a fixed average ionizing efficiency across all galaxies,
so that

                                x̄i = ζfcoll /(1 + n̄rec ),                   (82)


where n̄rec is the mean number of recombinations per ionized hydrogen atom
and the ionizing efficiency is

                                  ζ = AHe f⋆ fesc Nion .                      (83)


In this expression, fesc is the fraction of ionizing photons that escape their host
galaxy into the IGM, Nion is the mean number of ionizing photons produced
per stellar baryon, and AHe = 4/(4−3Yp ) = 1.22, where Yp is the mass fraction
of helium, is a correction factor to convert the number of ionizing photons per
baryon in stars to the fraction of ionized hydrogen. 16 We give some fiducial
estimates for these parameters in §3.4.2.

A more sophisticated treatment includes both ionizing sources and recombi-
nations, so

                      dx̄i        dfcoll
                           = ζ(z)        − αC(z, x̄i )x̄i (z)ne (z),          (84)
                      dt           dt


where α is the recombination coefficient, C ≡ hn2e i / hne i2 is the clumping
factor, and ne is the average electron density in ionized regions. The precise
definition of C is subtle but important: the electron density is averaged (by
volume) over all regions penetrated by ionizing photons (thus excluding gas
16 Here we have assumed that helium is singly ionized along with hydrogen, because

their ionization potentials are relatively close.


                                           56
outside of ionized bubbles and gas inside self-shielded clumps). Equation (84)
allows both the ionizing efficiency ζ and the clumping factor C to depend
on redshift – and hence implicitly on x̄i or any other parameter of galaxy
formation.


3.4.1 Recombinations and the Clumping Factor

Before considering ζ, we first discuss some subtleties of the sink term, which
is more complicated than it looks. First of all, the recombination coefficient
is uncertain by a factor of a few through both the gas temperature and an
environmental factor that determines whether case-A or case-B is more appro-
priate. 17 On the one hand, consider the case in which ionizations (and hence
recombinations) are distributed uniformly throughout the IGM (the usual as-
sumption in the literature e.g., [193,194]). Then case-B would be appropriate,
with αB ≈ 2.6 × 10−13 (TK /104 K)−0.7 cm3 s−1 [195]. On the other hand, in
the highly-ionized low-redshift universe, most recombinations actually take
place in dense, partially neutral gas (so-called Lyman-limit systems) because
high-energy photons can penetrate inside these high-column density systems.
However, the ionizing photons produced after recombinations to the ground
state usually lie near the Lyman-limit (where the mean free path is small) so
are consumed inside the systems. Thus these photons would not help ionize
the IGM, and case-A (with αA ≈ 4.2 × 10−13 [TK /104 K]−0.7 cm3 s−1 [195])
would be more appropriate [196]. Which of these regimes is more relevant de-
pends on the details of small-scale clumping and radiative transfer and is not
yet a solved problem. Additional uncertainty comes from the gas temperature,
which depends on the ionizing spectrum, another large unknown [197].

Even more problematic is the clumping factor C(z). In principle, of course,
this can be computed through numerical simulations. But that requires over-
coming two difficult problems: (1) tracing the gas distribution with sufficient
precision to resolve density fluctuations on the smallest scales and (2) cor-
rectly tracing the topology of ionized and neutral gas – because the average
must be performed only over the ionized gas. The first problem is obvious:
even leaving aside the interstellar medium (ISM) of each galaxy (which is ac-
counted for by fesc in eq. 83) the Jeans mass in the cold IGM is . 105 M⊙ .
This allows the formation of a well-defined cosmic web, as well as “minihalos,”
dense gas clouds that virialize but cannot cool or form stars. But simulations
of reionization must span ∼ 100 Mpc boxes in order to adequately sample the
large HII regions, requiring an enormous dynamic range. Thus, even in sim-

17 Here “case-A” allows recombinations directly to the ground state while “case-B”

does not; in the latter, ionizing photons produced from recombinations into the
ground state are assumed to be immediately absorbed again, so that they do not
affect the net ionization rate.


                                       57
ulations, clumping is usually accounted for through a “subgrid” model built
from semi-analytic techniques or smaller simulations [198,?,?,?]. Minihalos
are particularly problematic. Fortunately, although early estimates predicted
that they could increase the clumping factor by more than an order of magni-
tude [201], more recent efforts show that they have a relatively modest effect,
consuming only a few photons per baryon [202,?].

The second problem is perhaps more subtle: how do the sources and absorbers
relate to each other, and how does ionization affect the small-scale clumping?
For example, if low-density gas is ionized first, C < 1 throughout most of reion-
ization [10], because all the dense gas would remain locked up in self-shielded
systems. This is an attractive picture because (on small scales) it is certainly
easier to ionize voids than filaments or dense blobs. On the other hand, on
large scales the ionizing sources actually lie inside overdense regions (sheets
and filaments), where the recombination rate is relatively high. Moreover, as
the gas is ionized, the thermal pressure will increase and the clumpiness will
decrease. While widely appreciated in the context of minihalos [201,?,?,?], the
implications for the clumping of the more diffuse IGM have not been studied.

All of these issues have been considered in the literature, but unfortunately
there is no single unifying model that accounts for realistic small-scale struc-
ture along with the topology of reionization and feedback. The two most
common approaches include different physics. The first is to compute the
clumping factor from high-resolution simulations, ignoring reionization and
feedback. One must still be careful to exclude gas bound to ionizing sources
(which are described by fesc rather than C; see [200]), or else the estimated
clumping is much too large (this problem is why the widely-quoted C ∼ 30
value of [204] is much larger than more recent estimates). One recent estimate,
from a 3.5h−1 Mpc N-body simulation resolving the Jeans mass in the IGM,
is well-fit by [205]

                  C(z) = 27.466 exp(−0.114z + 0.001328z 2 ).                (85)


The other approach follows [10] and assumes that the lowest-density gas is ion-
ized first; in this case recombinations are much less significant. (This model
can be modified to include at least some aspects of source clustering, which
increases the clumpiness by a factor of a few [22].) The truth lies somewhere
between these extremes for two reasons: (1) the numerical estimate neglects
photoheating during reionization, while the other model of [10] is based exclu-
sively on post-reionization simulations with a warm IGM, and (2) the numeri-
cal estimate averages over all gas and does not allow any to sit in self-shielded
neutral systems, while assuming voids to be ionized first represents a partic-
ularly optimistic case for identifying such systems.



                                      58
3.4.2 The Ionizing Efficiency

We now move on to the source term in equation (84). This has two parts:
dfcoll /dz and the ionizing efficiency ζ. The collapse fraction for a given cosmol-
ogy depends only on mmin , the mass threshold for galaxy formation. The most
common choice for mmin corresponds to a virial temperature Tvir = 104 K,
the threshold at which hydrogen line cooling becomes efficient for primordial
gas (see, e.g., [46]). Above this mass, cooling and fragmentation into stars is
relatively straightforward. Other choices are, however, physically plausible in
certain regimes. For example, H2 cooling could allow star formation in much
smaller halos, although it is relatively weak (limiting the expected star for-
mation efficiency) and it is subject to a variety of feedback mechanisms (see,
e.g., [206,?,?] and references therein).

We can use local measurements of f⋆ , fesc , and Nion to guide our choices,
though the extrapolation to high redshifts is always difficult. Efficiencies f⋆ ∼
10% are reasonable for the local Universe, but so little gas has collapsed by
z = 6 that this does not directly constrain the high-redshift value. Appropriate
values for Pop III stars are even more uncertain. To the extent that each
halo can form only a single very massive ( & 100 M⊙ ) star that enriches the
entire halo, f⋆ ∼ (Ωm /Ωb )M⋆ /Mh . 10−3, though larger values are often taken
in the literature (implicitly assuming either inefficient metal dispersal or an
extremely rapid starburst).

The UV escape fraction is small in nearby star-forming galaxies (including
the Milky Way), with many upper limits fesc < 6% [208–210,?,?] and only a
few positive detections (at comparable levels). An initial detection of ionizing
flux from a stacked sample of blue (and hence atypical) Lyman-break galaxies
at z ∼ 3 implied fesc ≈ 10% [213], but more recent observations either place
upper limits fesc . 5–10% [214–217] or claim detections at much lower levels,
fesc ≈ 2% [218]. Note as well that fesc shows large variance between galaxies.
Theoretically the problem is equally difficult, because it depends on the spatial
distribution of hot stars and absorbing gas in the ISM. Some studies suggest
that the escape fraction in high-redshift galaxies could be much higher than
the detected values (generally because higher specific star formation rates al-
low supernovae to blow transparent windows through the ISM) [219–221], but
others predict that it will remain small [222]. Two special cases are worth not-
ing. First, quasars may have large escape fractions because they concentrate
all of their photons in one spatial location [222]. Second, the shock bounding
the HII regions of very massive Pop III stars may evacuate all the gas from
their host halos if Tvir < 104 K. In that case, fesc ∼ 1 [223].

Nion depends only on the stellar initial mass function and metallicity. Conve-
nient approximations are Nion ≈ 4000 for Z = 0.05 Z⊙ Pop II stars with a
Scalo IMF [224,?,225] and Nion ≈ 40, 000 for very massive Pop III stars [191].


                                       59
Note that the latter assumes that all Pop III stars are massive; metal-free
stars with a normal Salpeter IMF are only ∼ 1.6 times more efficient than
their Pop II counterparts [226]. More detailed spectra for Pop II stars can be
found in [190,227] and for Pop III stars in [191,228,226].


3.4.3 Feedback During Reionization

The wide range of allowed values for mmin , f⋆ , fesc , and Nion suggests that
these quantities might evolve in a non-trivial way, either over time or across
the galaxy population. Such feedback effects are now considered crucial to
reionization, so here we will briefly outline their effects on its global history.
In particular, we will focus on how feedback prolongs reionization. We refer
the interested reader to [48] for a more comprehensive discussion.

Feedback mechanisms can be conveniently divided into “internal” and “exter-
nal” flavors. The former includes processes that affect later generations of ob-
jects within the same galaxy. One straightforward example is self-enrichment:
once Pop III stars pollute their host halo with metals, subsequent star forma-
tion will be Pop II. Supernova winds also have other internal feedback effects:
most importantly, they can eject a large fraction of the interstellar gas into
the IGM, shutting off star formation (if only temporarily). These winds are
well-known in the local universe [229] and at moderate redshifts [230], and
they may be even more important at high redshifts. This is easy to see if we
compare the energy output in supernovae per baryon, WSN = f⋆ ESN νSN , to
the binding energy per baryon of a virialized halo, Eb ∼ Gmh /(λs rvir ):
                                                     !            !−2/3
          WSN             f⋆      νSN    λs 10             mh
              ∼ 4 E51                 −1                                  .   (86)
          Eb              0.1 0.01 M⊙ 0.05 1 + z         108 M⊙


Here rvir is the virial radius, ESN = 1051 E51 erg is the energy per supernova,
νSN is the specific frequency of supernovae (i.e., the number of supernovae per
unit mass of star formation), and we have assumed that the baryons lie at a
typical distance λs rvir from the halo center (our fiducial value is appropriate
for disks in normal galaxies [231]). Thus the supernova energy reservoir is
probably comparable to the binding energy of the baryons in high-redshift
dwarf galaxies, suggesting that they could have a significant dynamical effect.
                        −2/3
Because WSN /Eb ∝ mh , the feedback efficiency is a function of halo mass,
and f⋆ , fesc , or any of our other parameters may also be functions of halo
                                                                        2/3
mass. Indeed, low-mass galaxies in the SDSS appear to have f⋆ ∝ mh [232]
that may be a result of supernova feedback [233].

Fortunately, internal feedback mechanisms are relatively easy to incorporate
into reionization models. For the most part, we can mimic them by setting
ζ = ζ(mh ). Because these processes are local, on a global level they probably


                                       60
do not evolve rapidly with cosmic time and so will not introduce features
into x̄i (z). For instance, self-enrichment causes each individual galaxy’s star
formation mode to evolve on a short timescale, but the continuous formation
of galaxies throughout the Universe prevents any sharp evolution in the global
initial mass function (although of course it can prolong reionization relative
to a constant efficiency scenario [193]).

External feedback is much more difficult to incorporate into analytic models.
This includes all those effects that galaxies can have on their neighbors. We
consider two representative mechanisms here.

Metal enrichment: As described above, supernova winds likely escape their
host galaxies, spreading metals into the IGM and affecting subsequent gen-
erations of galaxies. The effective transition between (very massive) Pop III
and Pop II star formation is sudden, occurring at a critical metallicity Zt ∼
10−3.5 Z⊙ in the gas phase [234,235] or at Zt ∼ 10−5 Z⊙ if dust is included [236].
Because the transition could be accompanied by a large drop in Nion , this may
have had an enormous effect on the reionization history.

The simplest prescription for chemical feedback is to track the mean cosmic
metallicity Z̄ and to switch the mode of star formation once Z̄ > Zt . Be-
cause this imposes a global drop in the ionizing emissivity, it led to several
predictions of “double reionization” in which x̄i (z) actually decreased over
some finite time interval [193,?,?,?,?]. However, this approximation is not a
good one, because metal enrichment (like reionization) is highly inhomoge-
neous and must be modeled physically (rather than with an arbitrary pre-
scription) [240,?]. On the one hand, internal feedback must be included: even
before Z̄ = Zt , ongoing accretion onto existing galaxies produces Pop II stars
(assuming mixing is efficient).

The other aspect is that newly-formed halos only produce Pop III stars if
they collapse from pristine material. As galactic winds expand into the IGM,
more and more halos form out of pre-enriched gas, eventually choking off
the supply of Pop III stars. Wind enrichment has been studied extensively
from a theoretical perspective [242,?,?,?,?], though firm predictions are even
more difficult than for reionization because the physics is so complex. The
crucial point, however, is obvious: winds expand relatively slowly compared to
ionizing photons, broadening the transition from Pop III to Pop II [247,?]. For
the same reason, it is difficult to arrange for complete enrichment to precede
reionization.

The condition for double reionization follows from equation (84) [241]

                                                               1/2
                            ′ dfcoll                     1+z
                                                     
                        ζ              . 0.1 C x̄i                    ,      (87)
                              dz                          10


                                             61
where ζ ′ is the ionizing efficiency of the second generation of sources (in this
case, Pop II stars). Near the end of reionization, ζdfcoll /dz ∼ 1, so only if
C ≫ 1 or ζ/ζ ′ ≫ 1 can recombinations dominate. It is important to note
that, although the mean clumpiness may be large, rapidly recombining re-
gions contain only a small fraction of the total mass. Moreover, after reion-
ization, equation (85) no longer applies because it neglects Jeans smoothing
from photoheating – so C is likely reasonably small in the vast majority of
the IGM. Of course, double reionization is still possible if ζ/ζ ′ is sufficiently
large. However, in practice the slow evolution of the Pop III fraction (thanks
to self-enrichment) smoothes the transition so that, if the ratio is large, reion-
ization takes place over a long enough period that double reionization requires
ζ III /ζ II & 200 [241]; while in principle possible, this certainly pushes parame-
ters in uncomfortable directions.

Photoheating: A second crucial feedback mechanism is photoionization itself,
which heats the gas because the liberated electrons are typically left with ener-
gies & 1 eV. The increased thermal pressure suppresses accretion onto small
halos and hence decreases the rate of star formation. This is usually quantified
by raising the Jeans mass in heated regions to a larger mass. Unfortunately,
the equivalent virial temperature Th is not entirely clear; the canonical value
of Th ∼ 2 × 105 K [248,?,?,?] may be an overestimate for halos collapsing
during or soon after reionization [252].

Photoheating feedback provides a “self-regulation” mechanism for reioniza-
tion, because x̄i itself (or at least the closely related “photoheated fraction”
[241]) controls the transition. Thus photoheating can significantly extend the
reionization epoch (by ∆z ∼ 4 for the canonical Th ) by causing a plateau when
x̄i ∼ 0.5. On the other hand, self-regulation makes it quite difficult for recom-
binations to dominate at any point in this kind of feedback mechanism [241].
Note as well that photoheating can only be important if small halos domi-
nate the photon budget. If ζ increases rapidly with mass, reionization is only
slightly delayed.

Thus the major effect of external feedback (in either manifestation) is to
prolong reionization, but it probably does not introduce sharp features into
the history. Other mechanisms, such as the suppression of molecular hydro-
gen cooling by soft-UV photons, likely have much smaller effects on x̄i (z)
[253,?,?,?,?], though they may affect star formation in the first galaxies. In-
ternal feedback affects the distribution of ionizing efficiencies within galaxies
but also does not introduce strong features into the global ionization history.
The 21 cm background and its fluctuations will likely be one of our premier
tools for understanding the role these various processes play.




                                       62
3.4.4 Exotic Reionization Scenarios

To this point, we have implicitly assumed that stars (of one form or another)
reionized the universe. While that is clearly the most natural explanation,
other sources – such as quasars – may also have contributed. Because quasars
form in collapsed halos, they would probably produce qualitatively similar
x̄i (z) to star formation, although many of the ionizations would be due to
X-rays (which would affect the topology of reionization; see §7.2). However,
extrapolating the known population of quasars to higher redshifts suggests
that they are unimportant [193,6], and the z = 0 X-ray background prevents
them from dominating the reionization era [258,259] (see §7.2). On the other
hand, there are currently no direct observational constraints on faint, high-
redshift AGN, so they may still be important.

An even more exotic possibility is reionization from some sort of decaying
or annihilating particle [171,260–262,?,?]. In that case, the ionization history
would be entirely uncorrelated with structure formation, and there is no a
priori reason to expect sharp features. However, the CMB does constrain
such models, because long-lifetime decay leads to a protracted ionization his-
tory that affects the CMB temperature and polarization anisotropies [171,?].
Several currently fashionable dark matter models do not produce significant
ionization [264], though they can affect the 21 cm history [265,?].


3.5 The Global History


We are now in a position to compute the evolution of δT ¯ b in some representa-
tive structure formation models. These histories illustrate the basic features
of the observable signal and set the stage for the next several sections. We
will necessarily ignore many of the subtleties in constructing detailed reion-
ization histories; we refer the interested reader to the existing literature for
more examples [193,?,?,?,?,?,?,?,?,?,?,?].


3.5.1 Some Critical Points in the 21 cm Line History

There are five “critical points” in the 21 cm history that divide the signal
into several distinct epochs. The first is zdec , when Compton heating becomes
inefficient and TK < Tγ for the first time (eq. 66). This marks the earliest
epoch for which 21 cm observations are possible even in principle. The second
transition is when the density falls below δcoll (see eq. 67), at which point
TS → Tγ and the IGM signal vanishes. These two transitions are well-specified
by atomic physics processes, at least in the absence of any exotic dark sector
processes. They define the beginning and end of “dark ages” for the purposes
of the 21 cm line.


                                      63
The remaining transition points are determined by luminous sources, so their
timing is much more uncertain. These are the redshift zh at which the IGM
is heated above Tγ , the redshift zc at which xα = 1 so that the Wouthuysen-
Field mechanism couples TS and TK , and the redshift of reionization zr . Their
relative timing sets the observability of the 21 cm signal, so it is useful to
consider them in some simple parameterized models [270]. We first ask whether
Lyα coupling precedes the other two transitions. The net X-ray heat input ∆Tc
at zc is
                                                           !         3
            ∆Tc              fX,h fcoll 9690 1 0.023             20
                ∼ 0.08fX                                                   ,   (88)
            Tγ               0.2 ∆fcoll Nα Sα Ωb h2             1+z


where ∆fcoll ∼ fcoll is the effective collapse fraction appearing in the integrals
of equation (80). Note that ∆Tc is independent of f⋆ because both the coupling
and heating rates are proportional to the star formation rate. Interestingly, for
our fiducial (Pop II) parameters zc precedes zh (see also the simple models of
[135,133,?]). This could create a significant absorption epoch whose properties
offer a meaningful probe of the first sources. For example, very massive Pop III
stars have a smaller Nα , and an early miniquasar population could completely
eliminate the absorption epoch.

A similar estimate of the ionization fraction x̄i,c at zc yields
                                                           !         2
                           fesc Nion fcoll 1 0.023               20
            x̄i,c ∼ 0.05                                                   .   (89)
                         1 + n̄rec Nα ∆fcoll Sα Ωb h2           1+z


For Pop II stars, Nion /Nα ≈ 0.4; thus even in the worst case of fesc = 1 and
n̄rec = 0 coupling would become efficient during the initial stages of reion-
ization. However, very massive Pop III stars have much harder spectra, with
Nion /Nα ≈ 7. In principle, it is therefore possible for Pop III stars to reionize
the universe before zc , although that would require extremely unusual param-
eters (cf. [271]). Such histories cannot be ruled out at present, but we regard
them as exceedingly unlikely. Histories with x̄i,c ≪ 1 are much more plausible,
at least given our theoretical prejudices about high-redshift sources.

Finally, we ask whether the IGM will appear in absorption or emission during
reionization. Combining equations (70) and (82), we have
                                                       !
               ∆T     x̄i            fX,h 4800 10
                             
                  ∼               fX                       (1 + n̄rec )        (90)
               Tγ   0.025            fesc Nion 1 + z


for the heat input ∆T as a function of x̄i . Thus, provided fX & 1, the IGM
will be much warmer than the CMB during the bulk of reionization. This
is convenient in that δTb becomes independent of TS when TS ≫ Tγ , so it is


                                       64
Fig. 7. Global IGM histories for Pop II stars. The solid curves take our fiducial
parameters without feedback. The dot-dashed curve takes fX = 0.2. The short- and
long-dashed curves include strong photoheating feedback. (a): Thermal properties.
(b): Ionized fraction. (c): Differential brightness temperature against the CMB. In
this panel, the two dotted lines show δTb without including shock heating. From
[270].
easier to isolate the effects of the ionization field. Significant absorption during
reionization becomes more plausible for very massive Pop III stars, because
they have much larger ionizing efficiencies (although their remnants may also
induce correspondingly large X-ray heating).


3.5.2 Some Example Histories

We will now use some representative models chosen from [270] to illustrate
these qualitative features in a more concrete fashion (see also [135,?,?]). We
begin with a fiducial set of Pop II parameters. We ignore feedback (of all kinds)
and take mmin to correspond to Tvir = 104 K, f⋆ = 0.1, fesc = 0.1, fX = 1,
Nion = 4000, and Nα = 9690. (Thus ζ = 40 for this model.) Figure 7a shows
the resulting temperature history. The dotted curve is Tγ , the thin solid curve
is TK , and the thick solid curve is TS . As expected from equation (88), in this
case we do indeed find that zc > zh ; specifically, zc ≈ 18 and zh ≈ 14. Clearly
Lyα coupling is extremely efficient for normal stars.

The solid curve in Figure 7b shows the corresponding ionization history, with
the clumping factor computed following [10] (which assumes that the lowest
density regions are ionized first). It increases smoothly and rapidly over a
redshift interval of ∆z ∼ 5, ending at zr ∼ 7. That is of course purely a
function of our choice for ζ, but other values do not strongly affect the width.

Figure 7c shows the corresponding 21 cm brightness temperature decrement


                                        65
Fig. 8. Global IGM histories for very massive Pop III stars. Panels are the same as
in Fig. 7. The solid curve takes our fiducial Pop III parameters. The long-dashed
lines take fesc = 1, the short-dashed lines take fX = 5, and the dot-dashed line
(shown only in c) assumes fesc = 1 and fX = 5. From [270].

δTb relative to the CMB. Here we have also labeled the corresponding (ob-
served) frequency ν for convenience. The signal clearly has interesting struc-
ture. At the highest frequencies, reionization causes a steady decline in the
signal, with |dδT¯ b /dν| ∼ 1 mK MHz−1 . In this model, recombinations are rel-
atively inefficient; the only way to significantly increase the gradient during
reionization would be with some positive feedback mechanism.

However, as illustrated by the dashed curves, it is relatively easy to slow
reionization. These curves use two models for photoheating feedback [241]
in which the minimum virial temperature for galaxy formation increases to
Th = 2 × 105 K in photoheated regions, near the upper limit of theoretical
expectations [252]. It slows the evolution when x̄i & 0.5 (though it remains
monotonic), decreasing |dδT  ¯ b /dν| by about a factor of two. The ionization
history can be slowed by an even larger factor by also decreasing ζ in heated
regions, and in extreme circumstances this could even cause x̄i to decrease
slightly (see eq. 87). Unfortunately, such a “recombination epoch” would have
spectral gradients no larger than reionization itself (though with opposite sign,
of course).

Figure 7c contains an even more striking feature at higher redshifts. At z ∼ 30,
the IGM is nearly invisible even though TK ≪ Tγ (see Fig. 6). However, as
the first galaxies form, the Wouthuysen-Field effect drives TS → TK . Because
zc > zh , this produces a relatively strong absorption signal (δTb ≈ −80 mK)
over the range z ∼ 21–14 (or ν ∼ 70–95 MHz). However, the IGM still heats
up well before reionization begins in earnest, making δT¯ b nearly independent
of TS throughout reionization.


                                       66
Figure 8 shows similar histories for very massive Pop III stars. The solid
curves take mmin to correspond to Tvir = 104 K, f⋆ = 0.01, fesc = 0.1, fX = 1,
Nion = 30, 000, and Nα = 4800, yielding ζ = 30. Although the thermal history
is qualitatively similar to the Pop II case, it has zc ∼ 13 and zh ∼ 11. Thus the
absorption epoch is somewhat narrower, and it is also weaker because Pop III
stars produce relatively few Lyα photons. As a result, TS does not approach
TK until the IGM is already hot. Thus, if very massive Pop III stars dominate,
the absorption epoch will be considerably weaker, with gradients about half as
large as the Pop II case. Moreover, zh is relatively close to zr , so TS does not
saturate until after reionization begins. It may therefore be somewhat difficult
to separate TS and xi at the beginning of reionization.

Obviously, measuring this background could offer strong constraints on high-
redshift star formation. The other curves in Figures 7–8 illustrate the range of
features we expect. However, they all share one crucial property: zc occurs long
before reionization, so we can safely expect some signal from the high-redshift
IGM.



3.6 Observational Prospects


One obvious application of the 21 cm signal is to measure this “all-sky” spec-
trum δT¯ b (z) [98,272,273,184]. The wide range of histories shown in Figures 7–8
illustrate how powerful such observations would be (see also [168]). The models
we have considered imply gradients |dδT   ¯ b /dν| ∼ 1 mK MHz−1 during reion-
ization and possibly somewhat larger values during a preceding absorption
epoch.

Because this is an all-sky signal, single-dish measurements (even with a modest-
sized telescope) can easily reach the required mK sensitivity. However, the
much stronger synchrotron foregrounds (see §9 for a detailed discussion) nev-
ertheless make such observations extremely difficult: they have Tsky & 200-
2000 K over the relevant frequencies. The fundamental strategy for extracting
the cosmological signal relies on the expected spectral smoothness of the fore-
grounds (which primarily have power law synchrotron spectra), in contrast to
the non-trivial structure of the 21 cm background. Nevertheless, these fore-
grounds have |dTsky /dν| & 3 K MHz−1 , so extracting the high-redshift com-
ponent will be a challenge that requires extremely accurate calibration over
a wide frequency range [272,?] and, most likely, sharp localized features in
 ¯ b (z) that can be distinguished from smoother foreground features.
δT

The limiting factors in these measurements are likely to be systematics [272].
Foregrounds vary across the sky, coupling to the frequency-dependent side-
lobes (though the variation should be smooth and hence removable [274]).


                                      67
One strategy to avoid confusion with features in the foreground is to use mul-
tiple (wide) fields across which foregrounds are uncorrelated. Another prob-
lem may be the recombination lines of hydrogen and other common elements,
which give rise to spectral features throughout the relevant frequency range.
Fortunately, the frequencies of these lines are known precisely, and their rel-
ative strengths are related through simple physics. Observations seeking the
detection of a global signal will necessarily be made with high spectral resolu-
tion, both to separate the recombination lines and to prevent contamination
from terrestrial radio frequency interference.

The instrumental calibration required to detect these faint, ∼ 10−5 inflections
in the radio spectrum is an exceptionally difficult task. The usual strategy is
to compare the sky spectrum with a calibration source that is known to be
smooth. Two clear questions arise: first, is the comparison source truly smooth,
and second, can the two signals be brought together in the receiving system
through paths with identical (or at least calibrate-able) gains? One approach
is to use internal resistive loads that provide thermal power in proportion
to the load’s temperature. In this case, the impedance matching is critical,
and there must be ways to accurately assess matching (or reflections) in the
signal paths from the antenna that observes the sky and from the internal
load. Alternatively, one can search for sources in the sky that could provide
“external loads” with smooth spectra; one possible source is the Moon [272],
which emits thermally at these freqencies (although its brightness temperature
is actually cooler than the sky temperature at the low-frequency end of the
relevant range). The advantage of an external load is that the calibration signal
enters the receiving system through the same path as the sky signal. However,
the Moon is reflective (as well as emissive), so that a faint reflection of the
Earth radio frequency interference is mirrored at the Moon, making that a
likely contaminant.

The precision measurement of the shape of the CMB spectrum by the FIRAS
instrument on COBE [275] makes a sobering comparison. FIRAS compared
the CMB spectrum from the sky with an onboard black body source to deter-
mine precisely the CMB spectrum. It found agreement with a Planck curve
with an rms deviation of five parts in 105 over the wavelength range 0.5 to
5 mm. This was a space-based instrument, observing a thermal sky spectrum
in comparison to a thermal load, in a wavelength range where radio interfer-
ence is negligible. The highly-redshifted 21 cm spectrum will surely be much
more difficult to measure.

Fortunately, even if systematics do prove to be insurmountable, there are other
ways to measure the evolution of the mean signal. For example, Compton
scattering by a massive, low-redshift galaxy cluster shifts the spectrum in fre-
quency space in a predictable way, so that differential measurements between
the cluster and its surroundings could be made [276]. This avoids many of the


                                      68
systematic difficulties, but it requires relatively high-resolution observations
(and hence may not measure the truly “global” signal). Another problem is
the association of strong radio galaxies with the cores of massive galaxy clus-
ters, because the continuum flux density will be systematically greater than
the surrounding reference fields. Slight errors in gain calibration as a func-
tion of frequency (“passband calibration”) may leave residuals that mimic the
expected global signal. The calibration error would likely be present for all
clusters, although meticulous comparison with strong radio sources unassoci-
ated with X-ray clusters may be helpful. A second possibility is to use the
21 cm fluctuations to measure the mean background through their redshift-
space anisotropies [277], although in practice this is beyond the capabilities
of the first generation of interferometers [278]. Finally, if the ionized bubbles
can be separated from the residual neutral gas (through imaging or one-point
statistics [279], for example), their contrast and the abundance of each phase
provides a straightforward measurement of δT   ¯ b.



4   The Power Spectrum


While the global 21 cm background contains a great deal of information about
the mean evolution of the sources, each and every component discussed in §3
also fluctuates significantly. For the density field this is obvious: the evolving
cosmic web imprints growing density fluctuations on the matter distribution.
For the other aspects, the discrete nature of the luminous sources gives rise to
21 cm fluctuations. Ionized gas is organized into discrete HII regions (at least
in the most plausible models), and the Lyα background and X-ray heating will
also be concentrated around galaxies. The single greatest advantage of the 21
cm line is that it allows us to separate this fluctuating component both on the
sky and in frequency (and hence cosmic time). Thus we can study the sources
and their effects on the IGM in detail. It is the promise of these “tomographic”
observations that makes the 21 cm line such a singularly attractive probe, and
in the next several sections we will describe their expected forms in many
different physical regimes.

Observing the 21 cm fluctuations has one practical advantage as well. The
difficulty of extracting the global evolution lies in its relatively slow evolution.
On the small scales relevant to the fluctuations, the gradients increase dra-
matically. At the edge of an HII region, for example, δTb drops by ∼ 20 mK
essentially instantaneously. As a result, separating them from the smoothly
varying astronomical foregrounds may be much easier. We will discuss this and
other experimental issues in §9. Unfortunately, as we will also see, constructing
detailed images will remain extremely difficult because of their extraordinary
faintness; telescope noise is comparable to or exceeds the signal except on
rather large scales. Thus a great deal of attention has recently focused on


                                        69
using statistical quantities readily extractable from low signal-to-noise maps
to constrain the IGM properties. This is motivated in part by the success
of CMB measurements and galaxy surveys at constraining cosmological pa-
rameters through the power spectrum. In our case, although any number of
statistical quantities may be useful (especially during reionization, when the
fluctuations are highly non-gaussian), we will take the power spectrum as our
primary example. In the next several sections we will describe how both imag-
ing and statistics can teach us about the high-redshift Universe. The goal of
this section is to develop the formalism necessary to compute the 21 cm power
spectrum. Most of our discussion will be sufficiently general that it can easily
be extended to other statistics of interest.

We first define the fractional perturbation to the brightness temperature,
                      ¯ b ]/δT
δ21 (x) ≡ [δTb (x) − δT      ¯ b , a zero-mean random field (here δTb is to be eval-
uated at the observer). We will be interested in its Fourier transform δ̃21 (k).
Its power spectrum is defined to be
                  D                  E
                    δ̃21 (k1 ) δ̃21 (k2 ) ≡ (2π)3 δD (k1 + k2 )P21 (k1 ),      (91)


where δD (x) is the Dirac delta function and the angular brackets denote an
ensemble average. Power spectra for other random fields (such as the frac-
tional overdensity δ, the ionized fraction, etc.), or cross-power spectra be-
tween two different fields, can be defined in an analogous fashion. In gen-
eral, a power spectrum P (k) is the three-dimensional Fourier transform of
the corresponding two-point function and thus parameterizes the correlations
present in the appropriate field. We will often use the dimensionless version
∆2 (k) = (k 3 /2π 2 )P (k), which roughly quantifies the variance when the field
is smoothed on the scale x = 2π/k.

As is obvious from equations (18) and (20), the brightness temperature de-
pends on a number of input parameters. Expanding those equations to linear
order in each of the perturbations, we can write

                      δ21 = βδb + βx δx + βα δα + βT δT − δ∂v ,                (92)


where each δi describes the fractional variation in a particular quantity: δb for
the baryonic density, δα for the Lyα coupling coefficient xα , δx for the neutral
fraction (note that using the ionized fraction would cause a sign change), δT
for TK , and δ∂v for the line-of-sight peculiar velocity gradient. The expansion
coefficients βi are


                      xc
      β =1 +                    ,                                              (93)
               xtot (1 + xtot )


                                           70
                xHH
                 c   − xeHc
     βx = 1 +                                                               (94)
              xtot (1 + xtot )
                xα
    βα =                  ,                                                 (95)
         xtot (1 + xtot )
                                            eH             HH
                                                              !
            Tγ                 1   eH d ln κ10    HH d ln κ10
    βT =            +             x            + xc             ,           (96)
         TK − Tγ xtot (1 + xtot ) c d ln TK          d ln TK

where xtot ≡ xc + xα and we have split the collisional term into the dominant
H-e− and H-H components (xeH             HH
                                c and xc , respectively) where necessary. Here
we have assumed Tc = TK throughout; this is reasonable in most cases but, if
not, the expressions become much more complicated. Note that, by linearity,
the Fourier transform δ̃21 can be written in a similar fashion. Each of these
expressions has a simple physical interpretation. For β, the first term describes
the increased matter content and the second describes the increased collisional
coupling efficiency in dense gas. For βx , the two terms describe direct fluctu-
ations in the ionized fraction and the effects of the increased electron density
on xc . (The latter is only important in partially ionized regions; 21 cm emis-
sion is negligible in HII regions, of course.) βα simply measures the fractional
contribution of the Wouthuysen-Field effect to the coupling. The first term in
βT parameterizes the speed at which the spin temperature responds to fluctu-
ations in TK , while the others include the explicit temperature dependence of
the collision rates. The challenge of the next several sections will be to com-
pute these perturbation fields in the appropriate physical regimes. Note that
all of these terms, with the crucial exception of δ∂v , are isotropic (see §4.1).

Of course, the 21 cm background directly measures the baryonic density field
δb (or even more precisely, the hydrogen density field). For most purposes,
this is equivalent to the total matter density δ and in the following we will set
δb = δ throughout. However, note that on small scales the finite pressure of
the baryons introduces a cutoff absent from the dark matter [280]; in detail,
galaxy formation processes and feedback can also work on the two separately.

For context, Figure 9 shows how these expansion coefficients evolve in our
fiducial Pop II structure formation model (see §3.5.2). The density coefficient
β increases with time until z ∼ 20 before abruptly falling to unity. At z & 20,
collisions are only marginally important so the extra collisional coupling im-
parted by an increased density has a relatively large effect; at lower redshifts,
collisional coupling is negligible compared to the Wouthuysen-Field effect so
the second term in equation (93) vanishes. βx behaves nearly identically, be-
cause (outside of HII regions) the ionized fraction remains small. Fluctuations
in the Lyα background are only important over a limited redshift range (where
xα ∼ 1); at lower redshifts, all the gas is strongly coupled so fluctuations in
the background are unimportant. The temperature coefficient has the most
complicated dependence because it depends on the mix of Compton heat-
ing and collisional coupling. Note that the apparent singularity occurs where


                                      71
Fig. 9. Redshift dependence of perturbative expansion coefficients in the fiducial
Pop II model of Fig. 7. We show β (solid curve), βx (dotted curve), βα (dot-dashed
curve), and βT (dashed curve). Note that the singularity in βT at z = 17 is artificial
in that it does not actually appear in the fluctuation amplitude.

                                      ¯ b also vanishes at the same point. At
TK = Tγ ; it is not physical because δT
lower redshifts, TK ≫ Tγ and the emission saturates, βT → 0.

By equation (91), the power spectrum clearly contains all possible terms of
the form Pδi δj ; some or all could be relevant in any given situation. Of course,
in most instances the various δi will be correlated in some way; statistical
21 cm observations ideally hope to measure these separate quantities. We
have already included some of the obvious correlations in equations (93)–(96),
such as the variation of the collision rate with the ionized fraction. But we
have left others implicit: for example, as we will see later, it is likely that
overdense regions are ionized first. Or, if photoionization equilibrium applies,
δx depends on the density field. A more subtle example is the relation of
δα to the other quantities; as we saw in §2.3.3, it depends on the radiation
spectrum and hence on density, neutral fraction, and temperature in addition
to the background flux. We have left this implicit in the interests of simplicity
(and it is often ignored in the literature; [192,?]), but it should be included in
detailed calculations.

In all of these expansions, one must bear in mind that δx is of order unity if
the ionization field is built from HII regions. In that case terms such as δδx are
in fact first order and must be retained. This leads to non-trivial four-point
terms in the power spectrum (e.g., [278]); in practice, these terms may need


                                         72
to be computed along with the two-point correlations.

Because of the analogy to the CMB, some of the 21 cm literature makes use
of the angular power spectrum (e.g., [158,?]). This integrates out the line of
sight information (which is automatically measured in any real experiment
thanks to the frequency axis), so the three-dimensional version is generally
preferred (especially at large angular scales, where the shape of the matter
power spectrum is such that relatively small scale density fluctuations domi-
nate [277]). But the angular power spectrum is still useful for some purposes
– especially in correlations with the CMB or other two-dimensional fields on
the sky [282,?,?,?,?,?] – so for convenience we will define it here as well. For
the moment we neglect the velocity term. In that case δ21 is isotropic, and the
brightness temperature (relative to the CMB) of the sky at frequency ν can
be written
                                               Z
                               δ21 (n̂, ν) =       dr R(r; r0 ) δ21 (n̂, r),           (97)


where the integral is over the line of sight distance and R(r; r0) describes the
frequency response of the experiment; it is typically sharply peaked around
r0 , the conformal distance to the redshift of interest. We construct the angular
power spectrum from the spherical harmonic expansion of δ21 , conventionally
written
                                                   X
                                   δ21 (n̂, ν) =         alm (ν)Ylm (n̂).              (98)
                                                    lm



Using the identity

                               eik·x =        4πil jl (kr)Ylm
                                                            ∗
                                         X
                                                              (k̂)Ylm (n̂),            (99)
                                         lm




where jl (x) is the spherical Bessel function of order l, we find


                       l
                           Z
                                d3 k            ∗
     alm (ν) = 4πi                   αl (k, ν)Ylm (k̂)δ̃21 (k, ν),                    (100)
                               (2π)3
                  Z
    αl (k, ν) =       dr R(r; r0)jl (kr).                                             (101)

The (dimensionless) cross-frequency angular power spectrum is defined by
                      D                            E
                          al1 m1 (ν1 )a∗l2 m2 (ν2 ) ≡ δl1 l2 δm1 m2 Cl1 (ν1 , ν2 ).   (102)


                                                       73
Performing the integrals,

                                          k 2 dk
                                      Z
               Cl21 (ν1 , ν2 ) = 4π              P21 (k)αl (k, ν1 )αl (k, ν2 ).   (103)
                                           2π 2

                                                        ¯ 2.
In temperature units, equation (103) takes a prefactor δT b

To gain some intuition, consider two limiting forms of equation (103) for a pure
power law input spectrum [158]. First suppose that the frequency response is
a delta function (valid on angular scales much larger than the radial response,
or small l); then

              l2 Cl21 (ν, ν)    ¯ 2 (ν)∆2 (l/r0 ),
                             ∝ δT b     21                         l δr/r ≪ 1     (104)
                    2π

where δr characterizes the bandwidth of the observation. Thus on large angular
scales, the angular fluctuations should simply trace the corresponding density
fluctuations. (This is not, however, true for 21 cm fluctuations, because the
power-law approximation is not valid [277].) Small scale modes, on the other
hand, suffer a cancellation from the oscillatory Bessel functions, and

            l2 Cl21 (ν, ν)    ¯ 2 (ν)∆2 (l/r0 ) r0 .
                           ∝ δT b     21                             l δr/r ≫ 1   (105)
                  2π                           l δr

Here the angular fluctuations are suppressed by a factor that equals the num-
ber of wavelengths fitting across the band. Clearly, retaining the frequency
dimension will avoid this cancellation, so direct measurements of P21 (k) are
preferred.


4.1 Redshift-Space Distortions


In general, we expect fluctuations in density, ionization fraction, Lyα flux,
and temperature, to be statistically isotropic, because the physical processes
responsible for them have no preferred direction [e.g., δ(k) = δ(k)]. 18 How-
ever, there are two effects that do break the isotropy of 21 cm fluctuations,
both well-known from previous studies of large scale structure. The first is
that transverse and light of sight distances scale differently in non-Euclidean
18 Actually, this assumption can break down on extremely large scales, because then

the growth of structure with redshift becomes important. Fortunately, the 21 cm
field only contains rapidly evolving features on such large scales at the tail end of
reionization. The evolution is generally not important on the scales accessible to
observations [278,?].


                                              74
spacetimes, which artificially distorts the appearance of any isotropic distribu-
tion. This well-known Alcock-Paczyński (AP) effect [289–292] depends on the
underlying background cosmology, and we will discuss it in §4.2. 19 Second,
peculiar velocity gradients introduce redshift space distortions. Bulk flows on
large scales, and in particular infall onto massive structures, compress the sig-
nal in redshift space (the “Kaiser” effect), enhancing the apparent clustering
amplitude [293,273,281,277]. On small-scales, random motions in virialized re-
gions create elongation in redshift space (the “finger of God” effect), reducing
the apparent clustering amplitude [294]. We will now discuss each of these
effects in turn.

The anisotropy in the power spectrum induced by the Kaiser effect could allow
an interesting separation of astrophysical and cosmological contributions to
the 21 cm fluctuations [277]. On large scales, where linear theory holds, the
fractional perturbation in the radial peculiar velocity gradient dvr /dr has a
Fourier transform proportional to that of the density field, δ̃∂v = −µ2 f δ̃, where
µ is the cosine of the angle between the wavevector k and the line of sight
direction and f = d ln D/d ln a ≈ Ω0.6
                                     m (z) [293]. (Intuitively, the two powers of
µ result from taking the line of sight components of the peculiar velocity and
of its gradient.) Thus in Fourier space, brightness temperature fluctuations in
Fourier space have the form [281]:

                                  δ̃21 = µ2 f δ̃ + δ̃iso                       (106)


where we have collected all the statistically isotropic terms in equation (92)
into δ̃iso . Neglecting “second-order” terms (see below) and setting f = 1 in the
high-redshift limit, the total power spectrum can therefore be written as [277]:

                      P21 (k) = µ4 Pδδ + 2µ2 Pδiso δ + Pδiso δiso .            (107)


Equation (107) has some interesting features. Even in the simple case where
δ̃iso = δ̃ (i.e., there are no spin temperature or ionization fraction fluctuations),
the velocity term boosts the spherically averaged power spectrum by a factor
h(1 + µ2 )2 i = 1.87: redshift space distortions are not a small effect. Further-
more, because of the simple form of this polynomial, measuring the power at
≥ 3 values of µ should allow one to determine Pδδ , Pδiso δ , and Pδiso δiso for each
k. In particular, we can isolate the contribution from density fluctuations Pδδ .
This would not have been possible without peculiar velocity flows: comparison
to equation (92) shows that, in the most general case, Pδiso δ and Pδiso δiso contain
several different power spectra, including those of the density, neutral fraction,
and spin temperature as well as their cross power spectra [291]. Note that Pδδ
19 For the moment, we shall assume that that the true underlying cosmology is

known from, e.g., CMB studies; in that case the AP effect can be ignored.


                                           75
is simply the baryonic matter power spectrum at redshift z; assuming that we
have independent measurements of that, we can also determine the astrophys-
                              ¯ b ∝ x̄HI (1 − Tγ /TS ) from the velocity field. In
ically interesting prefactor δT
particular, at late times, when X-ray heating and Lyα coupling have driven
TS ≫ Tγ , we can in principle extract the mean neutral fraction x̄HI (z) [277].

Disentangling the other components will be more difficult, since there are sev-
eral remaining power spectra to be determined from the two measured quanti-
ties Pδiso δ (k) and Pδiso δiso (k). Anything we can learn from these components will
require properly modeling the processes and the correlations between them.
This will be simplest in regimes where one or more of the terms can be ne-
glected. For example, during the earliest stages of reionization (when δx is
negligible), one might be able to measure the power spectrum of spin temper-
ature fluctuations as well as its correlations with density. At late times (when
TS ≫ Tγ and δTb becomes independent of TS ), one might likewise ignore spin
temperature fluctuations and measure the ionization fraction fluctuations Pδx
and Pxx . In both these cases, there is generally a mild degeneracy in parameter
estimation which can likely be broken by making weak assumptions about the
asymptotic behaviour of the power spectra.

An additional difficulty comes from the correlations of “second-order” terms in
the perturbation expansion, such as δδx , that produce four-point terms in the
power spectrum. As mentioned in the previous section, δx is not necessarily a
small parameter, so these terms can be substantial. Unfortunately, they also
produce terms with non-trivial µ dependence that depend on the particulars
of reionization [278]. The presence of these terms make attempts to separate
the µn powers during reionization more difficult; the prospects are much better
before δx becomes important. We will return to this question in §8.3.2.

Note that the velocity term also affects the angular power spectrum; the ex-
tra µ2 terms alter the angular dependence of the signal and hence the l-
distribution of the power spectrum [281,?].

On small scales, random motions in virialized regions wash out features in
redshift space [295]. If we only study line-of-sight modes (which are the most
immune to foreground contamination), this places an irreducible lower limit
on the size of structures we can study. However, for all of the planned ex-
periments, the limiting angular resolution, which dilutes the radial signal by
mixing together neutral and ionized structures in the transverse direction, cor-
responds to much larger scales than the “fingers of God.” Thus these will not
affect any observables. Even at much higher angular resolution, virial motions
should not pose a significant obstacle to detecting ionized bubbles in the 21
cm data so long as photoionized bubbles are significantly larger than the virial
extent of halos (almost definitely a safe assumption; see §8).


                                        76
An important caveat to recovering redshift space distortions (and the AP
test below) is that it requires a high signal to noise measurement of the an-
gular structure of the signal. Unfortunately, the noise is anisotropic: radio
foregrounds have much more power across the sky than in the line of sight di-
rection. (Indeed, this very feature is crucial to foreground removal algorithms;
see §9.3.) Moreover, it is much easier to probe small physical scales in the
frequency direction than across the angular dimensions. As a result, taking
advantage of this “separation of powers” will likely require second generation
experiments (see [278] and Fig. 32).


4.2 Cosmological Tests


The preceding discussion assumed that the correct underlying cosmological
model was already known (from CMB measurements, for example). Using an
incorrect cosmological model creates apparent errors in the scaling of angular
sizes (which depend on the angular diameter distance DA ) compared to line of
sight sizes (which depend on the Hubble parameter), introducing an artificial
anisotropy even in intrinsically isotropic distributions. This Alcock-Paczyński
(AP) effect [289] can be used to measure cosmological parameters, though
doing so in practice has proven difficult. Galaxy redshift surveys generally do
not extend to sufficiently high redshifts for it to be important (although they
may become useful if supplemented by deep galaxy cluster surveys [296]).
Quasar surveys (e.g., SDSS), on the other hand, do have sufficient redshift
depth but tend to be too sparse for optimal parameter estimation [297]. In
principle the AP effect can be measured through distortions of the Lyα forest
power spectrum [298], but the practical challenges have proven substantial,
and the first results are only just arriving [299]. Because the 21 cm signal is
all-sky and so does not suffer from sparseness problems, one might hope that
it will allow a definitive detection of the AP effect [94,?,?].

In keeping with our former discussion we consider the AP effect in terms of
the power spectrum [292], though a presentation in terms of the correlation
function is equally illuminating [290]. The AP effect distorts the shape and
normalization of the 21 cm power spectrum to [292]:

             P21 (k) = µ6 Pµ6 (k) + µ4 Pµ4 (k) + µ2 Pµ2 (k) + Pµ0 (k).        (108)


The Pµ4 , Pµ2 , and Pµ0 terms include the redshift space distortions due to
peculiar velocity gradients (eq. 107), but here they are further modified by
the AP effect. How can we disentangle the two? The key is the presence of
the Pµ6 (k) term, which is solely due to the AP effect. 20 It therefore allows a
20 This is not precisely true, because lensing can also introduce such a term [285],




                                        77
measurement of
                                  HDA (Assumed Cosmology)
                    (1 + α) =                             .                 (109)
                                   HDA (True Cosmology)


Conceptually, we constrain cosmological parameters by varying them until
α = 0. Once the underlying cosmology is known, the AP contribution to
the Pµ4 , Pµ2 , and Pµ0 terms can be identified and removed, leaving only the
intrinsic power spectrum that we have already discussed. Note that the k and
z dependence of the AP effect are well known and can aid in separating it
from noise and foreground contributions.

In principle the peculiar velocity anisotropy is also sensitive to the background
cosmological model: substituting the full expression for the linear peculiar
velocity perturbation, Pz−space ∝ (1 + f µ2 )2 Preal space [293]. However, because
the universe is so close to Einstein-de Sitter at high redshift, this dependence
turns out to be negligible (with D ∝ a and f = 1). In contrast, the AP effect
does remain sensitive to the background cosmology out to high redshifts [291].
This can be easily seen from the expression for angular diameter distance in
a flat Universe:
                                           Z1
                                                 da′
                              DA (a) = a                .                   (110)
                                           a
                                             a′2 H(a′ )


The dependence on cosmology comes mostly from the contribution to the
integral at low redshifts, where ΩΛ (z) > 0. Unfortunately, this also implies
that the information content is essentially the same as that of the CMB,
where the angular diameter distance to the surface of last scattering has been
accurately measured using acoustic oscillations as a standard ruler [224,?,?].
Any additional information must come from the difference between DA (z)
and H(z) at the redshift of the 21 cm survey and at recombination. A relative
accuracy of better than ∼ 5% in logH and DA must be obtained for the 21 cm
AP effect to yield improvements on the CMB [292]. Unfortunately, real-world
challenges prevent any planned experiments (or even instruments an order of
magnitude larger than the SKA) from reaching this level [278].

The 21 cm AP effect is best measured in the early stages of reionization, when
the effect of ionized bubbles is negligible (these introduce substantial addi-
tional power in 21 cm temperature fluctuations as well as non-trivial µ depen-
dence; see §8.3.2). Once reionization is underway, the large scale anisotropy
pattern is strongly dominated by the distribution of HII regions rather than
the background cosmology [291]. A clever way of disentangling these effects

although it is generally small.


                                        78
might still be possible (see [290] for some suggestions) but is likely to be
difficult.


4.3 Secondary Fluctuations


Highly-redshifted 21 cm emission and absorption constitute a new source of
diffuse background light. Because it emerges from the distant Universe, it is
subject to all of the same radiative transfer effects as the CMB; these are
collectively termed “secondary fluctuations” and modify the observed power
spectrum (or specific resolved features in maps). Secondaries allow us to use
the 21 cm background to study the lower-redshift universe, yielding similar
information to analogous measurements with the CMB. However, the 21 cm
background does have two advantages over the CMB. First, because it is a
spectral line, the 21 cm background is not a single full-sky map but rather
a series of them at many closely-spaced redshifts [301]. Second, it contains
structure down to small physical scales (in principle the IGM Jeans mass),
whereas the CMB cuts off at ℓ ∼ 1200 because of Silk damping.

These properties are particularly useful for gravitational lensing. When con-
sidered as a single diffuse broadband background, the 21 cm signal is less useful
than the CMB because it is difficult to unambiguously separate the lensing
modifications from the intrinsic clustering of the signal [282]. Most of the
strategies for extracting lensing information from the CMB rely on two prop-
erties that the 21 cm background does not share. First, they assume that any
observed non-gaussianities are induced by lensing; as we shall see, this will
not be true for 21 cm emission during reionization. Second, the CMB has a
well-defined acoustic peak structure from which power is transferred, whereas
the 21 cm background is relatively featureless (though some structure does
appear during reionization).

Fortunately, the two advantages identified above still outweigh these difficul-
ties. Conceptually, 21 cm maps at many different redshifts are all at sufficiently
large distances that they experience nearly the same lensing potential. This
induces a cross-correlation between source screens from which the projected
mass distribution can be extracted [301]. The cross-correlation is visible both
in the variance map (because lensing changes the physical scale subtended
by each angular patch) and in the shear map. Typically, CMB lensing is de-
scribed through a perturbative expansion of the deflection angle δθ. Unfor-
tunately, this does not work well for the 21 cm background because of the
large temperature gradients on small scales, so new methods in which the de-
flection field is built by progressively adding smaller and smaller wavelength
modes in Fourier space are required [285]. Lensing typically modifies the power
spectrum by ∼ 1% [301,?].


                                       79
In practice, the cross-correlation between neighboring maps is noisy and may
not be the best way to extract the lensing information. Another way to ap-
proach it is through the aspherical perturbations induced by lensing, with
the largest modifications to modes along the line of sight because they sam-
ple the smallest projected scales [285,?]. Like redshift space distortions, this
introduces µ2 and µ4 components into the power spectrum. A quadratic esti-
mator, generalized from those used for the CMB, can take advantage of this
angular dependence to reconstruct the projected mass field from 21 cm obser-
vations [286]. Because such estimators extract the most information from the
smallest resolved scales, they require high angular resolution. As such, SKA-
class instruments will be needed to probe lensing effectively. However, such an
instrument could prove more powerful than the CMB at reconstructing the
intervening matter distribution.

One interesting (though difficult) application is to “delense” CMB polariza-
tion maps [302]. CMB lensing creates both E- and B-mode (i.e., curl-free and
divergence-free) polarization. The main interest in observing the much weaker
B-mode polarization is that its primordial component is generated by gravi-
tational waves and offers a sensitive probe of inflation [303,?]. However, the
lensing contribution must first be identified and removed; lensing aliases power
from E modes to the much weaker B modes. This can be done statistically with
high-resolution, all-sky CMB maps, but 21 cm maps provide an alternative
by independently measuring the projected mass distribution and hence the
B-mode contamination. In that case, the limiting systematic is the mismatch
in source redshifts (and hence lensing potential) between the 21 cm screens
and the CMB. An experiment centered on z = 30 that is sensitive to ℓ . 5000
could, together with a modest ground-based CMB polarization experiment,
reach comparable limits to a cosmic-variance limited, all-sky CMB-only mea-
surement after a year of (on-source) integration [302].

Another type of secondary is generated by Thomson scattering in the post-
reionization IGM, which washes out some of the intrinsic fluctuations (just
as with the CMB) [148]. But scattering also drives polarization anisotropies
sourced by the (local) quadrupole fluctuations seen by the scatterers (again
just as with the CMB [305,?]). However, the local quadrupole of the 21 cm
background may be much larger than that of the CMB, because fluctua-
tions in the ionized fraction (i.e., HII regions) when x̄i ∼ 0.5 have large sizes
( & 20 Mpc; see §8 below) and so contribute a substantial anisotropy. A simple
model with randomly distributed bubbles of a single size and instantaneous
reionization predicts peak rms fluctuations in the polarized brightness tem-
perature of ∼ 3–20 µK (with the amplitude increasing as reionization moves
to higher redshifts) on scales ℓ ∼ 100–500 (depending on the typical bubble
size) [148]. The cross-correlation with temperature is typically an order of mag-
nitude larger and (neglecting systematics) may be detectable with SKA-class
instruments.


                                      80
A third type of secondary is the Sunyaev-Zel’dovich (SZ) effect familiar from
the CMB [307], which describes the modification to the background spectrum
from energy exchange between photons and electrons during Compton scatter-
ing. For lines of sight through hot galaxy clusters at low redshifts, this modifies
the sharp spectral features of the 21 cm background and introduces new, non-
trivial features [276]. The difference between the spectra seen through the
cluster and through its surroundings could allow one to measure the global
21 cm background through a differential measurement free from many of the
usual systematics (see §3.6).



5   The Dark Ages


As we will see in §11, a number of other techniques can constrain star forma-
tion at z & 6 – and indeed many have already had some successes. However,
thus far 21 cm observations are the only proposed means of probing the truly
dark ages between recombination (z ∼ 1000) and first light (z ∼ 30). 21 By
observing the era before the messy baryonic physics of galaxy formation ap-
pears, this is potentially a gold mine of information about cosmological initial
conditions [2]. It even has two major advantages over the CMB: (i) IGM fluctu-
ations persist to much smaller mass scales, being unaffected by Silk damping,
and (ii) cosmic variance is much smaller, because there are many more in-
dependent modes in the full three-dimensional volume than in the (single)
last-scattering surface. However, the enormous difficulty of observations at
such low frequencies means that they probably lie many years in the future.
The ideas described in this section should therefore be regarded only as hopes
for the far future; all of the observatories now being planned will focus on the
“low-redshift” regime z . 15.

As discussed in §3, the IGM thermally decouples from the CMB at z ∼ 200,
cooling adiabatically so that TK < Tγ . However, until z ∼ 30 it remains
sufficiently dense that collisions drive TS → TK . Since TS < Tγ , the IGM
can be seen in 21 cm absorption against the CMB, with a peak signal at
z ∼ 80. Figure 6 shows the global spin temperature evolution. Because it
depends only on simple, well-known physics (adiabatic cooling and Compton
heating), this global temperature history is exact; any observed deviations will
be an exciting signature of energy injection at these high redshifts (e.g., due
to decaying particles [265,?]). Unfortunately, the observational difficulties are
immense: they are identical to those involved in detecting the “all-sky” δT¯ b (z)

21 It has been proposed that resonant scattering by neutral Li at z ∼ 500 might cre-

ate detectable CMB anisotropies which could also probe this era [308,309]. Unfor-
tunately, recent calculations show that the Lyα background from residual hydrogen
recombinations is sufficient to keep Li ionized until low redshift [310].


                                        81
during the reionization epoch (see §3.6), but at a much lower frequency when
foregrounds are ∼ 1000 times stronger (Tsky ∼ 105 K at 15 MHz), requiring
telescope calibration stable to one part in 107 over a wide frequency range.
However, the fluctuating 21 cm signal – seeded by linear density fluctuations
– might still be observable, providing a probe of the primordial matter power
spectrum over a wide range of scales [2].

It is useful to briefly review the evolution of these density fluctuations, which
serve as initial conditions for cosmological simulations and are calculated to
high accuracy in Boltzmann code solvers [311,312]. Before recombination, per-
turbations in the baryons on sub-horizon scales are strongly suppressed by
radiation pressure. After recombination, the coupling between baryons and
photons decreases sharply, and the baryon temperature and density are deter-
mined by the gravitational attraction of dark matter potential wells, in addi-
tion to thermalization with the CMB through Compton scattering off residual
free electrons. The linearized form of the thermal evolution equations (62) and
(63) is

                      dδT   2 dδ      xi       Tγ δT
                          =      −                   .                     (111)
                       dt   3 dt 1 + fHe + x̄i TK tγ


Temperature perturbations are thus sourced by scale-dependent density per-
turbations; this leads to a spatially variable sound speed that modifies the
growth of baryonic density fluctuations by up to 30% at z = 100 and 10% at
z = 20 [313,280]. Moreover, it requires that density and temperature pertur-
bations be tracked separately. The baryonic density perturbations gradually
approach those of the dark matter, while the temperature perturbations ap-
proach those of an adiabatic gas at a somewhat later time (see below). The
acoustic oscillations created as baryons fall into dark matter potential wells,
along with the variable sound speed, imprint five distinct fluctuation modes
on the baryons, each with an amplitude sensitive to the underlying cosmology.
Because each mode evolves differently with redshift, four of these modes may
be separable with 21 cm data (the fifth is already much smaller) [313]. By
contrast, low-redshift galaxy surveys are only sensitive to the growing mode
(which we have written as D(z) throughout).

Although a complete calculation of P21 (k) requires tracking the density and
temperature modes independently, we can build some intuition by ignoring the
extra scale dependence introduced by them. Thus we write δT ≡ g(z)δ [281].
(This is a reasonable approximation on the scales most accessible to obser-
vations, especially at z . 100 when the growing mode dominates.) Equa-
tion (111) becomes

            dg             d ln δ      xi /tγ     Tγ      g
               ≈ (2/3 − g)        +                              .         (112)
            dz              dz      1 + fHe + x̄i TK (1 + z)H(z)


                                      82
Here the first term describes adiabatic heating, which tries to drive δT → 2δ/3;
the second term (from Compton heating) counters this by trying to make the
gas isothermal. Obviously, during this epoch the terms ∝ δx , δα vanish in
equation (92). Thus we can write

                               δ̃21 ≈ (β ′ + µ2 f )δ̃                      (113)


where β ′ ≡ β + g(z)βT and we have used δ̃∂v = −µ2 f δ̃. The crucial point is
that, even in this simple approximation, fluctuations in the spin temperature
(and hence δT¯ b ) do not evolve identically to density fluctuations, because of
the extra redshift-dependent factor g(z). This term describes how the modified
kinetic temperature in dense gas affects the collision rate (and hence the spin
temperature).

Generically, we expect g(z) to evolve from g = 0 to g ≈ 2/3 as the CMB energy
density drops and Compton heating becomes less important. This must com-
pete with the evolving density perturbations and background temperature
to determine the overall growth of 21 cm fluctuations. We show the result-
ing spherically-averaged rms 21 cm brightness temperature in Figure 10 (see
also [2,281]). 22 For this illustrative figure, we have included only the growing
density mode; we refer the reader to [313,?] for more detailed calculations. We
present the amplitude at a fixed wavenumber k = 0.1 Mpc−1 for convenience;
this is chosen to be in the regime most accessible to observations. The solid
curve shows the net fluctuation amplitude; the other curves show the various
components that contribute to this signal.

First, the dotted curve sets β ′ = 1; this is equivalent to ignoring fluctuations
in both the temperature and collision rate. Thus in this case the rms fluctu-
ations simply trace δT  ¯ b (z) multiplied by the growth factor. The long-dashed
curve sets βT = 0, ignoring the temperature fluctuations entirely. This al-
ways amplifies the 21 cm fluctuations because, for example, increasing the
density increases the collision rate and hence drives TS closer to TK . But it
overestimates the real fluctuations, because adiabatic compression in dense
gas increases TK as well. The short-dashed curve includes this effect as well
but ignores the temperature dependence of collisional coupling (i.e., it sets
βT = Tγ /[TK − Tγ ]). Compared to the dotted curve, this decreases the fluctua-
tion amplitude at z & 80 but increases it at lower redshifts. At high redshifts,
collisions efficiently couple TS to TK everywhere; thus because TK increases in
overdense regions, so does TS . At lower redshifts, on the other hand, collisions
become inefficient and TS → Tγ . Overdense regions can thus more efficiently
drive TS → TK < Tγ , causing the spin temperature to fall inside density en-
hancements and increasing the overall fluctuation amplitude. Finally, the last
22 Note that the relative importance of temperature variations depends on angle

because they must compete with the (temperature-independent) velocity term.


                                        83
Fig. 10. Spherically-averaged fluctuations of the 21 cm brightness temperature rel-
ative to the CMB at k = 0.1 Mpc−1 as a function of redshift. The solid curve
shows the true net fluctuation amplitude. The dotted curve ignores collisions and
temperature fluctuations entirely (i.e., β ′ = 1). The short-dashed curve ignores
the temperature dependence of the collision rate, while the long-dashed curve sets
βT = 0.
step (included in the solid curve) is to add the temperature dependence of the
collision rates. This is unimportant at high redshifts but further boosts the
fluctuations at lower redshifts, because κHH10 is so steep at low temperatures
(see Fig. 2). The true peak of the fluctuations occurs at z ≈ 55.

One more subtlety relevant to this regime is that, at z . 100, collisional cou-
pling is only marginally efficient. In this case, the hyperfine level populations
depend on the atomic velocity (essentially because faster atoms collide more
frequently), which modifies the signal by a few percent [111].

A great virtue of these observations is that they probe the power spectrum
all the way to k . 103 Mpc−1 (above which Jeans smoothing effects become
important). They can therefore directly constrain modifications of small scale
power in the standard ΛCDM model made to account for galactic scale ob-
servations, as well as the possible running of the spectral index suggested by
WMAP [20]. By contrast, since Silk damping suppresses small-scale power
in the CMB, that field can only probe k ≤ 0.2 Mpc−1 . These small scales
are likewise inaccessible to Lyα forest observations, because the Jeans mass
increases by a large factor after reionization. Thus the 21 cm line is a truly
unique cosmological probe. In addition to Jeans smoothing, the 21 cm ab-
sorption line is also subject to thermal smoothing along the line of sight. In


                                       84
principle, this could be separated out via its angular dependence, allowing a
direct measure of the temperature TK (z) and Hubble parameter H(z) [280].
In practice, this requires extremely high frequency resolution (e.g., ∼ 25Hz at
z = 50, compared to the redshifted 21 cm frequency of 28 MHz).

Another great virtue of 21 cm observations is the huge number of independent
samples contained in the fully three-dimensional volume [2]. The observable
Universe has a volume ∼ 3000 Gpc3 between z = 30 and z = 100, correspond-
ing to ∼ 6 × 1011 patches with radii equal to 1 Mpc or & 1018 independent
Jeans masses. This huge number of samples could potentially be a sensitive
probe of primordial non-gaussianity, although of course instrumental system-
atics will be the real limiting factor.

The main damper on all these exciting possibilities is the extraordinary dif-
ficulty of the observations. The strong foregrounds at these low frequencies
have brightness temperatures two orders of magnitude larger than those of
z ∼ 10 observations, which as we will see pose a rather difficult challenge them-
selves. Furthermore, the earth’s ionosphere becomes opaque at ν ≤ 20 MHz
(or z ≥ 70), and one must go to space. “Dark age” experiments lie many years
in the future.



6   The First Structures


By z ∼ 30, collisions had become so rare that TS ≈ Tγ , and the 21 cm
fluctuations are no longer visible. However, at just about this time the first
collapsed objects began to form. These, and the surrounding networks of sheets
and filaments, produced hot, overdense gas where collisional coupling became
efficient again. Thus the next phase in the 21 cm history is the birth of the first
nonlinear structures; in this section, we will describe potential observations of
this epoch.


6.1 Minihalos


As we saw in §3.1, the IGM temperature is extremely small in the absence
of luminous sources. Thus the Jeans mass is quite small (∼ 105 M⊙ [314]),
and tiny objects can collapse. However, atomic line cooling in primordial gas
requires virial temperatures Tvir & 104 K (or M & 108 M⊙ ). Thus over a rel-
atively wide range in mass, halos are probably unable to cool and form stars
through the usual channels. Such objects are known as “minihalos,” and they
can evolve along two possible routes. First, if H2 is able to form, the gas can
cool through its vibrational transitions. It is via this process that the first mini-


                                        85
halos are believed to cool (over relatively long time intervals) and probably
produce the first stars [315,?,?].

However, once these first stars form, subsequent generations of minihalos no
longer form in isolation. In particular, these stars flood the Universe with UV
photons. As well as initiating Wouthuysen-Field coupling, photons in the en-
ergy range 11.18–13.6 eV (the so-called Lyman-Werner band) dissociate H2
and thus suppress cooling inside minihalos (see [46] for a review). As a re-
sult, minihalos virialize but do not fragment and form stars. Instead they
become dense (δmh ∼ 200) gas clouds that float serenely through the IGM.
During reionization, minihalos become photon sinks and contribute to the
gas clumpiness; thus their properties are important to measure. Fortunately,
they also become 21 cm sources [318]. Given their virial temperatures, δmh
is much larger than the critical value of equation (67), so collisional coupling
becomes extremely efficient. Unfortunately, the typical minihalo is . 10 kpc
across, much smaller than the resolution limit (at any reasonable sensitivity)
of any telescope for the foreseeable future. Thus minihalos must be detected
statistically [318,319]. The net signal depends on the fraction of baryons fmh
incorporated into minihalos and their average bias bmh .

Figure 11 shows some example power spectra built from the halo model [102,?].
The dot-dashed curves show the rms brightness temperature fluctuations for
a universe in which the entire IGM has TS ≫ Tγ ; the thick and thin curves are
for z = 20 and z = 10, respectively, assuming linear theory. The uppermost
solid and dashed curves show the rms fluctuations from minihalos at these two
redshifts. We see that the minihalo signal is ∼ 1 mK at z = 10, and nearly
an order of magnitude smaller at z = 20. On large scales, the net minihalo
fluctuations are [320]
                      ¯ b ∆mh (k) ≈ bmh fmh δT hot ∆lin(k),
                     δT                                                   (114)
                                              b



where δTbhot is the mean brightness temperature if TS ≫ Tγ and ∆lin is the lin-
ear density power spectrum. This shape only changes on scales k & 10 Mpc−1 ,
where individual minihalos are resolved and the power spectrum instead traces
their density profiles. Note, however, that the halo model does not include
nonlinear clustering, which modifies P (k) on somewhat larger scales (see be-
low) [319].

Of course, all the elements of equation (114) depend on the underlying cos-
mological model, and in principle minihalos provide a probe of its parameters
(especially the small scale matter power spectrum) [318]. However, as is all
too common in astronomy, there are unavoidable – and large – degeneracies
with the astrophysics. Most importantly, as we have seen in §3.2.1, luminous
sources produce X-rays, which have two effects on minihalos. First, they pen-
etrate minihalos and increase the free electron fraction, catalyzing H2 forma-


                                      86
Fig. 11. Expected rms brightness temperature fluctuations from minihalos. Thick
solid and thin dashed curves are for z = 10 and 20, respectively. From top to bottom
within each set, the curves assume TK = Tad , 20, 100, and 1000 K with Jα = 0. The
dot-dashed curves show the fluctuations from linear theory, assuming that the entire
IGM has TS ≫ Tγ . From [320].

tion. This promotes cooling and could allow minihalos to fragment and form
stars [255,?,174]. Unfortunately, the net effects of UV and X-ray feedback
remain unsettled.

But a more important aspect may be X-ray heating of the IGM, which sup-
presses minihalo formation by increasing the Jeans mass and preventing smaller
minihalos from accreting gas [321]. The effects are most easily expressed
through the “entropy” KIGM ≡ TK /n2/3 injected into the IGM. The entropy is
conserved during adiabatic expansion and contraction, so the effects of feed-
back can be seen by comparing KIGM to the entropy Kmh = Tvir /n(rvir )2/3
generated during halo formation. If KIGM ≫ Kmh , the thermal pressure gen-
erated during collapse exceeds the gravitational potential, and that minihalo
is unable to accrete gas [321]. The lower sets of curves in Figure 11 show
the minihalo signal if TK = 20, 100, and 1000 K, assuming that the energy
was injected at the cosmic mean density [320]. X-rays can decrease the signal
by more than two orders of magnitude – much larger than any cosmologi-
cal uncertainty. If the minihalo fluctuations can be seen, they will constrain
astrophysical feedback rather than cosmological parameters.

Unfortunately, separating the minihalo signal from the IGM will be difficult,
because the Wouthuysen-Field effect renders the entire IGM visible against


                                        87
Fig. 12. Minihalo signal in a cosmological context. (a): The mean ionized fraction x̄i ,
the collapsed fraction in star-forming halos fhalo , the minihalo fraction fmh , and the
bias-weighted minihalo fraction. For fmh , the upper and lower curves respectively
neglect and include X-ray heating. (b): Temperature history. (c): Large-scale 21
cm fluctuation amplitude. (d): Mean brightness temperature relative to the CMB.
From [320].

the CMB at an early stage of structure formation. Because the IGM contains
nearly all the mass, it will outshine the minihalo component by a large fac-
tor [274]. Figure 12 illustrates how the minihalo signal evolves in our fiducial
Pop II model of §3.5, except that we have set fX = 0.2 to minimize the im-
portance of X-ray heating. Panel (a) shows x̄i together with the mass fraction
in minihalos. Note that (because the effects of X-ray heating are controver-
sial) we show two cases for fmh , one ignoring X-ray heating and one assuming
suppression through the entropy floor [321].

Figure 12c shows the large-scale fluctuation amplitude for the IGM, minihalo,
and total signals. Minihalos are the only objects to shine brightly at z & 22,
before Lyα coupling begins. Unfortunately, at such high redshifts the minihalo
component contains only a negligibly small fraction of the mass, so it is still
overwhelmed by the weak IGM fluctuations. At z & 14, the IGM is still cold
(but visible), so the entropy floor is relatively unimportant. In this regime,
(hot) minihalos and the (cold) IGM actually cancel each other out in terms
of the mean signal δ T̄b . Thus the minihalos do have observable effects – but
because they trace the linear matter power spectrum on large scales (just like
the IGM), they remain difficult to separate. In particular, the subtle change in
 ¯ b they cause can easily be mimicked by a slightly different thermal history.
δT
By z . 15, the minihalo phase does contain a substantial fraction of the mass,
but the IGM has become hot. In this regime, minihalos have identical emission
properties to the diffuse IGM and – even in principle – cannot be distinguished
from the IGM short of resolving them. Note as well that this conclusion is


                                          88
independent of the efficacy of X-ray feedback.

Thus our best hope of observing minihalos is to resolve them, or at least their
nonlinear clustering patterns [319]. The dynamics of small-scale clustering
modify the shape of the power spectrum at k & 3 Mpc−1 and so make it
distinguishable from the linear power spectrum of the IGM. This effect is not
included in the halo model. Unfortunately, these scales are beyond the reach
of any planned experiment, but if they can be measured they will provide
valuable insight into the “sinks” of reionization. A better way to probe such
small physical scales may be with the “21 cm forest” (see §10).



6.2 The IGM


Perhaps the best hope to observe the first non-linear structures as they form
is before Wouthuysen-Field coupling becomes efficient. But, of course, even in
that case minihalos must compete with any other structures visible against
the CMB. In particular, equation (67) shows that, even at z ∼ 20, collisional
coupling does not necessarily require virial overdensities if the gas is moder-
ately warm. Thus we would expect to see the cosmic web visible against the
CMB even during the earliest phases of structure formation. Although this is
a difficult regime to study, it has been considered both analytically [183] and
in numerical simulations [185,186].

The analytic model of cosmic web shocks described in §3.2.3 provides some
intuition for the IGM signal. It assumed that cosmic web shocks form at lin-
earized overdensities characteristic of “turnaround” from the IGM Hubble flow
(δta = 1.06). The crucial point is that this density threshold is well below viri-
alization (δc = 1.69), so filaments form before halos. The cosmic web contains
a fraction ∼ (0.1%, 3%, 25%) of the gas at z = 30, 20, and 10 (compare to
fmh in Fig. 12b) so could boost the emission significantly. Unfortunately, the
emission strength also depends on the structure of the shocked gas, which
the analytic model cannot accurately describe. It is therefore best to turn to
numerical simulations.

High-resolution simulations can compute the detailed temperature and density
distributions of IGM gas (including shocks). The left-hand panels of Figure 13
(taken from [186]) illustrate the resulting signals. As the cosmic web forms,
gas collapses onto sheets and filaments. Because the IGM has TK = 7.2 K ≪
Tγ = 50.5 K at z = 17.5, the initial contraction leaves the gas overdense but
still cool. Collisional coupling is somewhat more efficient in this gas, and the
filaments are characterized by weak absorption. As it continues to collapse, the
gas shocks, heating it well above Tγ . In these central regions, collisions are quite
efficient, so filaments emit relative to the CMB. However, the total mass locked


                                        89
Fig. 13. Projected mass-weighted spin temperature (upper panels) and δTb (lower
panels) from a 0.5 Mpc simulation box at z = 17.5. The left panels assume no
radiation background, while the right panels contain a miniquasar (located at the
cross) that emits X-rays (but does not induce Wouthuysen-Field coupling). Note
that Tγ = 50.5 K at this redshift. From [186].

up in this phase is still small: only ∼ 1.7% of the box has δTb < −10 mK, with
a comparable amount observable in emission. This kind of signal therefore lies
well beyond the reach of any instruments on the horizon today.

However, as the analytic model shows, the fraction of gas in the cosmic web
increases rapidly at lower redshifts, because all of these structures are far off on
the exponential tail of the mass function. This is seen in much more detail in
simulations that continue to lower redshifts [185]. These also show a fluctuating
IGM appearing in both emission and absorption. As the mean cosmic density
decreases, the absorption phase weakens because overdensities characteristic of
shocks are required for collisional coupling. These simulations also compared
the IGM emission to that of minihalos [185]. By z ∼ 9, the nonlinear mass
scale is sufficiently large that fmh & 10% (see Fig. 12b). At this point, the
IGM emission is about half that of minihalos; at higher redshifts the IGM is
more important (although its absorbing and emitting components do tend to
cancel each other out).

Of course, once a Lyα background (or even a strong X-ray background) is
in place, all of the IGM lights up in the 21 cm line. Because this occurs


                                        90
quite early in the most plausible models, the collisionally coupled phase will
probably always be difficult to observe. The IGM will boost the emission –
especially at higher redshifts, when both filaments and minihalos are far above
the nonlinear mass scale [183] – but not by a large enough factor to render it
easily observable.



7   The First Luminous Objects


Once the first sources of light appear, the character of the 21 cm sky changes
completely. These objects change the spin temperature (through Wouthuysen-
Field coupling), the kinetic temperature (through X-rays), and of course the
ionized fraction. We studied the mean evolution of these quantities in §3, but
of course all of them also introduce fluctuations in the 21 cm signal from which
we can learn about the first sources. We have already seen that heating and
Wouthuysen-Field coupling typically precede significant ionization. To begin,
we will therefore ignore HII regions and focus on fluctuations induced by the
Lyα background and X-rays.


7.1 Fluctuations from the Wouthuysen-Field Effect


If star-forming galaxies dominate the UV radiation field, the average Lyα
background is given by equation (80): it is simply the sum of photon fluxes
redshifting into each Lyn transition, weighted by the appropriate frec (n). At
first sight, it might seem that this background would be extremely uniform
because the volume sampled by photons that redshift directly into the Lyα
transition has a radius ∼ 250 Mpc. However, in reality several factors combine
to render the fluctuations significant [192]: (i) the flux is weighted by r −2
and is hence more sensitive to nearby sources; (ii) the higher Lyman series
transitions are more closely spaced in frequency and so have much smaller
effective horizons; (iii) the first sources of light are highly clustered; and (iv)
the finite speed of light implies that more distant sources are sampled earlier
in their evolution (when they were presumably less luminous). As a result,
the UV background is bright near clumps of high-redshift sources and faint
elsewhere. Observations of this patchwork of emission or absorption would
measure when these sources first appeared, their clustering, and their spectra.

The resulting fluctuation power spectrum has been calculated in the limiting
case of x̄i = 0 and uniform (or zero) X-ray heating [192,?] and in a more general
case including non-uniform X-ray heating [129]. We will first focus on the
former. The fluctuations have two parts. The first traces the underlying density
field, in a similar manner to the ionization model we will describe below: large-


                                       91
scale overdensities contain extra sources and hence have large xα . The resulting
power spectra have the form [Pαα (k), Pδα (k)] ≡ [W 2 (k), W (k)] Pδδ (k). Here
Pαα is the power spectrum of fluctuations in xα , Pδα is its cross-correlation
with the density field, and W (k) is a scale-dependent weighting factor. On
large scales, W (k) approaches the average linear bias of the sources, as should
be expected for a background produced by a population of discrete halos
[192]. On scales much smaller than the effective horizon of Lyn photons, the
power vanishes since the radiation field is smooth beneath these scales. On
intermediate scales, the horizons of the various Lyn transition modulate the
effective bias [130]. The stochastic distribution of galaxies provides a second set
of fluctuations [322,?]: two nearby points sample nearly the same distribution
of sources, inducing strong intrinsic correlations in the flux field. As with any
Poisson process, the fractional fluctuations are proportional to N −1/2 , where
N is the effective number of sources inside the sampled volume. Thus this
term is important on scales comparable to the mean separation of sources.
Because these two components relate to the density field (which sources the
µ-dependent velocity term) in different ways, they are in principle separable
using redshift space distortions.

Figure 14 shows some example power spectra at z = 20 calculated following
[130]. The solid curves in the upper panels show the µ2 component of the
brightness temperature power spectrum [192],

                  Pµ2 (k) = 2[β + g(z)βT + βα W (k)]Pδδ (k),                 (115)


which includes both the density fluctuations (dotted curves, shown for xα = 1)
and those induced by Wouthuysen-Field coupling. The lower panels show the
Poisson component (uncorrelated with the density field). The two panels span
the range of plausible source parameters: the right plot assumes that Pop II
stars form in halos with Tvir > 104 K, while the left plot assumes that Pop
III stars form in all halos with Tvir > 500 K. In both cases, we assume a
constant star formation efficiency in all halos above threshold, normalized so
that xα = 0.25, 1, and 10 (bottom to top).

Clearly the fluctuation amplitude depends on the source properties: the signal
increases for halos that are rarer and more biased [192]. The boost is much
larger – over an order of magnitude between the two cases – for the Poisson
fluctuations, because those depend directly on the source density. The stellar
spectral shapes matter only on intermediate scales where the distribution of
photons between the different Lyn transitions has a weak effect on the k-
dependence. On large scales, the fluctuations are several times greater than the
density fluctuations (because of the source bias), but the amplification vanishes
at smaller scales. In general, on observable scales the Poisson fluctuations are
much weaker than the density-induced component because the corresponding
volumes are rather large.


                                       92
Fig. 14. 21 cm brightness temperature fluctuations from Wouthuysen-Field coupling
[129]. Upper panels: The µ2 component of P21 (k). Lower panels: Power sourced by
stochastic variations in the galaxy density. In each panel, we assume z = 20 and
TK = Tad . The left and right plots assume Pop III (Pop II) stars form in halos
with Tvir > 500 K (104 K). We show xα = 0.25, 1, and 10 (solid curves, bottom
to top). The dotted curves in the upper panels show the component from density
fluctuations when xα = 1. The vertical dashed lines show the scales corresponding
to the “Lyα horizon” kα and the minimum HII region size kHII .
From the form of βα in equation (95) and in Figure 9, it is obvious that the
fluctuations must peak when xα ∼ 1; this is clearly visible here as well. The
saturation when xα ≫ 1 implies that fluctuations in the Lyα background
are only relevant over a limited redshift range, so identifying that epoch, and
studying the power spectrum during it, constrain the parameters of the first
stars.

Figure 14 assumes TK = Tad = 9.25 K, the temperature appropriate for an
adiabatically expanding IGM with no heat sources other than Compton scat-
                       ¯ b = −100.7 mK at xα = 1. The fluctuations reach
tering. In this case, δT
∼ 10 mK on potentially observable scales (k ∼ 0.1 Mpc), implying ∼ 10%
variations across the sky. Because the rms fluctuations scale with δT  ¯ b , these
can be easily converted to other scenarios with uniform heating. Note then
that, if TK ≫ TS , these fluctuations will be significantly harder to observe.

The above calculations assumed linear fluctuations. Of course, this may not be
a good approximation in all cases, especially if the sources are highly clustered
[130]. For instance, for Pop III stars with large escape fractions (which have
large ratios of ionizing photons to Lyn photons), recombinations near the edges
of the HII regions would produce copious numbers of Lyα photons and could
create strong coupling near the edge of the region.

To this point we have included only the coupling induced by stellar radiation;


                                       93
any associated X-ray component will also produce Lyα photons and hence
modify the coupling (see eq. 81). As we will see below, the mean free path of X-
ray photons is typically a strong function of energy, so they seed smaller-scale
fluctuations and shift the observed power to larger k-modes [129]. Imaging
the regions around the first stars would offer even more powerful constraints
on their spectra [324,?,?], although it is far beyond the capabilities of any
planned instruments. These objects would appear as HII regions surrounded
by zones of strong emission. Close to the star, soft X-rays heat the gas, and
Lyα photons (either produced directly by the the stars or through X-ray exci-
tation) couple the spin and kinetic temperatures. Farther out (where heating
is weak but coupling still strong), absorption will dominate until the gas even-
tually fades into invisibility. In either case, the Wouthuysen-Field coupling
seeded by X-rays is not a small perturbation and must be included in realistic
calculations; it modifies the shape of the power spectrum on relatively small
scales [128,?]. Moreover, in most circumstances these fluctuations cannot be
cleanly separated from those in TK , and the two must be considered together
(see below).


7.2 X-Ray Pre-ionization


In order to see the high-redshift IGM in 21 cm emission, a large fraction of the
gas must be heated without becoming highly ionized. An X-ray background fits
the bill perfectly: with their large mean free paths, X-ray photons can pervade
the bulk of the IGM and provide a fairly uniform heating source even far away
from galaxies. On the other hand, once x̄e & 0.1, 23 secondary ionizations be-
come unimportant and the bulk of the primary electron’s energy increasingly
goes into Coulomb collisions (see eq. 69); an IGM heated by X-rays will there-
fore remain predominantly neutral [172]. As previously mentioned in §3.2.1,
possible X-ray sources include supernovae (which produce both free-free and
inverse Compton emission), X-ray binaries, and mini-quasars. X-rays are thus
an inevitable byproduct of any of the luminous sources that can source reion-
ization. We already discussed their most important aspect, X-ray heating, in
§3.2.1. Here we describe three other aspects relevant to 21 cm observations:
the increased coupling between TK and TS in a warm, partially ionized IGM,
fluctuations in the heating rate, and observational constraints on an early
X-ray background.

The importance of an X-ray background in promoting collisional coupling
should be immediately obvious from Figure 2. First, the rate coefficient κHH
                                                                          10
(from H-H collisions alone) rises steeply at low temperatures; thus, even a

23 In this section, we will use x̄
                                     e to denote the mean ionized fraction outside of HII
regions.


                                             94
small amount of X-ray heating will sharply increase the amount of collisional
coupling. Second, in the range 100 K < TK < 3000 K, the H-e− collisional
coupling rate is ∼ 20 times larger than the H-H collisional coupling rate.
Thus, as noted by [325], if x̄e & 5%, H-e− collisions could predominate. This
is particularly important because a moderately warm IGM is typically not
too far from xc ∼ 1 anyway. For example, if TK ∼ 500 K in a purely neutral
medium, an overdensity δ ≥ 8[(1 + z)/15]−2 is required for xHH   c ≥ 1 to unlock
the spin temperature from the CMB; thus, even in such a medium, filaments
will be visible in emission. However, if it is ionized, then xeH              HH
                                                              c ≈ 2(x̄e /0.1)xc ,
and the critical density for coupling decreases to of order the mean density
δ ∼ 1.

The right hand panels of Figure 13 illustrate how non-uniform X-rays can
affect the spin and brightness temperatures [186]. In this simulation, a mini-
quasar X-ray source has been placed at the “X” near the center of the box.
The contrast with the left-hand panels, which lack a mini-quasar and in which
only dense filaments are visible (see the discussion in §6.2), is stark. The
relatively strong X-ray emission has heated the gas to ∼ 2800 K and set
x̄e ≈ 0.03 in the box; thus collisional coupling becomes quite strong in even
slightly overdense filaments (especially near the mini-quasar). This leads to a
dramatic increase in the magnitude and covering fraction of 21 cm emission;
indeed, because the local density determines the coupling strength (and the
ionized fraction, provided that the gas is dense enough for photoionization
equilibrium to apply), even a uniform X-ray background increases the 21 cm
contrast between filaments and voids [325]. The resulting fluctuations have
magnitudes of a few mK on arcminute scales.

Although illustrative, this calculation did not include the Lyα background
generated by X-rays (through collisional excitation; see eq. 81). Such photons
are usually not produced in sufficient quantities to drive xα → 1, but they
can seed strong enough coupling to substantially increase the δTb fluctuations
[127,?], especially near sources (where most of the soft X-rays are absorbed).

Thus, even in the absence of a UV background, an early X-ray background
can still drive TS → TK , and some such scenarios are plausible and even at-
tractive in some ways [163,?,?]. Interestingly, in the limit of uniform radiation
backgrounds, adding Wouthuysen-Field coupling actually decreases the con-
trast of filaments because xtot is much more uniform. On the other hand, as
discussed in §7.1, the UV background varies, which seeds associated 21 cm
fluctuations. By permitting TS → TK coupling in regions where the UV flux
is sub-critical, X-ray induced collisional coupling could modulate or smooth
out such fluctuations.

Because of their long mean free paths, X-ray photons are often portrayed
as providing a uniform background. This is of course not strictly true. The


                                      95
comoving mean free path of an X-ray photon with energy E is:
                                             −2             3
                                       1+z             E
                                   
                             1/3
                  λX ≈ 4.9 x̄HI                                    Mpc;    (116)
                                        15           300 eV

thus, the universe will be optically thick to all photons below ∼ 1.8[(1 +
            1/3
z)/15]1/2 x̄HI keV. By comparison, a photon produced just redward of Lyβ
can travel a comoving distance
                                                 −1/2
                                           1+z
                                       
                         λα ≈ 330                        Mpc               (117)
                                            15

before redshifting into the Lyα resonance. Thus, soft X-ray photons will fluc-
tuate on relatively small scales but, because of the steep energy dependence,
there will be a uniform component to the X-ray background (unlike in the
UV). For a spectrum with νLν ∼const (such as the nonthermal component
observed in nearby ultraluminous X-ray sources), the component uniform on
∼ 5 Mpc scales provides ∼ ln(2000/300)/ln(300/13.6) ∼ 60% of the heating
compared to the fluctuating component. Another consequence of λX ∝ E 3 is
that the spectrum will harden significantly as one proceeds away from the
clustered ionizing sources. Nonetheless, many of the causes of fluctuations in
the Wouthuysen-Field effect (1/r 2 weighting; clustering of sources) apply with
equal force to X-rays.

Fluctuations from inhomogeneous X-ray heating can be computed using a
transfer function WX (k) that parameterizes the perturbations in the heating
rate relative to the density field; the only substantive difference from the Lyα
case is that TK depends on the entire history of heating while xα depends only
on the instantaneous flux at the Lyα transition [129]. Fluctuations sourced
by TK have one unique property: the cross-power between temperature and
density can be negative if TK < Tγ (because then βT < 0). Physically, dense
gas (which tends to sit near luminous sources) is warmer than average and
has a smaller δTb than average. Detection of such a feature would provide a
clear indication of a cold IGM with substantial temperature fluctuations.

Figure 15 shows the resulting power spectra (including both the spherically-
averaged component in the top panels and the µ2 component in the bottom
panels) in a model similar to our fiducial Pop II history from §3.5.2 [129]. At
high redshifts, z & 18, Wouthuysen-Field fluctuations dominate and the power
spectra appear similar to those in Figure 14. X-ray heating begins to kick in at
z ∼ 17 and immediately has a dramatic effect. Pµ2 , which contains a term PδT δ ,
becomes negative on intermediate scales, where temperature fluctuations are
strong. The spherically-averaged power remains positive (as it must), but it
contains two distinctive troughs separating the regimes where density, temper-
ature, and Lyα fluctuations dominate (from small to large scales). The peak


                                           96
Fig. 15. Power spectra of δTb including fluctuations in both TK (from X-ray
heating) and the Wouthuysen-Field coupling. The upper panels show the spher-
ically-averaged power, while the lower panels show the µ2 component. We show
several different redshifts in a reionization history similar to our fiducial Pop II
model of Fig. 7. In the lower panels, thick curves denote a positive signal and thin
curves a negative signal. The thin curves in the top panels also show the fluctuations
with uniform heating at z = 19 and 14 (left and right, respectively) for reference.
From [129].

on the largest scales eventually disappears (once xα ≫ 1), and the troughs
disappear entirely once TK > Tγ (at z ∼ 14 here).

As the mean IGM temperature increases, X-ray fluctuations become less and
less important (eventually disappearing once TS ≫ Tγ everywhere). However,
they can still be substantial even after the peak-trough component disappears,
especially when TK is still relatively close to the CMB temperature: compare
the dotted z = 14 curve to the thin solid curve in the top right panel, which
shows the expected fluctuation amplitude if the heating is completely uni-
form. However, at least in this scenario, these fluctuations still precede those
generated by HII regions during reionization and can be separated cleanly.
Measuring the 21 cm power spectrum in this regime would reveal the proper-
ties of the first X-ray sources (and especially their bias and spectra) and may
provide our best hope of constraining the thermal history of the IGM [129].

What observational constraints can we place on high-redshift X-ray emission?
The most obvious limit is the present-day soft X-ray background (SXRB),
part of which could originate from a high-redshift hard X-ray background
(≥ 10 keV) that free streams until today [326,?,?]. Approximately 94+6
                                                                     −7 % of
the SXRB has been resolved [328]; the mean and maximum intensity of the
unresolved component is (0.35, 1.23) × 10−12 erg s−1 cm−2 deg−2 respectively
in the 0.5–2 keV bands. Unfortunately, constraining X-ray reionization from


                                         97
the unresolved X-ray background (XRB) requires an uncertain extrapolation
of the spectral energy distribution to hard energies. For instance, in mini-
quasars, most of the UV and soft X-rays photons are thought to come from
an accretion disk, while hard X-rays are part of a power-law tail produced
through synchrotron/inverse-Compton emission. The relative contribution of
the two components is extremely uncertain.

Fortunately, we can perform a simple order-of-magnitude estimate that roughly
matches the more detailed constraints of [258,?]. Suppose the high-redshift
XRB is emitted at a median redshift z by a population of black holes with
comoving mass density ρBH and radiative efficiency ǫ, with a fraction fHXR
of the radiation emerging in the [0.5–2](1 + z)keV range. The comoving en-
ergy density in hard X-rays is ρHXR ≈ ǫρBH c2 fHXR and the flux received at
earth (in energy units) is J = c/(4π)ρHXR /(1 + z). On the other hand, the
number of ionizing photons per baryon produced by these same black holes
is Nion = ǫfUV /n̄b (ρBH c2 / hEi), where fUV is the fraction of the bolometric
luminosity that emerges above 1 Rydberg and hEi is the average energy per
ionization. Then, the SXRB observed at the present day is

                                             !          !
                                fHXR /fUV        hEi         Nion
                                                                    
                    −12
    JX ≈ 3.2 × 10
                                   0.2           5 Ry         10
                   10
                       
          ×                 erg s−1 cm−2 deg−2 ,                           (118)
                  1+z
where fHXR /fUV and hEi are appropriate for a spectrum with Lν ∝ ν −1 rang-
ing from 13.6 eV to 10 keV. Thus, the XRB produced if quasars or mini-quasars
alone reionized the Universe probably violates observed limits, although there
are considerable uncertainties. It certainly does not preclude a significant con-
tribution (Nion ∼ few) to the observed WMAP optical depth. 24 Certainly,
the amount of IGM preheating required for 21 cm emission will not violate
observed constraints:

                                                    !          !
                                  TK         fHXR       0.13
                                        
    JX ≈ 2.7 × 10−14
                                1500 K       fSXR       fX,h
             10
                       
          ×                 erg s−1 cm−2 deg−2 ,                           (119)
            1+z
where fSXR is the fraction of bolometric luminosity emerging in the relevant
0.3–2 keV bands and fX,h is the fraction of the primary electron’s energy which
goes into heat (this depends on the ionization fraction; see eq. 69).

Observational constraints on the X-ray luminosity associated with high-redshift
24 Note that this argument can be adapted for other emission mechanisms by ad-

justing fHXR /fUV and hEi.


                                                 98
star formation are less tight. In principle, the SKA will be capable of detect-
ing synchrotron radiation from high-redshift sources [163]. Since the same rela-
tivistic electrons producing synchrotron emission also inverse-Compton scatter
CMB photons to X-ray energies, such detections could place a bound on X-
ray emission from supernova remnants given reasonable assumptions about
the magnetic fields in supernova remnants: LX /Lsync = uγ /uB , where uγ and
uB are the energy densities in the CMB and magnetic fields respectively. In-
triguingly, the expected amount of high-redshift star formation can also pro-
duce a gamma-ray background comparable to the unresolved component from
EGRET [163], a scenario which could be tested by GLAST. Unfortunately,
this technique would not constrain other sources of X-ray photons, especially
X-ray binaries.



8   Reionization


We will now consider perhaps the most exciting aspect of the 21 cm signal:
its potential to teach us how and when the Universe was reionized. We have
already reviewed the basic physics driving x̄i (z) in §3.4. Here we will focus on
the “geometry” or “topology” of reionization (i.e., how the neutral and ionized
gas was distributed at a given x̄i ), because the 21 cm line provides by far the
best avenue to study this crucial aspect.


8.1 Simulations


Because the physics governing inhomogeneous reionization is so complex, nu-
merical simulations are the ideal way to approach it, and there has been a great
deal of interest in this possibility over the past decade [204,?,?,?,?,?,?,?,?,?].
The basic requirements are (i) code to evolve the density field, (ii) a pre-
scription assigning ionizing source parameters, and (iii) code to compute the
radiative transfer of ionizing photons through the gas density field.

The first component solves for the growth of structure in an expanding uni-
verse; it is of course necessary for any cosmological simulation, so the relevant
codes are now well-established. The principal challenge for reionization studies
is the computational expense of hydrodynamics. Thus, often the gas dynam-
ics are ignored and pure N-body codes, which track only the dark matter, are
employed [331,?,?,?]. Although this allows significantly larger volumes to be
studied, it requires the gas distribution, and especially star formation rates
and small-scale clumping, to be prescribed in a similar way to analytic models.

The second component is an algorithm to assign luminosities to ionizing


                                       99
sources. As we have emphasized in §3.4, any such procedure is fraught with
uncertainties because we know so little about high-redshift galaxies. Simu-
lations are typically calibrated to the observed properties of z . 3 galaxies,
supplemented by an extrapolation to higher redshifts. Of the parameters that
determine the ionizing efficiency ζ (see eq. 83), simulations can in principle
most improve our estimates of f⋆ because they follow the gas as it collapses
to high densities (though this is more difficult in pure N-body simulations,
of course). Unfortunately, the simplest prescription (the so-called Schmidt
law [334]), which is motivated by observed star formation rates in nearby
galaxies [335], tends to overproduce stars (hardly surprising even to its creator,
given its simplified assumptions; [336]). It must therefore be supplemented by
prescriptions for feedback regulation of star formation – internal, external,
or both, in the language of §3.4.3. Examples include adding supernova winds
carrying gas particles out of galaxies or introducing a multiphase interstellar
medium on the subgrid level (e.g., [337]). The resulting models are then cal-
ibrated to specific local observations (such as the star formation rate-density
relation [335,?] or the mean star formation rate [329]). Modern codes produce
reasonable agreement with a wide range of observations at z . 4 (e.g., [338,?]).
However, the star formation and feedback parameters may evolve with red-
shift, which could have important implications for reionization (e.g., [340]).
Unfortunately, even with self-consistent star formation rates simulations are
no better than analytic models at determining Nion or fesc , which are gener-
ally prescribed constants. (Although the metallicity can, to some extent, be
followed, that has not been factored into the ionizing efficiencies in existing
simulations.) Thus simulations suffer from the same systematic uncertainties
about the source population as analytic models. The range of source pre-
scriptions, from purely analytic [341,?] to semi-analytic [331,?,?,?] to “fully”
numeric [329,?], illustrates the diversity of approaches to these problems.

Finally, radiative transfer is a cutting-edge problem that has received a great
deal of attention lately. Computing the specific intensity Iν (t, x, n, ν) requires
solving a seven-dimensional problem: time t, position x, frequency ν, and di-
rection of propagation n. Furthermore, simulations can contain hundreds of
thousands of sources, even excluding the diffuse light generated by IGM recom-
binations. Thus the complete problem is prohibitively expensive, and approx-
imate schemes are necessary. Existing approaches include the “local optical
depth approximation” [204,?], the “optically thin variable Eddington tensor”
approximation [344,?], adaptive ray tracing [345,?,?,?,?], and Monte Carlo
techniques [346,?,?]. We will forego the details of these various approaches
and refer the interested reader to the individual papers for more information.
For us, the crucial result is that, for the most part, the existing codes yield
reliable and consistent results [347].

To further complicate matters, feedback demands that these three compo-
nents interact with each other: supernova winds and photons affect the gas


                                       100
distribution, which affects the halo (and hence star) formation rate, which
affects the ionization rate, etc. Prescriptions for mechanical feedback are now
incorporated into many simulations, but the results can be quite sensitive
to uncertainties in the observations and implementation, especially at high
redshifts [340]. Including photoheating requires the radiative transfer to be
incorporated directly into the simulation. This is possible [329], but in most
cases radiative transfer is added as a post-processing step [330,?] and hence
has no dynamical effect. Of course, whenever N-body simulations are used,
this kind of feedback is implicitly ignored anyway, because the photons can-
not interact with dark matter particles [331,?,?]. Thus, at least for now, the
feedback processes described in §3.4.3 must be explored by analytic or semi-
analytic means.

As in most cosmological applications, the biggest computational challenge
is resolving all the relevant structures while also subtending a large enough
volume to be representative of the Universe as a whole. The most obvious
criterion for a “representative volume” is that the density fluctuations on the
scale of the box be small. This is, of course, easy to check and also relatively
easy to achieve: at z ∼ 6, the nonlinear mass scale corresponds to ∼ 106 M⊙ .
With this criterion in mind, most of the first generation of reionization simu-
lations used boxes . 10h−1 Mpc on a side [204,?,?,?,?] (or 20h−1 Mpc with
pure dark matter codes [331,?]). Some of these simulations could resolve all
galaxies with Tvir > 104 K, although none included minihalos.

These simulations focused on understanding the global evolution of reioniza-
tion, tracking x̄i (z) for a given source population, and on the “breakout” phase
of ionization fronts around galaxies. But they also began to address questions
about inhomogeneous reionization by observing where HII regions appeared
and how they grew. Unfortunately, it quickly became obvious that these vol-
umes were insufficient for answering many questions about reionization. One
problem is that high-redshift galaxies are so highly biased that even these large
boxes missed many of them [348]. A second difficulty, more important for our
purposes, is that (again because of clustering) reionization in each box was
driven by just a few clumps of sources. Thus all of these simulations sampled
only a few HII regions and could not adequately model the inhomogeneity. A
third problem, relevant to 21 cm studies, is that realistic experiments will have
angular resolutions of several comoving Mpc – comparable to the total sizes
of these simulations! This motivated the development of the analytic models
that we will describe in §8.2.

As a result, attention has recently focused on performing reionization simula-
tions in much larger boxes – with sides & 100 Mpc [200,?,?]. These must use
pure N-body codes, and even then the dynamic range is not good enough to re-
solve all of the collapsed halos, so many ionizing sources are missed (especially
if reionization is tuned to occur at high redshifts, when the nonlinear mass


                                      101
scale is much smaller). Moreover, the clumpiness is completely unresolved (es-
pecially without hydrodynamics). Fortunately, both of these problems can be
overcome, at least approximately, through analytic models or by “bootstrap-
ping” from smaller boxes where the relevant structures are better resolved. For
example, grid-based radiative transfer codes (such as ray-tracing algorithms)
require the clumping factor and emissivity of each grid cell. These can both
be extracted from comparable regions in higher-resolution simulations [200,?]
(note, however, that clumpiness measured in this way cannot include the back-
reaction of reionization itself, which can be substantial – see §3.4.1). The hope,
of course, is that these approximations will not affect the large-scale features
of reionization. Given the resolution of 21 cm experiments, this is probably
not a bad approximation.

The leftmost column in Figure 16 shows an example of a reionization simu-
lation in a (65.6h−1 Mpc)3 N-body simulation taken from [109] (which uses
the radiative transfer code of [198]). The ionizing efficiencies were assigned
so that reionization ends slightly before z = 6. It resolves galaxies with
M & 2 × 109 M⊙ and underestimates the recombination rate by ignoring
small-scale clumping. Several crucial qualitative features are apparent in Fig-
ure 16. First, the ionized regions rapidly attain large sizes. At z = 7.68, when
x̄i = 0.35, the characteristic bubble size is ∼ 3 Mpc, with some bubbles al-
ready larger than 10 Mpc. The typical size reaches ∼ 20 Mpc by z = 6.89. As
we shall see, this is a direct result of the highly clustered galaxy distribution.
These large features should make the HII regions much easier to observe with
21 cm surveys.

Second, reionization begins in and around the densest regions. In Figure 16,
the ionized bubbles predominantly appear around large-scale overdensities,
leaving voids neutral until the end of reionization. This “inside-out” picture
of recombination is generic to any scenario in which the sources are more biased
than the recombining gas [198,?]. 25 Third, the bubbles are initially roughly
spherical but take more complex shapes as they reach scales & 3h−1 Mpc. 26
Nevertheless, many galaxies contribute to each bubble even when they are still
roughly spherical: evidently, before reionization, the cosmic web plays only a
secondary role in the large-scale geometry of reionization (although this is
partly a product of the coarse resolution of the simulation).
25 This is not to say that, on a local level, reionization cannot be “outside-in” with

dense blobs ionized after their low-density surroundings [10,?]. Instead we mean
that photons originate in dense environments and so must at least ionize the more
rarefied gas in their local overdensity before escaping toward large voids. In many
ways, the apparent dichotomy between these two kinds of models is a false one.
26 Resolving small galaxies is important for this aspect, because they provide the

small-scale structure visible in Fig. 16: resolution much worse than used here creates
a “cookie-cutter” morphology in which merged bubbles appear to be built from
nearly spherical subunits [109,108].


                                        102
Fig. 16. Slices through a simulation of reionization at z = 8.16, 7.68, and 6.89
(top to bottom); these have x̄i = 0.13, 0.35, and 0.55, respectively. The colorscale
is proportional to the HI density. The slice is 65.6h−1 comoving Mpc across and
0.25h−1 Mpc deep. The left column uses a radiative transfer code; the right column
applies a slightly modified version of [341] to the same density field. The middle
column applies that ionization criterion to the overdensity of bound halos. The
points inside the HII regions in the left and middle columns identify the ionizing
sources. From [109].




                                       103
Computing the 21 cm signal from a simulation requires one additional piece
of information: the spin temperature. Unfortunately, as we have seen in §3,
this depends on the UV and X-ray emissivities of the sources, which must
be prescribed based on some analytic model. (No reionization simulation has
attempted radiative transfer for these components.) A few do try to compute
the evolution of all three quantities self-consistently on a global level [349,?,?],
but most simulations assume that TS ≫ Tγ throughout the box. Although ex-
tremely simplistic, this is most likely a reasonable assumption for x̄i & 0.1
(see §3 and [271]). In this limit δTb becomes independent of TS , and the 21
cm signal can easily be computed from the simulation outputs. Figure 17
shows slices through the largest calculation to date (an N-body simulation in
a 100h−1 Mpc box) [205]. The slices are ∼ 49′ across; the two panels effec-
tively assume different ionizing efficiencies and hence have reionization end at
different times. The lower panel also imposes subgrid clumpiness that evolves
with time (eq. 85), slowing down reionization. Because the 21 cm signal essen-
tially traces the neutral gas density, the maps look quite similar to those of
Figure 16: relatively weak fluctuations from the cosmic web in predominantly
neutral gas and significantly stronger fluctuations from HII regions. This is
true even though the assumed reionization redshifts are quite different: as we
will see below, the qualitative features of reionization at a fixed x̄i are only
weakly dependent on redshift. Note, however, that toward the end of this sim-
ulation, the bubbles “percolate” and the topology inverts itself, transforming
from a “Swiss cheese” universe composed of neutral gas with ionized holes to
a sea of ionized gas with islands of neutral material. This behavior is generic
to any percolation phenomenon [350].


8.2 Analytic Models


Given its intrinsic complexity, reionization may seem a difficult problem for
analytic models. But they are useful for several reasons. Most importantly,
they give us physical insight into how the seemingly complex global ionization
pattern is generated: as we will see, to first order it is shockingly simple.
Second, they have essentially infinite dynamic range, avoiding many of the
resolution problems of the simulations. Third, they allow us to fill parameter
space efficiently, which is crucial given the large uncertainties in the input
parameters. Finally, simulations themselves require analytic approximations
for the sources and clumping, so it is best to understand them in detail!
Figures 16 and 17 give us hope that such models might be successful: in them,
reionization is driven by the large-scale clustering of ionizing sources – which
can be described by linear theory. This allows us to construct simple models
for the size distribution of HII regions as a function of x̄i . While these models
must ultimately be compared to numerical simulations, they provide a great
deal of intuition about the 21 cm signal.


                                       104
Fig. 17. The evolving brightness temperature of the 21 cm transition in two simula-
tions of reionization (tuned so that reionization occurs at different times). The box
subtends ∼ 49′ in the x-direction. From [205].
The key ingredients to a model of HII regions are their number density as a
function of mass nb (m), their clustering strength, and their correlation with
the underlying density field. The only possible solution that approaches any-
thing like “first principles” is to examine the growth of HII regions around
individual galaxies [351,?]; unfortunately, this model problem is probably only
relevant for the first galaxies, before clustering becomes significant. One sim-
ple generalization is to assume that bubbles trace dark matter halos but to
allow for clustering in an approximate way. For example, specifying x̄i (z) and
the characteristic bubble size Rc (z) determines nb uniquely, and the bubbles
can then be naturally associated with dark matter halos of that number den-
sity [295]. (Of course, the associated halos need not provide all the ionizing
photons for the bubble; their neighbors could contribute as well.) Such a model
takes advantage of the highly-developed halo-clustering machinery to describe
the bubble pattern [102], but it requires Rc (z) to be specified “by hand.”

A more satisfying approach is to estimate Rc (z) on physical grounds. The
key ingredient is the source clustering, which implies that overdense regions
(with many sources) will be ionized before underdense regions [348]. We begin
by assuming that x̄i = ζfcoll , where ζ is the ionizing efficiency defined in
equation (83). 27 Consider an isolated (large) region of the IGM with mass
27 This is not strictly necessary [342], but it makes the argument simpler. For now




                                        105
m and mean fractional overdensity δ. It is fully ionized if the local collapse
fraction fcoll (δ, m) satisfies

                                fcoll (δ, m) > ζ −1 ,                          (120)


where for the Press-Schechter mass function 28 [101] (c.f. eq. 5)
                                     (                        )
                                          δc (z) − δ/D(z)
                   fcoll (δ, m) = erfc √                     .                 (121)
                                         2 [σ(mmin ) − σ(m)]


Thus, for isolated regions, we can restate the ionization condition as a criterion
on the local smoothed density field.

We would like a method to compute the statistical distribution of regions
satisfying this condition, as a function of mass. In that case we cannot treat
each region in isolation: a low-density void lying near a cluster of sources will be
ionized by its neighbors. Interestingly, stated this way the problem is similar to
the “excursion set” derivation of the Press-Schechter mass function [189,?]. In
that case, the critical overdensity δc (z) describes the condition for virialization:
any region with δ > δc (z) is part of a halo. But this prescription also suffers
from a problem similar to our void/ionizing cluster situation (here it is known
as the “cloud-in-cloud” problem”): a point can be part of many regions with
δ > δc (z) (on different mass scales). For halos, as for HII regions, only the
largest of these is physically relevant, because it incorporates all of the smaller
ones. The excursion set formalism treats the problem as diffusion in the (σ 2 , δ)
space [or equivalently (m, δ)] with an absorbing barrier at δc (z); here σ 2 plays
the role of time (because the rms density fluctuation increases monotonically
toward smaller scales) and δ plays the role of space. Posed in this way, one
can compute the distribution of “crossing times” – or masses – from which
the halo mass function (eq. 5) follows immediately. This procedure avoids
the cloud-in-cloud problem by following trajectories from large to small mass
scales (or increasing σ 2 ) and assigning each diffusion trajectory to the largest
halo of which it is a part (this is why the barrier is absorbing).

The HII bubble problem has an identical structure except that the absorb-
ing barrier δx comes from the condition fcoll (δ, m) = ζ −1 (instead of simply
equaling δc ) and is hence a function of mass. Fortunately, this barrier is well-
approximated by a linear function in σ 2 , δx (σ 2 ) ≈ B(σ 2 ) ≡ B0 + B1 σ 2 , 29

we will ignore recombinations.
28 Note that the following conclusions do not depend on the precise form of the mass

function [342].
29 Recently, an elegant numerical solution to the diffusion problem confirmed the

accuracy of this approximation [354].


                                         106
Fig. 18. HII region size distributions at z = 15 for the model of [341,?]. The solid
                                           2/3
and dashed curves assume ζ ∝ m0h and mh , respectively. From left to right within
each set, we assume x̄i = 0.05, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, and 0.8. Recombinations are assumed
to be uniform throughout the IGM.
which allows an analytic solution for the mass function [355,?,?]
                         s
                                                   B 2 (m, z)
                                                      "            #
                             2 ρ̄ d ln σ B0
         m nb (m) dm =                       exp −            dm.             (122)
                             π m d ln m σ(m)       2σ 2 (m)


Note the similarity to the Press-Schechter halo mass function [101,?]. As a
consequence of this derivation, most of the machinery used for halo mass
functions, clustering, etc. can be carried over to HII regions. For example, the
linear bias of ionized bubbles, defined so that nb (m|δ) = nb (m) [1 + bx (m) δ]
in a large region of mean overdensity δ [357,?,?], is [356]

                                     B(m)/σ 2 (m) − 1/B0
                      bx (m) = 1 +                       .                    (123)
                                           D(z)

The solid curves in Figure 18 show the resulting size distributions for a range of
x̄i at z = 15; the ordinate is the fraction of the ionized volume filled by bubbles
of a given size. The results are similar to those from the simulations [109]:
most importantly, bubbles grow large during the middle stages of reionization,
with characteristic sizes Rc ∼ 1, 4, 10, and 30 comoving Mpc when x̄i =
0.2, 0.4, 0.6, and 0.8.

Of course it is possible to implement more sophisticated source prescriptions.


                                       107
One possibility is to explicitly associate ionizing sources (either stars or black
holes) with halo mergers; the results differ in detail but are qualitatively similar
[360]. The dashed lines in Figure 18 show another, which assumes that ζ ∝
  2/3
mh . In this case massive galaxies provide a larger fraction of the ionizing
photons, and Rc increases [342]. To understand why, note that Rc is the scale
at which a “typical” density fluctuation is able to ionize itself; mathematically,
it is where σ(Rc ) ≈ B. In the large bubble limit (B ≈ B0 ), our original
ionization criterion becomes

                           ζ fcoll (δ = B0 , σ 2 = 0) = 1.                    (124)


Expanding equation (121) to linear order, this can be written

                                              x̄−1
                                                i −1
                            σ(Rc ) ≈ B0 ≈              ,                      (125)
                                              D(z)beff


where beff is the average galaxy bias [359]. Intuitively, a more biased galaxy
population provides a larger “boost” to the underlying dark matter fluctu-
ations, allowing larger regions to ionize themselves. Thus, by measuring the
HII region sizes through the 21 cm transition, we can constrain the galaxies
driving reionization.

Two more properties of equation (122) deserve emphasis. First, at a given x̄i ,
nb (m) depends only weakly on redshift. This is because the shape of fcoll (δ, m)
evolves only slowly with redshift; quantitatively, D(z)beff is roughly constant
for high-redshift galaxies [361]. Second, the width of nb (m) is ultimately deter-
mined by the shape of the underlying matter power spectrum, which steepens
toward larger radii [342].

Another physically motivated estimate of Rc yields similar results [362,?]. It
differs from this model primarily by imposing at a maximum size determined
by the light crossing time at the end of reionization. This is only one of sev-
eral mechanisms that effectively limits the range of “causal contact” between
sources; the most important is likely to be recombinations.

Incorporating inhomogeneous recombinations into this analytic model is rel-
atively straightforward [22]. Each HII region obviously contains density fluc-
tuations. Because the recombination rate increases like (1 + δnl )2 , where δnl
is the fully nonlinear fractional overdensity, dense clumps will remain neutral
longer than voids will. Thus, following [10], we make the simple ansatz that
there exists a threshold density δi below which gas is ionized and above which
it is neutral. 30 Any ionizing photons striking these dense blobs will be lost
to recombinations in the neutral gas. Thus, for an ionized bubble to continue
30 Of course, this cannot be exactly true, because galaxies are embedded in dense




                                        108
growing, the mean separation of these dense blobs must exceed the radius
of the bubble. Given a model for the volume-averaged IGM density distribu-
tion, PV (δnl ), δi can therefore be computed by requiring the mean free path
between such regions to equal the bubble radius. Clearly it increases as the
bubble grows – so denser and denser gas is ionized. But this will also increase
the recombination rate per proton, which is


                              Zδi
    Arec = α(T )n̄e (1 + δ)         dδnl PV (δnl ) (1 + δnl )2                (126)
                              −1
         ≡ α(T )n̄e C(δ, R),

where C(δ, R) is the local clumping factor. The bubble can only grow if ionizing
photons are produced more rapidly than recombinations consume them; in
other words if
                            dfcoll (δ, R)
                        ζ                 > α(T )n̄e C(δ, R),                 (127)
                                 dt

The crucial point is that C depends on both the mean density of the bubble
(recall that on large scales overdense regions are ionized first in this model) and
on its size (through δi ) – as expected from §3.4.1, inhomogeneous reionization
affects the clumping factor. 31 Recombinations become increasingly important
as bubbles grow; eventually they balance ionizations and the bubbles saturate,
becoming true cosmological Strömgren spheres.

Equation (127) complements our original ionization condition, equation (120),
which requires that the cumulative number of ionizing photons exceeds the
total number of hydrogen atoms. Of course, in reality both conditions must
be fulfilled, but in practice one of the two generally dominates [10,?]. (This is
essentially because recombinations take over only when δi approaches the char-
acteristic density of virialized objects, or in other words when “Lyman-limit”
systems dominate the mean free path, as in the lower-redshift Universe.) As a
consequence, it is possible to combine the two conditions in the excursion set
formalism and compute the “bubble” sizes including recombinations. However,
we must keep in mind that in this case the model describes the mean free path
of ionizing photons. When recombinations are unimportant, this equals the size
of isolated bubbles. But once the bubbles “saturate” as Strömgren spheres,
neighboring HII regions can touch – it is only that their ionizing photons

filaments, so ionizing photons do not immediately reach the voids. This model im-
plicitly assumes that these recombinations are incorporated into fesc (see [200] for
a similar application to simulations).
31 Note that this model is therefore both “inside-out” on large scales and “outside-

in” on small scales.


                                              109
will not influence each other. The model therefore describes how the “bubble-
dominated” topology characteristic of reionization maps smoothly onto the
“web-dominated” topology of the post-reionization IGM.

The key input parameter is obviously PV (δnl ), which describes the IGM clumpi-
ness. As we have emphasized repeatedly, this is difficult to specify because it
depends on reionization itself. The distribution has been measured in simula-
tions at z ∼ 2–4 [10], but they assumed the gas to be highly ionized and hence
smooth on the Jeans scale of photoheated gas. While it is still neutral, and
even shortly after it is ionized, the gas could be much clumpier – although
how much depends on the unknown X-ray heating rate [321]. If minihalos
form, they could dramatically increase the clumpiness [201]. However, recent
numerical simulations [202,?,?] and analytic models [203] show that minihalo
evaporation occurs quickly enough that they do not have an enormous ef-
fect on reionization. Thus for now the most widely-used choice is the fit to
lower-redshift simulations by [10].

Figure 19 shows some example bubble size distributions with this PV (δnl ). The
axes are identical to Figure 18, and the thin curves show the same model as
in that figure (with ζ ∝ m0h ). The thick curves (with the filled hexagons) add
recombinations as described above. They have only a modest effect on nb (m)
when x̄i . 0.75, truncating the distribution’s tail but not affecting most bub-
bles. This is because small bubbles need not ionize any of their dense gas; it
is only unusually large bubbles that ionize dense clumps deeply enough for
recombinations to become significant. However, as typical bubbles grow be-
yond ∼ 20 Mpc, recombinations completely dominate their size distribution,
imposing a well-defined Rmax on it. Qualitatively, at this point the typical size
of an ionized bubble equals the typical separation of Lyman-limit systems.
Thus most ionizing photons are absorbed by one of these objects before hit-
ting the edge of a bubble; Lyman-limit systems are so dense and thick that
they cannot easily be “burned off” and so impose a sharp limit on the bubble
sizes. This saturation radius depends sensitively on the assumed IGM den-
sity distribution; measuring it would thus constrain the growth of small-scale
structure. It is also sensitive to the evolution of the ionizing emissivity [342].

Of course, this approach must ultimately be validated against simulations.
Fortunately, because the model is constructed from the density field, it is easy
to compare it to specific simulations in a detailed, and not simply statistical,
sense [364,?,?]. We return to our basic ionization criterion, ζfcoll (δ, m) > 1.
This is a condition on the linear density field: the same field that serves as
the initial condition for simulations. At any redshift, the linearly-evolved den-
sity field can be smoothed around each point on progressively smaller scales,
checking whether the ionization criterion is fulfilled. Each point satisfying it
(at any scale) is tagged as ionized: points ionized by distant neighbors pass
the density threshold on large scales, while points ionized by nearby sources


                                      110
Fig. 19. HII region size distributions at z = 8 for the models with and with-
out inhomogeneous recombinations (thick and thin curves, respectively). The dot-
ted, short-dashed, long-dashed, and solid curves assume x̄i = 0.41, 0.68, 0.84, and
0.92, respectively. Recombinations sharply truncate the bubble size distribution at
R ≈ Rmax . The filled hexagons show the additional fraction of the IGM volume in
bubbles with R = Rmax . From [22].

pass it on small scales. The rightmost column of Figure 16 shows an example
of this approach in the same box used for the radiative transfer simulation
shown in the leftmost column [109]. 32 Considering the simplicity of the ana-
lytic model, the agreement is remarkable. Large HII regions are identified in
a nearly one-to-one manner (although their detailed shapes differ). Thus the
basic principles of the model, and the generic predictions we have emphasized,
appear to be accurate. This scheme allows the rapid generation of large, high-
resolution reionization histories, even with modest computational facilities,
and it reproduces the complex geometries of ionized bubbles reasonably well.
Thus we expect it to provide a powerful tool in studying reionization and its
observable implications.

Nevertheless, it is vital to explore the reasons for the disparities with the
full simulations. One interesting difference is that the simulations tend to
show larger HII regions appearing in the later stages of reionization [108];
32 Note that recombinations are not included in the analytic version, because small-

scale clumping was also neglected in the simulation. But they can easily be incor-
porated in the model by simply using both ionization criteria; in fact, given the
difficulty of properly adding recombinations to simulations, this is an attractive
option.


                                       111
this is inherent to percolation processes, where an infinitely large HII region
containing islands of neutral gas must eventually appear. In the simulations
this manifests itself through HII regions much larger than expected from the
naive analytic model in the later stages of reionization (beyond the stage
shown in Fig. 16), although note that applying the analytic criterion to the
simulation’s density field does correctly describe this topology inversion, so
it is not a result of new physics. Moreover, we have already emphasized that
the analytic model is better suited to describe the mean free path of ionizing
photons in this regime; comparisons during the late stages must await the
self-consistent incorporation of recombinations into simulations.

Another difference is that the galaxy population contains stochastic fluctua-
tions over and above those sourced by density fluctuations. Analytic models
suggest that, in most cases, the effects of this scatter on nb (m) are modest
once the bubbles become large [342]. But this will certainly affect the detailed
distribution of ionized gas. One way to address its importance is to apply the
ionization criterion to the halo density field rather than the dark matter [109].
This is shown by the center column in Figure 16, which clearly provides an
even closer match to the radiative transfer results, especially in regard to the
connectivity of the ionized regions. This algorithm requires running an N-body
simulation (to generate the halo field) but eliminates the radiative transfer, so
it still dramatically speeds up the calculation. Obviously there are a variety
of approaches to inhomogeneous reionization, of increasing sophistication and
accuracy, which can be tailored to the task at hand. We expect the continued
development of reionization models (incorporating, for example, feedback pro-
cesses [365] and more sophisticated star formation algorithms [360]) to sharpen
our expectations for studies of reionization.


8.3 Statistical Predictions


We now turn more specifically to predictions for 21 cm observations and what
they can teach us about inhomogeneous reionization. We will begin with sta-
tistical measurements, because they are most likely to be accomplished first.


8.3.1 The Isotropic Power Spectrum

The simplest possible statistic is the power spectrum, neglecting peculiar ve-
locities and other factors that introduce anisotropies into the signal (see §4.1
and 8.3.2). This requires computing the power spectrum of ionized bubbles,
which was first written down in the context of “patchy reionization” CMB
anisotropies [366,?]. A number of analytic models have been presented in the
literature, including simple tracers of the density field [368] and direct associ-


                                      112
ation with dark matter halos [295]. We will first describe how to build P21 (k)
from the physically-motivated reionization model discussed above. This pro-
vides intuition for more detailed investigations with simulations, which are
necessary given the complex shapes of real HII regions.

We expect the two-point function to have the form [341]

                          hxi (r) xi (r′ )i = x̄2i + (x̄i − x̄2i ) f (r/Rc ),   (128)


where r ≡ |r−r′ |, Rc is the characteristic bubble size, f (r/Rc ) ≈ 1 for r ≪ Rc ,
and f (r/Rc ) ≈ 0 for r ≫ Rc . This form is necessary because the bubbles have
a finite size: thus two nearby points will either both be ionized by the same
bubble (with probability x̄i ) or both be neutral. At large separations, on the
other hand, the points must be ionized by two distinct bubbles, each with
probability x̄i .

In constructing f we must take care because xi has a restricted range from
zero to unity. Thus x̄i = 1 implies xi = 1 at every point in the IGM, and
the correlations must vanish in both limits x̄i → (0, 1). This is a particular
concern for statistical models of the bubble distribution, because it means
that bubbles cannot overlap and we cannot simply distribute them randomly.
One solution is to treat the ionization as a Poisson process [341,?], which
prevents more than one bubble from covering any particular location but has
the unattractive feature of failing to conserve photons.

It is therefore more illuminating to try to construct f (r/Rc ) directly while
taking care to enforce the proper limiting behavior. By analogy to the halo
model for density fluctuations [102], we separate it into two components: the
probability p1 for which a single bubble ionizes both points and the probability
p2 for which two separate bubbles do so [341]. Then
                                            Z
                              p1 (r) =          dm nb (m) Vov (m, r),           (129)


where Vov (m, r) is the volume within which the center of a bubble of mass
m (or radius R) can sit while still ionizing both points. Note that p1 ∼ x̄i
for r ≪ Rc but p1 ≈ 0 for sufficiently large r. The two-bubble term can be
written [356]:

               Z                   Z            Z
                                        3
    p2 (r) =       dm1 nb (m1 )        dr           dm2 nb (m2 )
                   Z
               ×       d3 r′ [1 + ξbb (r − r′ |m1 , m2 )],                      (130)

where ξbb is the bubble correlation function. Clearly P2 → x̄2i as r → ∞.


                                                     113
The challenge posed by the discrete bubbles is to set the spatial integration
limits to simultaneously avoid overlap (to force P2 → 0 as r → 0) while still
allowing bubbles to reside near to each other. This is difficult because of the
assumed spherical symmetry. (The basic problem is similar to packing a crate
with oranges: small gaps are invariably left between the bubbles. In reality, of
course, the HII regions can assume arbitrary sizes to fill space.)

An approximate solution that matches simulation power spectra reasonably
well (at least at x̄i . 0.8) is [356]
                                  
                                   p1 (r) + p2 (r)
                                  
                                                           x̄i < 0.5
                 hxi xi i (r) =                                               (131)
                                   (1 − x̄ )p (r) + x̄2
                                  
                                                           x̄i ≥ 0.5,
                                           i   1       i



with ξbb ≈ b2x ξδδ on sufficiently large scales and ξδδ the dark matter correlation
function. This form is intuitively simple: when x̄i < 0.5, overlap is relatively
unimportant and we can use the one- and two-bubble terms as is. At larger
ionized fractions, overlap becomes significant, but by this point the charac-
teristic bubble size Rc & 5 Mpc, and ξbb (Rc ) is sufficiently small that setting
p2 ≈ x̄2i everywhere suffices. Thus we only need the one-bubble term p1 (r)
(weighted by the neutral fraction to enforce the proper limits). This basic
form captures most of the relevant features of the correlations (see [288] for a
simplified version using bubbles of a single size).

Because δTb ∝ xHI n, we also require the cross-correlation ξxδ between the
ionized fraction and density. This is implicit in the analytic model, which cal-
culates the bubble geometry from the density field itself [341,?]. The resulting
expressions have similar ambiguities and limiting behaviors to hxi xi i.

Armed with the correlation functions ξxx , ξxδ , and ξδδ (and the corresponding
power spectra), 33 the isotropic power spectrum of 21 cm brightness temper-
                     iso
ature fluctuations, P21  , is 34 [341]
                iso
               P21  (k) = Pδδ (k) + Pxx (k) − 2Pxδ (k) + Pxδxδ (k);           (132)


                                                                  ¯ 2 . The four
to convert to temperature fluctuations, we must multiply this by δT b
                                                                   2
point term Pxδxδ is in general complicated; we will take Pxδxδ = Pxδ   + Pxx Pδδ
by dropping the connected part. 35
33 Note that we write P
                       xx for the power spectrum of δx , the fractional perturbation
in x̄HI used in equation (92). This differs from the definition in [356].
34 Here we assume T ≫ T throughout the IGM; if this is note the case, as may
                      S     γ
occur early in reionization, other terms sourced by TS will appear.
35 Formally, this is only valid for a gaussian field. But comparison to numerical

simulations show that it is a reasonable approximation [356].


                                          114
Fig. 20. Rms variation in the 21 cm brightness temperature as a function of
wavenumber at several different stages of reionization, ignoring peculiar velocities.
All the curves assume z = 10. They have x̄i = 0.13 (dotted curve), x̄i = 0.36
(dash-dotted curve), x̄i = 0.48 (short dashed curve), x̄i = 0.69 (long-dashed curve),
and x̄i = 0.78 (solid curve). Following [341,?].

Figure 20 shows several examples. We set z = 10 and vary the ionizing effi-
ciency ζ to examine a range of x̄i . When x̄i ≪ 1, HII regions are unimportant
and P21 (k) essentially traces the matter power spectrum (the sharp rise at
k & 10h Mpc−1 is due to small scale nonlinearities). When the bubbles ap-
pear, they first suppress the power by ionizing the highest density regions
first. Soon, however, Pxx becomes large and begins to dominate the fluctua-
tions, creating a “shoulder” at kpk . The scale of this feature is directly related
to the characteristic bubble size, and kpk decreases throughout reionization;
moreover, the more sharply peaked the bubble distribution, the more distinct
the peak. For k < kpk , P21 ∝ Pδδ when x̄i is small (it is simply amplified by
the effective bias of the bubbles), but once the bubbles become large their
Poisson fluctuations dominate and P21 approaches white noise. This peak is
probably the single most important feature for 21 cm experiments, because it
directly and clearly constrains reionization and the sources responsible for it.
Its detection is one of the major goals of 21 cm observatories.

Of course, the power spectrum is best measured in simulations of reioniza-
tion, which can capture its complex geometry – although large volumes are
obviously necessary (cf. [271,?]). Figure 21 compares the power spectra of the
ionized fraction in full radiative transfer simulations (solid curves) to imple-
mentations of the analytic model in the same box (using the linear density field


                                        115
in the dotted curves and the halo distribution in the dashed curves); these are
the same fields shown in Figure 16 [109]. Qualitatively the results are similar
in the three cases: the power spectrum has a well-defined peak that moves to
larger scales and eventually fades into Poisson noise as x̄i increases. We see
kpk ∼ 0.01–0.1h Mpc−1 over this range, as expected from [341]. However, the
radiative transfer simulations do have somewhat less power on large scales and
somewhat more on small scales; the latter is due to fluctuations in the recom-
bination rate and in the halo distribution. The agreement in P21 is similarly
good [109], and other simulations show qualitatively similar behavior, with a
peak developing in both ∆2xx [108] and the angular power spectrum of 21 cm
fluctuations [205] that moves to larger scales throughout reionization.

Thus, although numerical implementations are clearly required to produce
detailed power spectra (and by extension other statistical measures), the an-
alytic model, especially as implemented in realistic density fields, can provide
a great deal of intuition about the signal. For example, measuring the shape
of P21 will teach us about the sources of reionization (through their cluster-
ing) [342], the role of recombinations [22], feedback during reionization, and
even whether X-rays have uniformly ionized the IGM [370].


8.3.2 Anisotropies

The velocity field makes P21 anisotropic (see §4.1) and hence considerably more
complicated. Using the linear theory approximation δ̃∂v = −µ2 f δ̃L , where δL
is the linear density field, we can write (with f = 1) 36 [278]


               iso
    P21 (k) = P21  (k) + 2µ2 [PδL δ (k) − PxδL (k)]
              +µ4 [PδL δL (k)] + 2PxδδL x (k) + PxδL δL x (k).                (133)

The first three terms in equation (133) show the µ0 , µ2 , and µ4 dependen-
cies originally derived by [277], but the last two terms are considerably more
complicated. Although they appear to be higher order, they must be included
because δx is not small during reionization, so these four-point terms are still
only second order in δ. Unfortunately, they have nontrivial µ dependence; for
example,


                       d3 k′
                    Z
    PxδδL x (k) =             (n̂ · k̂′ )2 [PxδL (k ′ ) Pxδ (|k − k′ |)
                      (2π)3
                    +PδδL (k ′ ) Pxx (|k − k′ |)].                            (134)

36 In practice P
                δL δL and Pδδ are identical on the scales accessible to experiments,
but we separate them in order to label those terms arising from velocities.


                                              116
                 0.1
                             z=8.16, xi=0.13




      ∆2XX(k)

                0.01




                             z=7.26, xi=0.35
                 0.1




      ∆2XX(k)




                0.01
                             z=6.89, xi=0.55                Radiative Transfer
                 0.1                                         Halo-Smoothing
                                                                       FZH04




      ∆2XX(k)




                0.01
                       0.1                           1                           10
                                                k [h/Mpc]

Fig. 21. Comparison of dimensionless power in the ionization fraction between a
simulation and the analytic model. The solid, dashed, and dotted curves correspond
to the three different columns in Fig. 16. From [109].

Thus, when they are large, they will ruin the decomposition in powers of µ
proposed by [277].

Figure 22 shows the 21 cm power spectra at several stages of reionization for
µ = 0, 0.5, and 1 (solid, dash-dotted, and dashed curves, respectively). When
x̄i = 0, only the Pδδ and PδδL terms remain and redshift space distortions
significantly enhance the power in line of sight modes, as usual. This remains


                                               117
                         <x > = .7                  <xi> = .5
                           i
                 2
                10




       (mK )
      2
                 1
                10

      2

      (k)/2 π
                 0
                10
                         <x > = .1                   <x > = 0
                           i                              i
          ∆T    10
                     2


      3k P
                     1
                10



                     0
                10              −1    0         1              −1    0       1
                               10    10    10                 10    10     10
                                                     −1
                                           k (Mpc )

Fig. 22. 21 cm brightness temperature power spectra at four different stages of reion-
ization. In each panel, the solid, dash-dotted, and dashed curves take µ = 0, 0.5,
and 1, respectively. The model follows [341] with ζ = 12. From [278].



true when x̄i is small, because the enhancement from the velocity field is
of course independent of reionization. However, the Pxx term is isotropic, so
once it begins to dominate, the total power becomes nearly independent of
the underlying velocity field (and hence of µ). Only on scales smaller than
the characteristic bubble size does the power spectrum remain anisotropic,
partly because the four-point terms can be large in this regime [278]. Thus,
once reionization gathers steam, redshift space distortions will be difficult to
separate and to interpret cleanly; they can probably only be used to measure
cosmological parameters before reionization.

Another source of anisotropy is evolution in the density field and neutral gas
distribution across the observational bandwidth. When P21 ∝ Pδδ (i.e., when x̄i
is small or on scales much larger than the bubbles), this only affects the overall
amplitude of the power spectrum and can be modeled reasonably well. Only
in the late stages of reionization, and only if the remaining voids are ionized
rapidly, do these “light-cone” effects introduce measurable anisotropies that
dominate those of the velocity field [278,?].




                                          118
8.3.3 Nongaussianity

To this point, we have focused exclusively on the power spectrum. To many
readers familiar with the CMB and galaxy surveys, this will seem natural: in
those cases, the power spectrum provides a nearly perfect statistical descrip-
tion, because the relevant fields are (to an excellent approximation) gaussian.
Of course, for the 21 cm signal during reionization, this gaussian assumption
breaks down. A glance at Figures 16 or 17 shows immediately that the fluctua-
tions are dominated by the striking contrast between the neutral IGM and the
HII regions; the (gaussian) density fluctuations in the residual neutral gas play
only a secondary role. Only on scales so large that P21 ∝ Pδδ does the gaus-
sian approximation hold [371]. Exploring these signatures of nongaussianity is
crucial for extracting the maximal information from upcoming experiments,
especially because it helps to distinguish the cosmological signal from the fore-
grounds. Unfortunately, it is also difficult and so has received relatively little
attention.

The obvious place to begin is with the probability distribution function (PDF)
of pixel fluxes considered as a function of smoothing scale. Analytic models
show that, because of the correlation between xi and δ, this will have in-
teresting and nontrivial structure during reionization [370]. Figure 23 shows
several examples taken from a simulation of reionization [205]. The maps have
been smoothed over 20, 10, and 5h−1 Mpc; the Figure also shows the best
fit gaussians. When x̄i = 0.5, the PDF has a cutoff at large δTb and an ex-
cess at negative δTb (from HII regions). The cutoff is caused by “inside-out”
reionization, in which sources ionize their (dense) surroundings first. It is a
direct result of the ionization criterion ζfcoll > 1; if voids were instead ion-
ized first, the PDF would look much different, even if the power spectra were
comparable [370]. Note also that the distribution narrows as the smoothing
scale increases, because bubbles are no longer resolved. Later in reionization,
at x̄i = 0.75, the PDF has a strong peak at negative δTb and a long tail to-
ward higher fluxes. This occurs because, by this point, the simulation contains
large, connected HII regions with discrete islands of neutral gas. Because these
islands still have high contrast, they may be the easiest features to detect at
the end of reionization [205].

The simplest way to approach nongaussianity is to try to measure this PDF
directly. In particular, if the bubbles are resolved, the distribution will have
two peaks: one centered on δTb = 0 for pixels entirely inside HII regions
and one centered on δTb ≈ 20 mK. Thus, even factoring in noise near to
or larger than this separation, the underlying distribution will be bimodal.
Sensitive tests for bimodality in large datasets are available and relatively
easy to implement [279]. These techniques essentially compare the goodness
of fit of single and multiple gaussians to the data; they succeed because of the
enormous volume subtended by the fields of view of even the first generation


                                      119
Fig. 23. Pixel flux PDFs in a simulation of reionization. The left and right panels
have x̄i = 0.5 and 0.75, respectively. Within each panel, the maps are smoothed on
scales 20h−1 , 10h−1 , and 5h−1 Mpc (solid curves; narrowest to widest). The dotted
curves show the corresponding best fit gaussians. From [205].

of telescopes. Numerical simulations show that this simple idea can work in
realistic datasets (although foreground contamination may be a problem).

Of course, the PDF throws away all the information contained in spatial cor-
relations so it is certainly not optimal. A complementary approach is to study
“global” properties of the ionization pattern, such as the genus number [372].
This is particularly useful in identifying the topological transition from dis-
crete HII regions to discrete HI clouds.

We expect the continued development of strategies to detect the signatures of
HII regions to be a major step toward reliable 21 cm data analysis algorithms.
It is imperative that we identify robust and powerful statistics to extract as
much information as possible from the data. A particularly important appli-
cation is to develop tests for “bubble” structure or sharp edges in the data;
statistical detection of such features, through methods like the bimodality test
of [279], will vastly increase the believability of the results, because foreground
contamination and removal are unlikely to introduce sharp edges like these (at
least in the frequency direction, where all sources have smooth spectra).


8.4 The Imaging Regime


The statistical measures described in the previous section will shed a great
deal of light on the reionization epoch. However, even more exciting is direct


                                       120
three-dimensional tomography of the high-redshift IGM (e.g., [273,373,374]).
The 21 cm line is by far the best way to perform such tomography: the CMB
is a snapshot of a two-dimensional surface, and quasar absorption spectra only
sample the IGM in sparse one-dimensional skewers. The low S/N of upcom-
ing 21 cm experiments precludes direct imaging of the cosmic web in the near
term (see §9.1.2). However, the large HII regions blown by quasars or clustered
galaxies will appear as holes in 21 cm emission and will have sufficiently high
S/N to be detected individually. They may very well be the first unambiguous
features of the epoch of reionization detected by these experiments. We there-
fore focus here on the rich science returns from direct imaging of high-redshift
HII regions.


Detecting HII regions in the face of telescope noise requires that they be suf-
ficiently large and that the contrast between neutral and ionized regions be
sufficiently high. As we will see in §9.1.2, the brightness temperature sensi-
tivity decreases dramatically as the physical scale to be probed decreases (eq.
141). It should be compared to the temperature contrast δTb ≈ 22xHI (1 +
δ)[(1 + z)/7.5)]1/2 mK (assuming TS ≫ Tγ ) between neutral and ionized re-
gions (note that this contrast falls if the IGM is partially ionized from X-rays
or incomplete recombination in a fossil HII region). The angular and frequency
scales required for a ∼ 5σ detection correspond to ∼ 20h−1 Mpc with the first
generation of experiments. To prevent beam dilution across the bubble, the
beam size should be somewhat smaller than the bubble radius; as with power
spectrum measurements [158], the optimal S/N generally results from match-
ing the frequency resolution to the beam size: reducing the channel width
when the bubble is unresolved yields no gains (because of beam dilution) but
increases the noise level.


The need for such large bubbles pushes us toward either those blown by bright
quasars [273,?,?,?] or those characteristic of clustered galaxies late in the reion-
ization process [341]. The former are particularly attractive, since a number
of z > 6 SDSS quasars with large proximity zones are already known [7]; if
the IGM is significantly neutral x̄HI ≥ 0.2 at z ∼ 6.0–6.5, their HII regions
should be detectable and will likely be the the first imaging targets of the
new generation of 21 cm experiments. In this context, the 21 cm fluctuations
discussed in the last several sections (including the linear density field, the
spin temperature, and unresolved bubbles) become noise [158,374,373]. This
is analogous to confusion noise in ordinary imaging and provides an irreducible
background in that additional integration does not reduce the effective noise
level (except the contribution from bubbles, in so far as smaller bubbles can
be identified). Thus, the optimal strategy is to integrate until the telescope
noise reaches the same level as that due to the cosmic web, which is typically
a few mK on the scales of interest. This limit will probably only be reached


                                       121
with SKA-class instruments. 37

Given that we are looking for bright quasars, one might expect features to be
extremely rare. However, 21 cm experiments have broad bandpasses and wide
fields of view encompassing huge volumes. For instance, a simple extrapolation
of the empirical quasar luminosity function at lower redshifts yields at least
one quasar with LB > 2 × 1010 L⊙ within the ∼ 500, 000(h−1 Mpc)3 volume
subtended by a single 10′ synthesized beam from z = 6–12 [374]; such an
object will blow an HII region of sufficient size to overcome the cosmic web
variance. Similar estimates based on a semi-analytic model for the quasar
luminosity function [375,?,?] (and also from a different extrapolation of the
empirical luminosity function [6]), predict that HII regions should appear in
each MWA-5000 38 pointing with a field of view of 400 deg2 in a bandpass of
16 MHz. They emphasize that the short duty-cycle of quasars (∼ 0.01 at these
redshifts) implies that the abundance of fossil HII regions – where the quasar
has turned off but where (due to the long recombination time) the HII cavity
remains – may be up to two orders of magnitude larger. They estimate ∼ 1
active/fossil quasar HII region with R > (24, 40) Mpc, R > (18, 36) Mpc, and
R > (11, 22) Mpc (in comoving units) at z = 7, 8, and 10, respectively, in a
single MWA-5000 field of view [373].

What is the best observational strategy to pick out these HII regions? Statis-
tical detection of boundaries in a noisy field is a classic problem with many
applications from oceanography to medical imaging. The optimal strategy for
21 cm surveys is still unclear. One possibility is to throw away spatial informa-
tion and simply examine the PDF of pixel temperatures [279]. However, if the
bubbles are large and the S/N per bubble is high, more straightforward tech-
niques are applicable. For experiments operating solely in the frequency do-
main, both the equivalent width and depth of spectral dips sourced by quasar
HII regions are possible indicators [374]. The equivalent width depends on the
lifetime of the quasar; for short-lived objects, it cannot be distinguished from
the tail of Gaussian fluctuations. However, the depth is more robust since the
gas is always highly ionized regardless of the HII region size. The optimal
strategy for detecting dips depends on their distribution along a line of sight,
[dN/d(LOS)](> dmin ) ∝ d−α  min (where dmin is the limiting detectable depth in
a given observation). Since dmin ∝ t−1/2 , the total number of detected dips
N ∝ ntα/2 ∝ tα/2−1 (where n is the number of sightlines, t is the time each is
observed, and we have assumed nt =constant). If α > 2, it is more efficient to
integrate longer than to increase the number of lines of sight. Figure 24 shows
some simulated three-dimensional cubes illustrating how quasar HII regions

37 See §9 below for a detailed discussion of the instruments mentioned in this section.
38 The MWA-5000 is a proposed larger version of the MWA described in §9, increas-

ing the collecting area by about an order of magnitude. See [373,?] for details on
its capabilities.


                                         122
Fig. 24. Simulated maps of HII regions around z = 6.5 quasars with the MWA-5000,
assuming a 3′ Gaussian beam top-hat smoothed at 0.5 MHz in a 1000 hr integration.
The first row shows an intrinsically spherical HII region. The second, third and
fourth rows show intrinsically bi-conical HII regions oriented along, at π/4 to, and
perpendicular to the line of sight, respectively (with opening angles of π/3). The
three maps show different slices of the frequency cube. The contours correspond to
5, 11, and 17 mK. The solid black dot at (-20,-20) shows the beam size. The dashed,
solid, and dotted spectra in the right-most panel correspond to the left, center, and
right lines of sight marked in the third frequency slice, while the dotted and dashed
vertical lines show the locations of the quasar and of the front of the HII region.
(Note that distances are in physical units here.) From [373].

can be detected (from [373]). The MWA should be able to detect HII regions
around the most luminous quasars; the follow-up MWA-5000 should be capa-
ble of mapping the detailed geometry of HII regions (which can be complex if
quasar emission is beamed), while the SKA can detect narrow spectral features
and may measure the sharpness of the HII region boundary.

What could we learn by imaging quasar HII regions? Some of the exciting
possibilities are summarized in [373]. Most importantly, the contrast between
HII regions and the IGM yields xHI in a more reliable way than trying to fit for
 ¯ b (z) since the HII regions (within which only the radio foregrounds appear,
δT


                                        123
provided the mass fraction of Lyman limit systems inside the HII regions is
small) calibrate the foregrounds as a function of frequency. Inferences about
high-redshift quasars are also possible, since full 3D data will be available
(unlike with the Lyα forest). Measurement of the shape of the HII region
could reveal the emission profile of the quasar (as in the conical profiles of
Fig. 24). The HII region sizes jointly constrain the quasar lifetime tQSO and x̄HI .
Asymmetry in the transverse and line of sight sizes (with additional constraints
on the latter from the Lyα forest) can arise due to finite time travel effects. 21
cm and Lyα forest measurements sample different epochs in the evolution of
the HII regions; photons along the transverse direction were emitted earlier,
when the HII region was smaller. The asymmetry depends on the expansion
                                                                             −1/3
speed of the HII region, which for a given ionizing flux is proportional to xHI .
Thus it could potentially break the degeneracy between xHI and tQSO , directly
constraining xHI (with only a small dependence on quasar beaming) [375].
These possibilities are of course subject to caveats about radiative transfer
through a filamentary IGM – which also breaks spherical symmetry – but at
the least a statistical detection might be possible. Finally, near-IR followup of
large (R & 20 Mpc) HII regions, which should be dominated by quasars, may
be an efficient means of discovering high-redshift quasars, since only ∼ 100
pointings would be needed to find an active quasar – a vast improvement
over blind searches. Such a survey would also measure the duty cycle (and
lifetime) of quasars, provided that the largest bubbles are indeed sourced by
bright quasars rather than clustered galaxies. These followup surveys should
not be too difficult; quasars driving HII regions with R & 20 Mpc should be
detectable with 8-meter class telescopes in 200-300 s. The next generation of
large telescopes will allow us to probe further down the luminosity function
and to search for bright galaxies.


One final possibility for high resolution instruments such as the SKA is to
measure the structure of the ionization front and emission/absorption shells
around a quasar. The thickness of the ionization front (which depends on
the hardness of the ionizing source spectrum) could be used to discriminate
between quasars and stars as ionizing sources [377]. This requires that the HII
region sit in a neutral IGM; partial ionization by X-rays or relic HII regions
significantly reduce the power of this discriminant. In addition to the ionization
front, isolated quasars also have non-trivial temperature structure [273]: the
HII region would then be surrounded by a ring of 21 cm emission (where X-
rays from the quasar heat the IGM) fading into 21 cm absorption (where the
X-rays peter out and TK < Tγ ). However, this structure will disappear if X-
rays from other sources have heated the IGM on a more global level (as seems
likely by z ∼ 6.5; see §3). If it does exist, the detection of absorption will
constrain the background UV flux of Lyα photons, because the Lyα photons
from the quasar itself are unable to couple the spin and kinetic temperatures
(largely because the HII region expands so fast) [375].


                                       124
9   Low-Frequency Radio Observations


In the past several chapters, we have described the power of 21 cm tomography
for studying basic cosmology, high-redshift structure formation, and reioniza-
tion. A number of experiments are currently being built to explore this signal;
we list some of the largest in Table 6. Observing fluctuations during and be-
fore reionization requires low-frequency telescopes (the observed frequency is
ν = 1420/[1 + z] MHz) with baselines of order a kilometer (in order to achieve
sufficiently good angular resolution). Thus all the experiments we will dis-
cuss are interferometer arrays. The 21 Centimeter Array (21CMA, formerly
known as PAST) is located in the Xinjiang province of western China and is
currently being commissioned [378]. The Low Frequency Array 39 (LOFAR) is
under construction in the Netherlands, with plans for a possible extension into
the rest of Europe. LOFAR is a general purpose low-frequency radio telescope
that will have both long and short baselines; it is the largest (both in terms of
baselines and collecting area) of the first generation instruments. The compact
core, which is most relevant to 21 cm studies, is scheduled for completion in
2008. The Mileura Widefield Array Low Frequency Demonstrator 40 (which we
will refer to as simply the MWA) is a smaller telescope to be built in western
Australia, specializing in observations of the 21 cm background, radio tran-
sients, and the heliosphere. It should also begin observations in two to three
years. Finally, the Square Kilometer Array 41 (SKA) is the next-generation
multi-purpose radio telescope, aiming for completion toward the end of the
next decade. It is sufficiently early in the design process that its parameters
in Table 6 should be considered educated guesses at best. Not included in Ta-
ble 6 is the Precision Array to Probe Epoch of Reionization (PAPER), which
aims to study the observational challenges, and strategies to overcome them,
in detail as sensitivity is slowly increased. Thus its parameters are sufficiently
dynamic that a summary as in Table 6 is not useful. An 8-dipole array has
already been deployed in Green Bank, West Virginia, and plans call for later
expansion to Western Australia (D. Backer, private communication).

The purpose of this section is to review these challenges and to ground the
great promise of 21 cm studies in the practical considerations of the real world.
We begin with a brief discussion of low-frequency radio astronomy in §9.1. We
then describe how to estimate the sensitivity for statistical measurements in
§9.2. Finally, we end with discussions of foreground cleaning (§9.3) and some
other systematic difficulties (§9.4).



39 See www.lofar.org for more information.
40 See web.haystack.mit.edu/arrays/MWA/ for more information.
41 See www.skatelescope.org for more information.




                                      125
  Array      Na    Atot (103 m2 )   ν (MHz)     FoV (deg2 )   Dmin (m)     Dmax (km)
 21CMA       20          8.0         70–200        π152          100           10
  MWA       500          7.0         80–300        π162           4            1.5
 LOFAR       64          42         115–240       4 × π22        100           2c
    SKA      5000        600         100–200      π5.62          10           5c
Table 6
Existing and planned low-frequency radio telescopes and their approximate param-
eters. The second column is the number of antenna elements. The third shows the
total collecting area Atot at z = 8. We also quote the field of view (FoV) at z = 8;
                                                    2 (or with [1 + z]2 ). D
it scales approximately with the diffraction limit θD                       min is the
minimum baseline (in most cases determined by the area of a single element). Dmax
is the maximum baseline; for experiments labeled with “c” this is actually the ex-
tent of the compact core (which is the only part included in this table). Parameters
are taken from [379,?] and the experiments’ websites; all are approximate.
9.1 Overview


Low frequency radio telescopes operate as phase coherent apertures. The
“diffraction limit” dictates that the finest achievable angular resolution θD
depends on the largest dimension Dmax of the telescope, θD ∼ λ/Dmax ; in our
case, we have θD ∼ λ0 (1+z)/Dmax , where λ0 = 21.1 cm. The exact value of θD
depends on the details of the aperture illumination, whether the telescope is
a single dish or an array of sub-apertures, and the procedures invoked during
calibration and image processing; a useful estimate for the redshifted 21 cm
line is θD ∼ 1.2◦ [(1 + z)/10] (Dmax /100 m)−1 .

Telescope mirrors must be smooth to a fraction of a wavelength in order to
achieve diffraction-limited operation. In the ν < 200 MHz regime relevant
for us, λ > 1.5 m, and this smoothness requirement is lax. This permits the
use of coarse mesh as a reflecting surface. Furthermore, simple, inexpensive
technologies, such as yagi antennae 42 and dipole arrays, can be used in tele-
scope designs, making it possible to build the required large collecting areas
at affordable costs.

A further consequence of diffraction-limited operation is that the sensitivity to
a distant radio source whose angular size is less than θD results from the phase
coherent sum of the source’s incident electric field over the entire telescope col-
lecting area. In this regime, the detectability of compact radio sources is nearly
42 Yagi or Yagi-Uda antennae (named after their inventors) are the most common

type of roof-mounted antenna for receiving television signals. They consist of a
driven dipole mounted between parallel elements (rods) that form a reflector behind
the dipole and a series of directors, which serve to increase the antenna gain in rough
proportion to the number of director elements.


                                         126
independent of the telescope aperture distribution and can be estimated quite
simply from the total telescope area. But the surface brightness sensitivity to
radio sources resolved by the telescope (θS > θD ) is highly dependent on the
design of the telescope, as we discuss in § 9.1.2.

The sensitivity of a telescope system depends on the competition between the
strength of the celestial signal collected by the antenna and the noise, which
can have different origins. In many radio astronomy applications, the dominant
noise contribution arises in the first amplifiers that are connected to the output
of the antenna. The electrical junction between the antenna and this first
amplifier of the receiving system is a convenient place to compare the celestial
signal strength to the receiver noise level. The signal output of the antenna
can be specified as an antenna temperature, Ta , which is the temperature
of a matched resistive load that would produce the same power level (Pa =
kB Ta ∆ν for the resistor) as the signal power P = Ae Sν ∆ν/2 received in
one of two orthogonal antenna polarizations [381]. Here Sν is the source flux
density (assuming an unpolarized source), ∆ν is the observed bandwidth, and
Ae is the effective collecting area of the antenna. These equations define the
antenna sensitivity factor Ka = Ta /Sν = Ae /2kB in units of K Jy−1 . 43

The signal-to-noise ratio is assessed by comparing Ta and Tsys , the system
temperature, similarly defined as the temperature of a matched resistor in-
put to an ideal noise-free receiver that produces the same noise power level
as measured at the output of the actual receiver. Noise fluctuations ∆T N
decline with increased bandwidth and integration time tint according to the
well-known radiometer equation (e.g. [382]):

                                     Tsys       Tsys
                       ∆T N = κc √           ≈√         ,                   (135)
                                     ∆ν tint    ∆ν tint


where κc ≥ 1 is a loss factor accounting for the details of the signal detection
scheme. For radio spectrometers, κc depends on the number of bits of precision
used to quantify the signals when they are digitized. For interferometers, there
may be loss of signal when compensation is made for rapid fringe rotation.
For our purposes, this instrumental parameter will be close to unity, and we
will set κc = 1 throughout the remainder of this discussion.



43 Some confusion surrounds the definition of K , because many early radio as-
                                                a
tronomy systems received only a single polarization. Then, a Ka′ was defined as
Ae /kB , with the implicit assumption of unpolarized sources. This definition per-
sists in many applications, and observers compensate by averaging (rather than
summing) the measurements from dual polarized systems to obtain the total flux
density.


                                      127
Fig. 25. Brightness temperature of the radio sky at 150 MHz (from [383]) in Galactic
coordinates. Contours are drawn at 180 (dashed), 270, 360, 540, 1100, 2200, 3300,
4400, and 5500 K. The 21CMA/PAST [378] survey field at the North celestial pole
is cross-hatched. Heavy lines indicate constant declinations:−26.5◦ , +35◦ , and +54◦
with dots to mark 2 hour intervals of time. Star symbols indicate the coordinates of
the 4 highest redshift (z > 6.2) SDSS quasars (found with the NASA Extragalactic
Database, nedwww.ipac.caltech.edu).

9.1.1 The Radio Sky

Pointing the beam of the radio telescope into a region of sky whose brightness
temperature is Tsky has the effect of adding noise power to that already present
in the receiver, so that Tsys ≥ Tsky . In fact, at the low radio frequencies relevant
to the redshifted 21 cm line, the sky is so bright that Tsys ≈ Tsky . Figure 25
maps the radio sky at 150 MHz, corresponding to z = 8.5 for the 21 cm line.
Everywhere on the sky, Tsky is dominated by synchrotron radiation from fast
electrons in the Milky Way; we will discuss the characteristics of this emission
in more detail in §9.3. At these frequencies the Galactic Center is the strongest
feature, and the brightness declines rapidly with Galactic latitude, making the
Galactic poles attractive survey targets. Also of significance are two minima
in the sky brightness located in the general direction of the anti-center, where
the sky brightness reaches ∼150 K. A rule of thumb for typical high-latitude,
“quiet” portions of the sky is
                                                    −2.6
                                              ν
                                      
                         Tsky ∼ 180                         K.                 (136)
                                          180 MHz


The challenge at the heart of these observations is immediately apparent: the
foregrounds are four to five orders of magnitude larger than the expected
signal, so substantial collecting areas and/or long integrations will be required
to separate the cosmological component, even ignoring systematic effects! Also


                                          128
note the rapid increase toward lower frequencies; for this reason, we expect the
lowest redshifts (corresponding to reionization) to be by far the most accessible
to observations.

To minimize Tsys , experiments must therefore choose fields where the sky
brightness is small. Figure 25 indicates the location of the 21CMA/PAST [378]
field, fixed by the telescope design to point at the north celestial pole. Both
LOFAR and MWA have steerable beams, which allows the selection of low sky
brightness survey fields. Solid lines in Figure 25 trace the paths of the zenith
through the course of a single day (at declinations +54◦ for LOFAR and at
−26.5◦ for MWA). LOFAR fields chosen at declinations around +35◦ would
lie in the heart of the northern cool spot. MWA will be able to observe fields
in both the northern and southern cool zones.

At low radio frequencies, non-thermal radiation from the Sun becomes ex-
tremely bright and variable during periods of high solar activity. To minimize
solar contamination, redshifted 21 cm observations must be made at night.
Together with the restriction that cold regions of sky be accessible, 21 cm
studies will have limited operating “seasons.” For example, over a calendar
year, any single field will only be accessible for ∼ 1000 hours with MWA.



9.1.2 Telescope Sensitivity: Imaging

Computing the sensitivity of compact sources unresolved by the diffraction-
limited beam θD of the array is straightforward. The noise level (in flux density
units) can be written

                                     Tsys /Ka
                                σS = √         ,                           (137)
                                       ∆ν tint


where Ka now includes the total effective collecting area of the telescope. As
a concrete example, the flux density corresponding to δTb ∼ 10 mK across a
25′ HI cloud (or hole) at z = 8.5 (spanning a comoving diameter ≈ 65 Mpc)
is ∼270 µJy. In theory, a telescope like Arecibo (Ka ∼ 10 K Jy−1 ) observing a
quiet patch of sky with 1 MHz bandwidth and dual polarizations could detect
such a hole in tint ∼ 35 hours.

There is often confusion about the sensitivity of radio telescopes to low surface
brightness features, especially when the telescope is a sparse “array” of small
apertures. Such a configuration is called an “unfilled aperture.” One approach
to computing this important quantity uses the relation between brightness
temperature and flux density from §2.1. We obtain an equivalent brightness


                                      129
temperature uncertainty,
                                                    σS c2
                                    ∆T N =                   ,                           (138)
                                                  2kB ν 2 ΩB

                                                            2
where the telescope beam subtends a solid angle ΩB ≈ θD       if the telescope
collecting area is distributed over an area of diameter D. Combined with the
definitions for σS , Ka and θD , equation (138) reduces to
                                    2
                                          !
                           N       Dmax           Tsys        Tsys
                      ∆T       =              √           ≡ √         ,                  (139)
                                   Atot           ∆ν tint  ηf ∆ν tint

                                                     2
where Atot is total effective area and ηf ≡ Atot /Dmax    is the array filling fac-
     44
tor.    An appreciation of this dependence on ηf is crucial: the integration
                                                                             4
time required to detect a given surface brightness grows as tint ∝ Dmax           if
the (fixed) total collecting area is spread over larger areas in order to achieve
better angular resolution.

We can develop more intuition about the telescope response through a thought
experiment in which a radio telescope is encased in a blackbody of temperature
T . Regardless of its size, and with proper impedance matching, the telescope
would produce an antenna temperature Ta = T at its output. For this reason,
attempts to observe the global 21 cm background are more concerned with
issues of matching and gain calibration than with antenna size (see §3.6).

On the other hand, a telescope constructed with a beam of solid angle ΩB will
still deliver Ta = T at its output if (i) it is embedded in a black body radiation
field or (ii) an emitter of TB = T entirely fills its beam. Unfortunately, real
radio telescopes do not form perfectly defined beams, and all suffer from side-
lobes whose shapes and responses are dictated by diffraction and scattering of
the incident radiation through the telescope. This is especially true of arrays,
where a fraction (1 − ηf ) of the total response lies outside the beam defined
by θD ∼ λ/Dmax .

Using equation (136) with Tsys ≈ Tsky to estimate the telescope noise ∆T N for
a single-dish measurement of an unresolved source, we find
                                                      2.6                    !1/2
                                              1+z                MHz 100 hr
                                          
                 N
            ∆T       |sd ∼ 0.6ǫ−1
                               ap   mK                                               ,   (140)
                                               10                ∆ν    tint


where we have replaced ηf with the aperture efficiency ǫap , the ratio of effec-
tive and physical areas for a single dish. Recall that the mean 21 cm signal
44 Note that, because it is the ratio of the effective area to the physical size, η need
                                                                                   f
not be unity even for a single dish.


                                              130
     ¯ b ∼ 10 mK; thus single dish telescopes can easily reach the sensitivity
has δT
necessary to detect the global 21 cm background. Instead, the challenge is
to separate the (relatively slowly varying) cosmological signal from the fore-
grounds through careful gain calibration (see §3.6). This may be possible if
the 21 cm background has strong features (such as an absorption dip from
early Wouthuysen-Field coupling or a sharp break from rapid reionization).

Of course, given the limited resolution of single-dish experiments at these
low frequencies, interferometry is required to make maps with even relatively
coarse resolution; for realistic collecting areas, the array dilution factor ηf dra-
matically decreases the sensitivity. Again using equation (136) for the system
temperature, we find
                                               !2          4.6                !1/2
                             Atot        10′          1+z          MHz 100 hr
                                    
    ∆T N |int ∼ 2 mK                                                                   .(141)
                            105 m2       ∆θ            10          ∆ν    tint


From equations (3) and (4), these angular and frequency scales correspond
to ∼ 20h−1 Mpc: clearly, at least for the first generation of interferometers,
imaging will only be possible on coarse scales that exceed the typical sizes
of bubbles during most of reionization. It is for this reason that near-term
imaging experiments focus primarily on large quasar HII regions.

To this point, we have used the conventional radio astronomy approach and
explicitly separated the angular and frequency dimensions. In most applica-
tions, these are physically different: the former correspond to physical dis-
tances while the latter provides spectral information from each source. Our
application is different in that all three are equivalent: because of the cos-
mological redshift, the frequency dimension also corresponds to a distance
(albeit in redshift space). Thus it is usually better to think in terms of three-
dimensional volumetric cells rather than pixels on the sky, or (for the power
spectrum) the Fourier transform of this representation.

In detail, the effective collecting area at a given angular resolution actually
depends on the distribution of baselines in the array, so careful attention must
be paid to antenna placement during array design. Figure 26 illustrates this
for some realistic array configurations as specified in Table 6. It shows the
fraction of Fourier-space “pixels” (each corresponding to a particular baseline
and frequency pair; see below for a more precise definition) for which the rms
signal exceeds the rms noise in a 1000 hour observation at z = 8 with the MWA
(dashed curve), LOFAR (dot-dashed curve), and the SKA (solid curve); note
that these pixels can be identified a priori because they correspond to base-
lines with long effective integration times (and hence low noise). The vertical
dotted line shows the scale corresponding to a 6 MHz bandwidth observation;
as we will see in §9.3, larger scales are essentially removed by foreground-
cleaning. Thus only wavenumbers to the right of this line are really relevant


                                          131
                                   1                                                                 1




 Fraction of Imaged Pixels at k
                                                                                                    0.9




                                                                   Fraction of Imaged Pixels at k
                                  0.8                                                               0.8

                                                                                                    0.7

                                  0.6                                                               0.6

                                                                                                    0.5
                                  0.4                                                               0.4

                                                                                                    0.3
                                  0.2                                                               0.2

                                                                                                    0.1
                                   0 −2       −1         0                                           0 −2       −1         0
                                   10       10          10                                           10       10          10
                                                   −1                                                                −1
                                          k (Mpc )                                                          k (Mpc )


Fig. 26. Fraction of three-dimensional Fourier-space “pixels” with signal-to-noise
greater than unity in several upcoming 21 cm experiments: the MWA (dashed),
LOFAR (dash-dotted), and the SKA (solid). Left: Scale-dependent signal originating
from pure density fluctuations. Right: Scale-independent 12 mK signal (half the
contrast between fully neutral and fully ionized gas). We have assumed a 1000
hour integration at z = 8. In each panel, the vertical dotted line marks the scale
corresponding to 6 MHz; smaller-k modes will likely be overwhelmed by residual
foregrounds. From [278].

to observations.

The two panels make different estimates for the signal. In the left plot, we
let it equal the (scale-dependent) rms brightness temperature fluctuation if
only density fluctuations contribute. Because reionization tends to enhance
the fluctuations, this is somewhat pessimistic. In the other plot, we let the
signal equal 12 mK regardless of scale: this is one-half of the contrast between
completely neutral and completely ionized gas. This plot therefore represents
the ability to image isolated HII regions at each scale, essentially providing a
“best case” scenario for imaging during reionization. Clearly, the prospects for
imaging with LOFAR or the MWA are dim at best: only a small fraction of
modes will be well-resolved. LOFAR fares considerably better because of its
larger collecting area [384] – and is even reasonably efficient at detecting HII
regions with k < 0.1 Mpc−1 – but note that it also has a significantly smaller
field of view. Thus the total number of imaged modes per field is actually
comparable in the two experiments. The SKA, on the other hand, has a large
enough collecting area to image all modes up to k = 0.3–0.5 Mpc−1 , with a
tail extending to higher wavenumbers. Still, these scales correspond to radii
of ∼ 5 Mpc, so detecting small HII regions will always be difficult.



9.1.3 Telescope Response Patterns

We now briefly discuss antenna response patterns in order to prepare for our
later assessment of systematic errors and astrophysical foregrounds.


                                                             132
               Zenith




                         ZA




                                           North

      d                                     Az

                                   Eas
                                      t
Fig. 27. “4×4 tile” and its response pattern. Left: Sketch of a “tile” with 16 horizon-
tal dipoles arrayed in a 4×4 grid, spaced at d ≈ λ/2. For optimum gain at zenith,
the dipoles must be positioned at λ/4 above the conducting ground plane. Right:
Response of the tile, projected on the sky, for phasing that points toward an azimuth
angle Az=30◦ and zenith angle ZA=30◦ . Radial distance is ∝ sin (ZA). Contours
lie at −3 (dashed), −10, −20, −30, and −40 decibels relative to maximum.
The left panel of Figure 27 sketches the basic antenna station that the MWA
and LOFAR designs use as a fundamental element of the interferometer arrays.
This “tile” is composed of 16 dipoles positioned in a 4×4 grid on a conducting
ground plane. The dipoles shown in Figure 27 are aligned parallel to the ground
plane. For optimum gain near zenith at observed wavelength λ, they should
be positioned on a grid with λ/2 spacing at λ/4 above the ground plane.

The effective collecting area of a dipole scales as λ2 in applications where the
linear size of the dipole is adjusted in proportion to wavelength. However, in
the tile design, a fixed size for the elements and fixed spacing must serve a
range of wavelengths in order to observe a range of redshifts. Under these cir-
cumstances, the elements are operated as “active short dipoles” [385] in which
preamplifiers are built into the hubs of the dipoles to assist in impedance
matching, and the shortness of the dipoles causes their effective collecting
areas to drop toward long wavelengths. Despite this apparent loss of effec-
tiveness, the noise power from the sky brightness continues to dominate Tsys ,
and some benefits accompany the reduced effective collecting area toward long
wavelengths, since it carries with it a weaker coupling of the fields between
the elements and a reduced cross section for mutual shadowing.

The prototype designs have a second set of orthogonal, north-south dipoles
co-located with the east-west ones in order to receive both polarizations si-
multaneously. The optimized designs from extensive computer modeling are
generally complex structures that look little like the conventional picture of
the linear dipoles sketched in Figure 27.

The right panel of Figure 27 shows the simulated response pattern of a simple
4×4 tile, assuming that it is phased to receive radiation from azimuth angle 30◦


                                          133
and zenith angle 30◦ (gray scale image with contours). 45 This response pattern
is known as the primary beam of the antenna and will be denoted Wν (n̂0 , n̂).
Here n̂ is a unit vector denoting an arbitrary direction in the sky, and n̂0
is the direction for which the tile is phased to produce maximum response.
Note the presence of “sidelobes” far from the nominal pointing direction; these
pose a significant problem for experiments. The sine projection onto the plane
tangent to the celestial sphere at zenith has the useful property that nulls
between the main beam and sidelobes retain a rectangular grid pattern. The
depth of the nulls in real telescopes is unlikely to equal those indicated in this
figure, because slight variations in gain among the dipoles and quantization
in the delays made to steer the tile beam imply that adding the 16 signals to
form the tile beam will probably introduce errors greater than the 10−4 level
depicted in Figure 27.

An important characteristic of the tile design (true, in fact, for all diffraction-
limited telescopes) is that the sidelobe pattern scales with λ. Thus the nulls
systematically move across the sky as a function of frequency, even if the center
of the beam remains phased to point at specific coordinates independently of
frequency. This chromatic behavior is a serious concern in the discussion of
astrophysical foregrounds, because the interferometer array detects sources all
across the sky through the frequency-dependent sidelobes. Thus as the earth
turns and the maximum of the response pattern tracks the chosen celestial
coordinates, the reception pattern projected on the sky rotates and distorts,
causing the signals received from sources lying in the sidelobes to vary in
strength.


9.1.4 Polarization Properties of Crossed Dipole Antennae

These 21 cm line observations will require extraordinarily precise instrumen-
tal calibration because of the high dynamic range necessary to identify mK
structures in the bright radio sky (see eq. 136), with the additional compli-
cation of bright discrete radio sources. While they are relatively inexpensive,
dipole antennae require unconventional calibration methods. As we will see, a
particular problem is instrumental coupling between polarized flux and total
intensity.

The calibration problem is made difficult by the varying polarization response
of crossed dipoles with angle on the sky, as illustrated by Figure 28. Dipoles
that receive orthogonal polarizations from sources near zenith become progres-
sively more correlated in their reception patterns as the source’s zenith angle
increases. For sources close to the horizon, the crossed dipole antenna can re-
45 Although dipole tiles lie flat on the ground and are not physically steerable,

properly phasing the elements allows us to point the combined beam by introducing
electrical delays in the signal paths from the dipoles.


                                       134
Fig. 28. Schematic view of crossed dipole antennae above a ground plane for four
viewing angles, varying from face-on at zenith angle ZA = 0◦ to ZA = 90◦ .


ceive only a single polarization; fortunately, this limit is not a severe problem,
because dipoles above ground planes project nulls toward the horizon.

Although antenna tiles will not be used to track sources at zenith angles
greater than 60◦ , their large sidelobes (Fig. 27) imply that flux from bright
sources and Galactic continuum emission enter the telescope from nearly the
entire hemisphere above the horizon. For applications such as ours where pre-
cise intensity measurements or polarization information is desired, the an-
tenna response must be carefully calibrated to decode the incident signals
into Stokes parameters. The calibration of antenna tiles will take advantage of
the well-developed “measurement equation” formalism [386–388] to describe
this instrumental response. A single dipole above a ground plane has a readily
calculable response with this formalism. But an array of crossed dipoles on
a tile is complicated by shading and electrical coupling between the dipoles,
and these effects are more difficult to quantify with the measurement equa-
tion. Developmental studies are now in progress to implement the necessary
degree of precision into instrumental calibration.



9.1.5 Interferometer Response Patterns

When two antennae are coupled together electronically to form an interferom-
eter, the combined response projected on the sky resembles the characteristic
diffraction pattern from a double slit (see Fig. 29). In general, the interferom-


                                      135
Fig. 29. Telescope response patterns. Upper row: The sine projection of the re-
sponse pattern on the plane tangent to the sky at zenith. Lower row: The response
pattern projected on the celestial hemisphere above the horizon. Left: Response
of a single interferometer element (a “tile” in the case of MWA), also known as
the primary beam. Center: Response of a two element, east-west interferometer of
omni-directional elements with a baseline of 20λ. Right: Response of an interferom-
eter with two MWA tiles as receiving elements.
eter response to the sky brightness distribution Iν (n̂) is
                 Z
                     dΩ Iν (n̂ )E1 (n̂0 , n̂, ν) E∗2 (n̂0 , n̂, ν) e2πi n̂·B/λ ,          (142)


where Ei (n̂0 , n̂, ν) is the complex electric field response pattern of the ith
element. The term exp(2πi n̂ · B/λ), where B is the baseline vector from one
interferometer element to the other, is purely geometric. With the assumption
of identical beam patterns for all the elements, the product of the electric field
patterns becomes the primary beam power pattern Wν (n̂0 , n̂) introduced in
the previous section. Radio astronomers conventionally write the response for a
particular “visibility” V, corresponding to a particular baseline and frequency
pair, in units of flux density
                             2kB
                                        Z
           VJy (B, n̂0 , ν) = 2             dΩ δTb (n̂, ν)Wν (n̂0 , n̂) e2πi n̂·B/λ .     (143)
                              λ

Usually, an approximate form of equation (143) can be adopted:

                            2kB
                                    Z
       VJy (n̂0 , u, v, ν) ≈ 2          dx dy δTb (x, y, ν)Wν (n̂0 , n̂) e2πi (ux+vy) ,   (144)
                             λ


where B = λ(uî0 , v ĵ0 , wn̂0). In the orthogonal (u, v, w) coordinate system,
the w axis aligns with the direction toward the sky at the center of the tile
beam, and the u-v axes are oriented so that the v axis projects onto the local
meridian. The coordinates x and y are angles measured in the “sky plane”
relative to the intersection of n̂0 with the celestial sphere. In this Fourier
transform of the sky, u and v represent spatial frequencies and the w axis


                                               136
produces a phase offset in the interferometer fringe that can be calibrated. This
is the standard equation for describing aperture synthesis techniques, because
radio interferometer arrays are designed to sample VJy (u, v, ν) at many u-v
coordinates and then reconstruct images of the sky through the inverse Fourier
integral (e.g., [381]). For our purposes, it is convenient to define the equivalent
response in temperature units,

                    V(n̂0, u, v, ν) ≡ λ2 VJy (n̂0 , u, v, ν)/2kB .             (145)


For most of the following discussion, we adopt the assumptions and nomen-
clature of equation (144). However, its approximations are not always valid,
in which case more elaborate solutions than a simple Fourier inversion are
required. Complications arise because we must observe large areas of sky to
build sufficient statistics and to identify interesting objects for followup at
other wavelengths. Thus in order to keep the primary beam patterns large,
the individual interferometer elements are intentionally kept small. There are
several consequences.
                                                          √
First, the assumption of a single spatial frequency (= u2 + v 2 ) across the
entire primary beam does not hold for beams as broad as our example tile’s
(Fig. 27). Figure 29 shows that the fringe spacing (or “resolution” θ) of the
interferometer varies with direction according to θ ∝ λ/B sin α, where α is
the angle between B and (n̂ − n̂0 ). Thus the spatial frequency of structures
in the sky sensed by the interferometer depends on their directions on the
sky, and the interferometer actually senses a band of spatial frequencies rather
than a single one. More sophisticated imaging techniques will be required than
those commonly used in aperture synthesis applications. Extracting the power
spectrum will of necessity be a multi-stage procedure, involving an interplay
between image plane and u-v constraints during calibration and foreground
cleaning.

Second, for telescope designs relying on electronically steered tiles, slight differ-
ences in primary beam patterns Ei (n̂0 , n̂, ν) will result from small imbalances
in the gains and the delays used to sum the signals from the individual ele-
ments. Especially with regard to removing sources outside the primary beam,
these gain patterns will be difficult to calibrate, because every pointing direc-
tion suffers from slightly different gain imperfections. Thus the gain variations
from element to element void the assumptions of the simple Fourier inver-
sion approach. In the course of a day, the rotation of the reception pattern,
with its lobes and nulls, also defeats the assumptions adopted in conventional
Earth-rotation aperture synthesis.

Third, the Fourier integral does not properly account for sources far outside the
primary beam; in effect, these add a noise-like contribution entering through
the sidelobes. Were it not for the variability of the primary reception pattern,


                                        137
the signals from these outlying sources would be suppressed by the system-
atic cancellation of the aperture synthesis method. But as it is, the residuals
can remain problematic because of the extreme brightness of the foregrounds
relative to the redshifted 21 cm signal.

The problem is that a source with a flat continuum couples to the field of
interest in a frequency-dependent way. Each baseline in the array (phased to
point in the direction n̂0 ) senses an unresolved source S in the direction n̂
with response


    VJy (B, n̂0 , ν) = Wν (n̂0 , n̂)S exp [2πi (n̂ − n̂0 ) · Bν/c]
                     ≡ Wν (n̂0 , n̂)S exp (2πi ν/νc ),                    (146)

where νc is the characteristic frequency scale of the chromatic contamination;
for a field observed on the meridian by an east-west interferometer, a source
rising in the east would yield νc = c/|B|, which for a 1 km baseline inserts
a ripple into the spectrum with period 0.3 MHz. As the source rises higher,
the period of the ripple in the spectrum lengthens. The superposition of sig-
nals, with pseudo-random phases, from all over the sky, creates a noise-like
background that is unlikely to be gaussian if it is dominated by several bright
sources. Because methods for foreground suppression rely on spectral smooth-
ness (see §9.3), this chromatic behavior will escape the conventional foreground
removal. For this reason, reduction of 21 cm observations will need to begin
with all-sky catalogs of the bright sources and perform iterative calibration
and source subtraction.

The strength of this “sideground” contamination can be estimated by inte-
grating over the differential extragalactic source counts [389],

                    n(S) dS = 102 SµJy
                                   −2.2 −0.8
                                       νGHz dSµJy arcmin−2 ,              (147)


where SµJy is the flux density in microJanskys and νGHz is the frequency in
GHz. For a simple estimate, assume that 4π fsky steradians of sky (with fsky =
1/8) is viewed through −20 dB sidelobes of the tile pattern (corresponding
to a gain gsl = 0.01). The vector responses of the sources can be combined
as a random walk, σsg = gsl [fsky 4π n(S) S 2 dS]1/2 . We consider z = 8.5
                                       R

(ν = 150 MHz) and ignore the phase smearing caused by rotation (i.e., we
integrate over a short interval of time). Since the integral diverges mildly at
the bright end, we truncate it at 10 Jy, which implicitly assumes that all ∼800
sources of 10 Jy and brighter have been dealt with individually through self-
calibration and subtraction. The cumulative effect of the remaining weaker
sources on a single baseline is σsg ∼1.6 Jy. An array such as the MWA has
Na = 500 tiles, yielding NB = Na (Na − 1)/2 = 1.2×105 baselines. If this
sideground noise from each baseline were to add incoherently for all baselines,


                                          138
                                                  √
then the rms fluctuation would fall to ∼ 1.6 Jy/ NB = 4 mJy. However, the
baselines of an interferometer are of course calibrated to preserve systematic
phases in a coherent sum, so the reduction in sideground fluctuations will
actually be much larger. Moreover, the Earth’s rotation also smears the signals
from outlying sources, and the total suppression should bring the residual
sideground contamination below the tens of µJy signal expected from the the
z ∼ 10 Universe. Similar estimates at lower frequencies show that observing
the dark ages themselves will be extremely difficult. However, this is an image
processing regime that has not yet been fully explored and conquered, so for
the moment these expectations should be viewed with some caution.


9.2 Sensitivity: Statistical Measures


Given the difficulty of high signal-to-noise imaging, attention has recently fo-
cused on statistical measurements. We will now turn to estimating the sensitiv-
ity of 21 cm experiments to the power spectrum. Error estimates for other sta-
tistical measures must still be developed, but the basic principles are the same
(see [390,?]). In this section, we will only consider the effects of thermal noise
and cosmic variance, which provide a fundamental limit. Systematics (espe-
cially foregrounds) present equally large difficulties, and the community is hard
at work developing strategies to mitigate them (see §9.3). Over the past sev-
eral years, the CMB community has developed expertise at both imaging and
power spectrum estimation with interferometers, which provides an important
launching point for describing the 21 cm signal (e.g. [392]). The theory has now
been further developed and applied directly to the 21 cm case (different from
the CMB primarily because it is three-dimensional) [393,?,?,?,?,?,?,?,?,?].
Note that we will work exclusively in terms of the three-dimensional power
spectrum. Similar considerations apply to the angular power spectrum [158].

We begin with the complex visibility of equation (144). The detector noise for
a single visibility measurement is closely related to equation (135) [382]. In
the limit in which Tsys ≈ Tsky ,

                                          λ2 Tsky
                            ∆T N (ν) =     √      ,                          (148)
                                         Ae ∆νtu


where here tu is the integration time of this particular baseline 46 and Ae =
46 Typically, with these large interferometers, the uv  coverage changes with the
earth’s rotation, so this is not the same as the total integration time. Note that
this is qualitatively different from CMB experiments, which work at high enough
frequencies that the instruments can be rotated mechanically to achieve the desired
uv coverage.


                                       139
ǫap δA is the effective collecting area of each antenna element, which is equal
to its physical area δA multiplied by the aperture efficiency ǫap . For simplicity,
we will set ǫap = 1 in the following; its propagation through the error estimate
depends on the particulars of each experiment (especially whether the beam
is tapered). To mark the difference, we will use δA exclusively below. This
expression follows naturally from equation (137) for the noise level measured
in flux density, combined with the definition for Ka , and the conversion from
flux density to temperature in equation (145).

The observed “visibility data cube” is actually a hybrid of Fourier space (u, v)
and redshift-space (ν) coordinates and is thus inconvenient for comparing
to theoretical models. One can either transform the visibility data to the
sky plane to obtain the “image cube” or transform the frequency (redshift)
coordinate to its Fourier-space equivalent in order to obtain a representation
with spatial frequency for all three dimensions,
                                    Z
                        δTb (u) =       dν V(u, v, ν) e2πiην ,               (149)
                                    B



where the integration extends over the full bandwidth B of the observation,
u ≡ uî + v ĵ + ηẑ, and η has dimensions of time. In this representation, the
effective noise can be obtained by Fourier transforming the signal across the
frequency axis [398], yielding
                                      √
                        N      λ2 Tsys B      Tsys      λ2
                    ∆T (u) =        √    ≈√        ×        .             (150)
                                 δA tu         B tu δA δη

In the second equality, we have set δη equal to the inverse bandwidth. The
factor δA/λ2 × δη then represents the Fourier space resolution of the observa-
tion (or the inverse volume sampled by the primary beam, in the appropriate
units); note the similarity to equation (135) when written in this form. Here
∆T N (u) has units of temperature divided by time, because of the Fourier
transform in the frequency direction.

To estimate the statistical errors, we need the covariance matrix of the noise
for antenna pairs at baselines ui and uj . Because the thermal noise errors
are uncorrelated between measurements, this is simply a diagonal matrix with
each element the square of equation (150). In transforming to the physical
wavevector k, we distinguish between the component u⊥ oriented along the
sky (corresponding to k⊥ = 2πu⊥ /ℓ, where ℓ is the comoving distance to the
observed 21 cm screen) and the component kk along the line of sight. This is
useful because interferometers can have arbitrarily good frequency resolution
while the u⊥ coverage is fixed by the baseline distribution.

We define the number density of baselines that observe a given u⊥ as n(u⊥ );


                                          140
this is normalized so that its integral over the half-plane is NB = Na (Na −1)/2,
the total number of baselines in the array. Two properties of n(u⊥ ) are worth
emphasizing. First, because of the earth’s rotation, it is azimuthally symmetric
and only a function of u⊥ = |u⊥ |. Second, for a smooth antenna distribution,
n(u⊥ ) is virtually always a decreasing function of u⊥ . This is simple geometry:
it is difficult to arrange the antenna distribution to have many more long
baselines than short ones. In practice, a ring of antennae provides the flattest
possible distribution (though that is rarely optimal; see below). We can write:
                                                            !
                                                       δA
                                    tk ≈ n(u⊥ )                 tint .     (151)
                                                       λ2


As before δA/λ2 ≈ δu δv is the angular component of the Fourier-space reso-
lution. Thus [398,?]

                     D                             E
    C N (ki , kj ) ≡ ∆T N (ui )∗ ∆T N (uj )
                                     !2
                    λ2 B Tsys             δij
                  =                            .                           (152)
                       δA                 B tk


Equation (152) represents the thermal noise contribution to the covariance
matrix; even in an ideal experiment with no systematics from foregrounds, we
must also include errors from sample variance. This component is [278]


    C SV (ki , kj ) = hδTb∗ (ki ) δTb (kj )i
                                Z
                          ¯2
                   ≈ δij δT          d3 u |W̃ (ui − u)|2 P21 (u)
                            b

                         2
                      ¯ P21 (ki )       λ2 B 2
                   ≈ δT b                       δij ,                      (153)
                                       δA ℓ2 ∆ℓ
where ℓ is the distance to the 21 cm field and ∆ℓ ∝ B is the line-of-sight
depth of the observed volume in comoving units (see eq. 4). In the first line,
the average is over baseline and frequency pairs indexed by ki and kj (or
equivalently ui and uj ). In the second line, W̃ is the Fourier-transform of the
primary beam response function, including the finite bandwidth, and is most
naturally expressed in the “observed” units u. It typically differs from zero
in an area δu δv δη ≈ δA/(λ2 B) and (ignoring efficiencies) integrates to unity
over the beam. For the last line, we have assumed that u is much larger than
the width of this response function. Then P21 (u) is constant across the beam
and can be pulled out of the integral, which becomes simply (δu δv δη)−1 . We
have also transformed to the more physically relevant wavenumber k, which
introduces a factor B/(ℓ2 ∆ℓ).


                                               141
Equation (153) has a simple physical interpretation: it is essentially a normal-
                 ¯ 2 B 2 ) multiplied by P21 /Vℓ , where Vℓ ≈ ℓ2 ∆ℓ(λ2 /δA) is the
ization factor (δT b
total volume observed by the telescope. The second factor counts the number
of estimates available for the measurement; thus the cosmic variance decreases
as the volume increases.

The Fisher information matrix gives an estimate of the errors on a power
spectrum measurement from the total covariance matrix C = CN + CSV .
Given a vector of parameters Ψ, the (i, j) element of the Fisher matrix is
defined as (see, e.g., [400])


              ∂ 2 ln L
          *             +
    Fij ≡ −                                                                   (154)
             ∂Ψi ∂Ψj
            "                   #
                −1 ∂C     −1 ∂C
        = Tr C          C         ,                                           (155)
                    ∂Ψi     ∂Ψj

where L is the log-likelihood function. For the simple case of measuring the
binned power spectrum from the datapoints, the “parameters” are the power
spectrum amplitudes in each of the bins, Ψi = P∆T ≡ δT    ¯ 2 P21 (ki ); in more
                                                             b
general cases they are the parameters of a theoretical model meant to describe
the data. The Cramer-Rao inequality states that the errors on any unbiased
estimator of the power spectrum must satisfy

                                       1       q
                        δP∆T (ki ) ≥ q          (F−1 )ii ,                    (156)
                                      Nc (ki )


where Nc is the number of measurements in the appropriate bin and F−1 is
the inverse of the Fisher matrix.

In our case, the Fisher matrix is particularly simple to use because the co-
variance matrix is diagonal. (This will not be true for real data, because fore-
ground cleaning and other systematic effects induce correlated residual errors,
but it provides a rough estimate of the noise limits.) Also, CN is of course
independent of the underlying power spectrum, so the errors become [278]

                          1       δA x2 y N
           δP∆T (ki ) ≈ q            2 B2
                                          [C (ki , ki ) + C SV (ki , ki )].   (157)
                         Nc (ki )  λ


The last step is to count the number of Fourier cells in each bin, which depends
on the Fourier-space resolution of the instrument. Recall that P21 is not truly
isotropic, but it is azimuthally symmetric. Thus we use Fourier cells grouped
into annuli of constant (k, µ). Then, in the limit that kµ is much larger than


                                        142
the effective kk resolution,
                                                         "           #
                                            2  Vℓ
                       Nc (k) ≈ 2π k dk dµ ×       ,                              (158)
                                             (2π)3


where the last term represents the Fourier space resolution. One can also
average the measurements spherically [398,?,?]; although intuitively simpler,
this eliminates information whenever redshift-space distortions are significant.


9.2.1 Implications

Equations (152), (153), and (157) fully specify the effects of noise in the ab-
sence of systematic effects (which we will discuss in the next two sections).
But to make estimates we must determine the effective observing time tk for
each mode – and hence the baseline distribution n(u⊥ ) by equation (151) – as
well as the sampling density (eq. 158 for a measurement in annuli). These two
quantities are obviously highly dependent on the instrumental configuration.
Thus it is useful to consider the simple thermal noise-dominated case in order
to develop some intuition for array design. Substituting for Nc in equation
(157) and assuming C N ≫ C SV , we find
                                                                           2
                                                 "               #          !
                               −3/2       −1/2            1              Tsys
                δP∆T ∝ δA             B               3/2
                                                                              ,   (159)
                                                     k n(k, µ)           tint

                             √
where of course u⊥ ∝ k 1 − µ2 . Here we have assumed that the power spec-
trum is measured in bins with constant logarithmic width in k but constant
linear width in µ. From equation (159), we can deduce a number of funda-
mental considerations driving array design [398]. For instance, we see that
δP∆T ∝ t−1 int ; this is because the power spectrum depends on the square of the
intensity.

A more subtle question is the improvement possible by increasing the collect-
ing area, which could be accomplished in either of two ways. First, we can
add antennae while holding the dish size δA constant. Recall that n(k, µ) is
normalized to the total number of baselines NB ∝ Na2 : thus, adding antennae
of a fixed size decreases the errors by the total collecting area squared. (Of
course, the number of correlations needed also increases by the same factor, so
this strategy has other costs.) Second, we can make each antenna larger but
hold their total number fixed. In this case, the total number of baselines, and
hence n(k, µ), remains constant, but δP∆T ∝ δA−3/2 . Increasing the collecting
area in this way is not as efficient because it decreases the total field of view
of the instrument.


                                                143
Adding bandwidth increases the sensitivity relatively slowly: δP∆T ∝ B 1/2 ,
because it adds new volume along the line of sight without affecting the noise
on any given measurement. Of course, one must be wary of adding too much
bandwidth because of systematics (especially foregrounds) and possibly in-
trinsic evolution.

Finally, as a function of scale k, δP∆T ∝ k −3/2 n(k, µ)−1 . The first factor comes
from the increasing (logarithmic) volume of each annulus as k increases. But in
realistic circumstances the sensitivity actually decreases toward smaller scales
because of n. This is most obvious if we consider a map at a single frequency.
In that case, high-k modes correspond to small angular separations or large
baselines; for a fixed collecting area the array must therefore be more dilute
and the sensitivity per pixel decreases as in equation (141). In the (simple but
unrealistic) case of uniform uv coverage, the error on a measurement of the
                                          −2
angular power spectrum increases like θD      for a fixed collecting area [158].

Fortunately, the three-dimensional nature of the true 21 cm signal moderates
this rapid decline toward smaller scales: even a single dish can measure struc-
ture along the line of sight on small physical scales. Mathematically, because
n(k, µ) = n(k⊥ ) (neglecting the slow variation of uv coverage with frequency
across the band), each baseline can image arbitrarily large kk , at least in prin-
ciple. For an interferometer, this implies that short baselines still contribute to
measuring large-k modes. Thus, provided that they have good frequency reso-
lution (which is anyway required for RFI mitigation), compact arrays like the
MWA are surprisingly effective at measuring small-scale power [398]. There is
one important caveat to this trick: if short wavelength modes are only sampled
along the frequency axis, we can only measure modes with µ2 ≈ 1. Thus we
recover little, if any, information on the µ dependence of the redshift-space
distortions. Studying this aspect of the signal does require baselines able to
measure the short transverse modes with µ2 ≈ 0.

The preceding discussion shows that understanding the expected errors on
statistical measurements is crucial to both the array design and the observing
strategy. To that end, we next review some of the main results of such esti-
mates [393,?,?,?,?,?,?,?,?,?]. We emphasize again that we neglect systematic
errors in this section. Table 6 shows the basic parameters for several upcoming
experiments (although many of these are only educated guesses). The major
element missing is the baseline distribution between Dmin and Dmax . The fig-
ures below assume that the baselines are distributed as r −2 with a compact,
filled core. This is reasonable if Na is large; if not, the Fourier space coverage
may be patchier.

Figure 30 summarizes the expected errors for the MWA (thick dashed curves),
LOFAR (thick dot-dashed curves), and the SKA (thick solid curves) on the
isotropic power spectrum [278]. In each panel, estimates of the signal (with


                                       144
                             2
                            10
                             0
                            10

                   (mK )
                  2
                             −2
                            10                              z=6
                             2
                  2         10


                  (k)/2 π
                             0
                            10
                             −2

                      ∆T
                            10                              z=8

                   k P
                             2
                            10    −2    −1          0                1
                  3
                             0
                            10

                             −2
                            10                              z = 12
                                   −2    −1             0                1
                                  10    10          10           10
                                               −1
                                        k (Mpc )

Fig. 30. Isotropic power spectrum sensitivity, in logarithmic bins with ∆k = k/2, for
several experimental configurations. In each panel, the thin solid and dashed curves
show estimates of the signal with and without reionization. The thick solid, dashed,
and dot-dashed curves show error estimates for 1000 hour observations over 6 MHz
with the SKA, MWA, and LOFAR, respectively. Each assumes perfect foreground
removal. The dotted curve in the middle panel assumes a flat antenna distribution
for the MWA. From [278].

and without reionization) are shown by the thin dashed and solid curves. The
setup assumes 1000 hours of total integration on a single field (about a one-
year observing campaign), 47 a 6 MHz band (corresponding to ∆z ∼ 0.5), bins
of width ∆k = k/2, and Tsys = (250, 440, 1000) K at z = (6, 8, 12). We must
also guess how Atot scales with ν (see details in [278]; for now note that we
optimistically assume that the SKA is optimized for each of these frequencies).

Several key points are apparent in Figure 30. First and foremost, thermal
noise and cosmic variance do not pose an insurmountable problem. Both the
MWA and LOFAR can make reasonably precise measurements at z . 10 and
k . 1 Mpc−1 , and the SKA can extend this to z & 10 and k . 10 Mpc−1
(although foregrounds probably prevent measurements at k . 0.01 Mpc−1 ).
The differences with redshift are mostly because of the rapidly increasing sky
background toward lower frequencies (see eq. 136): clearly, our prospects for
signal detection rapidly worsen toward higher redshift. It is for this reason that
exploring the first galaxies and bound structures, as well as the dark ages, will
be much more difficult than reionization, even though the intrinsic signals are
comparable.

47 Unfortunately, t
                     int cannot be increased to arbitrarily large values because sys-
tematics will eventually intervene. Current estimates suggest that integrating for
several hundred hours should be reasonable, but going too much beyond that is
likely to be difficult.


                                         145
The most surprising aspect of Figure 30 is that the MWA and LOFAR have
comparable performances, despite the nearly order of magnitude difference
in collecting area. There are several reasons for this. First, the MWA has a
much larger field of view as a consequence of its significantly smaller antennae,
allowing it to beat down statistical errors. Second, the smaller antennae of the
MWA allow it to sample modes with k⊥ . 0.03 Mpc−1 , which LOFAR cannot
do (hence the cutoff near this value in the LOFAR curves); on the other
hand, its extremely compact configuration does not allow it to observe any
modes with k⊥ & 0.5 Mpc−1 . For many radio observations, this poor angular
resolution would be a crippling disadvantage – and that is why LOFAR, meant
as a more general-purpose radio telescope, has both long and short baselines.
But for this particular application, high-k modes can be sampled when they
are oriented along the line of sight.

Finally, the thick dotted curve in the middle panel of Figure 30 shows the
errors if the MWA has a flat baseline distribution (rather than r −2 ). This
configuration reduces the sensitivity on all scales, which may seem surprising if
one is used to measuring angular power spectra: in that case, flat distributions
are more sensitive to high-k modes (e.g., [158]). But, thanks to the frequency
dimension, even compact arrays can measure small-scale structure.

Figure 31 shows another view of the MWA sensitivity [379], this time with
an explicit comparison to some analytic models of reionization [341]. The Fig-
ure assumes a similar experimental setup as before, except with a 360 hour
integration over 8 MHz at z = 8. The points show simulated data (again ne-
glecting systematics) with 1σ errors; 48 the dark gray regions show the error
envelope from cosmic variance (binned in the same manner as the data), and
the light gray regions include thermal noise as well. The solid curve is the
power spectrum if x̄i = 0; the other curves show predictions for the signal at
various stages of reionization from [341]. The purpose of this figure is to show
explicitly that, over the range 0.01 Mpc−1 . k . 0.2 Mpc−1 , the next gener-
ation of radio telescopes will be able to distinguish models at high confidence
levels, provided that the thermal noise limit can be reached (the low-k cutoff
comes from foreground removal; see below).

To this point, we have only considered the spherically-averaged signal, which
ignores the cosmological information available from redshift-space distortions.
Figure 32 shows the sensitivity of the MWA (medium width curves) and the
SKA (thick curves) to anisotropies in the 21 cm signal [278]. The thin solid and
dashed curves show Pµ0 and Pµ4 ; the others show the errors in bins of width
∆k = k/2. Here we have assumed 2000 hours of integration time split between

48 Note that some of the simulated datapoints have negative power here; this is a

result of the simplified error propagation used by [379]. In a realistic experiment, the
estimator will be constructed to preserve the positive-definite nature of the signal.


                                         146
Fig. 31. Isotropic power spectrum sensitivity of the MWA at z = 8. The dark gray
regions show errors from cosmic variance; the light gray regions include thermal
noise as well. The data points show a simulated realization of the measured power
spectrum with 1σ errors. The solid line assumes x̄i = 0, while the dashed lines
assume x̄i = 0.51, 0.43, 0.38, 0.25, and 0.13, from top to bottom [341]. The setup
assumes an 8 MHz band observed for 360 hours. From [379].

two fields at z = 8. The two panels assume different stages of reionization;
at x̄i = 0.1 the anisotropic component is strong because density fluctuations
dominate, but it is weak at x̄i = 0.7 when the bubble signature (which is
isotropic) dominates the power. The Figure shows how difficult it will be to
extract detailed information on the angular dependence of the 21 cm power
spectrum, especially for the MWA. The MWA sensitivity to the µ4 component
is sharply peaked because it relies on the frequency axis to provide all of its
high-k information. Thus it cannot constrain the angular dependence of the
power. The larger collecting area and longer baselines of the SKA allow it
to measure transverse modes to k ∼ 1 Mpc−1 . However, even it will have
difficulty seeing the µ4 component during reionization.

Because the redshift-space distortions (and the AP effect) contain the most
robust cosmological information, firm measurements of fundamental param-
eters will be difficult to extract from 21 cm experiments. In the absence of


                                      147
                                   2
                                  10




        k3 P∆ T (k) /2 π2 (mK2)
                                   1
                                  10



                                   0
                                  10



                                   −1
                                  10



                                   −2
                                                    <xii> = .7                 <xi> = .1
                                  10     −2    −1        0          −2    −1       0
                                        10    10       10          10    10      10
                                                                   −1
                                                            k (Mpc )

Fig. 32. Power spectrum sensitivity to the fully anisotropic signal. The thin solid
and dashed lines show Pµ0 and Pµ4 for x̄i = 0.1 (right panel) and x̄i = 0.7 (left
panel). The medium width and thick curves show the expected errors in bins of
width ∆k = k/2 for the MWA and SKA, respectively (solid and dashed correspond
to the µ0 and µ4 components). We assume 2000 hours of integration split equally
between two fields at z = 8. From [278].
the µn terms, these surveys can only measure the matter power spectrum
over a relatively limited range of scales. Thus, only when combined with other
datasets (such as the CMB) will they be able to effectively constrain cosmo-
logical parameters [399,?,?]. The first generation of experiments will likely
be restricted to studying features from reionization and to offering marginal
improvements on cosmological parameter determinations from other meth-
ods (see §4.2). SKA-class instruments can significantly improve constraints
on parameters that depend on the small-scale power spectrum, such as the
primordial scalar spectral index ns and the neutrino mass. But, of course, any
such attempt to extract fundamental parameters relies on understanding the
astrophysical factors as well. Cosmological studies will be most straightfor-
ward during an epoch in which x̄i and fluctuations in TS are both small. Such
an era may or may not exist (see §3); if not, parameter estimation will likely
be degenerate with these astrophysical processes [401].


9.3 Foreground Removal Strategies


As mentioned in §9.1.1, foregrounds are formidable at such low radio fre-
quencies, where the mean brightness temperature of our Galaxy, the primary
foreground, exceeds that of the expected 21 cm signal by at least four orders of


                                                             148
magnitude. Fortunately, while this large mean brightness resets the zero point
and adds a great deal of noise, it does not introduce systematic difficulties:
instead, we are interested only in its fluctuations on the sky. These are not
yet well-studied at the frequencies and angular scales relevant to 21 cm stud-
ies. Extrapolation from CMB foreground studies (e.g., [402,?]) suggests that
Galactic fluctuations will be relatively gentle on arcminute scales [272]. An
observational program at the Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope using the
Low Frequency Front-End (LFFE) receiver system, 49 covering 120–180 MHz,
is underway to measure the fluctuation spectrum of the Galactic emission.
However, even if these turn out to be small, the 21 cm signal is still swamped
by temperature fluctuations from extragalactic sources: radio galaxies [404]
and free-free emission from the reionizing sources themselves [361,274,405]
both create fluctuations that exceed the signal by one or two orders of mag-
nitude (for a unified treatment of extragalactic foregrounds, see [406]).

Fortunately, these difficulties are not insuperable: it should be possible to re-
cover the 21 cm signal through its structure in frequency space, because all the
foreground contaminants mentioned above are spectrally smooth [158,397,407,294].
In other words, while the 21 cm signal is expected to be isotropic in 3D space
(neglecting redshift space distortions and evolution), foregrounds have strong
fluctuations in the transverse direction across the sky but weak ones in the ra-
dial direction. There are other foregrounds that are not spectrally smooth, in-
cluding radio recombination lines (§9.4.1) and terrestrial radio frequency inter-
ference, both atmospheric and man-made (§9.4.2). The telescope response can
also introduce frequency structure: sidelobes change with frequency (§9.1.3),
implying that different parts of the sky (with different brightness tempera-
tures) are surveyed at different frequencies [274]. Perhaps most worrying, in
large part because so little is known about it, is whether polarized features in
the Galactic foreground will suffer significant Faraday rotation. The polarized
component can have brightness temperatures of several Kelvins and does have
substantial structure on arcminute scales [408,?,?]. If it is Faraday rotated on
frequency scales of ∼ 1 MHz – not at all unreasonable at these frequencies,
given the known Galactic magnetic fields – the polarized Galactic signal would
appear as a chromatic fluctuation in the measured total intensity if the polar-
ization response of the instrument is not perfectly calibrated (see §9.1.4). This
is another question being addressed by the LFFE system at Westerbork. If
these conditions occur, then the onus falls on the precision of the calibration
algorithms to properly apportion the polarized component between the Stokes
Q and U parameters without falsely coupling to variations in total intensity
that could be mistaken for the redshifted 21 cm line signal. It is not yet clear
how stringent these calibration requirements must be and whether they can be
realized in practice. In general, these frequency-dependent foregrounds could
be much more difficult to remove and require specialized techniques. Here we

49 See http://www.ursi.org/Proceedings/ProcGA05/pdf/J03-P.14(0817).pdf.




                                    149
focus instead on continuum foreground removal.

As mentioned above, the essential property employed by cleaning techniques is
the strong frequency coherence of foregrounds. Indeed, if foregrounds were per-
fect power laws, then they could be trivially removed. However, (i) the Galactic
foreground spectral index fluctuates as a function of both frequency (steepen-
ing toward lower frequencies) and position, and (ii) extragalactic foregrounds
are a sum of power law spectra with different spectral indices; the result in
general will not be a power law. 50 The stochastic decoherence of foregrounds as
a function of frequency sets a fundamental limit on the efficacy of foreground
removal. These properties are well-understood in the CMB literature [412,413]
and have recently been applied to the 21 cm problem [158,407].

It is simplest to begin by neglecting practical difficulties of the telescopes. We
imagine an ideal instrument and ask whether foregrounds impose an absolute
limit on the sensitivity. Although we have emphasized the three-dimensional
nature of the 21 cm signal, foreground removal is perhaps most intuitively
understood with the angular power spectrum, because that explicitly sepa-
rates the angular power spectrum (which is contaminated) from the (much
more pristine) spectral fluctuations used for the cleaning. To quantify the fre-
quency decoherence between maps at two different frequencies, consider the
correlation coefficient [158,407]:

                                   Cl (ν1 , ν2 )              log2 (ν1 /ν2 )
              Il (ν1 , ν2 ) ≡ q                           ≈1−                      (160)
                               Cl (ν1 , ν1 )Cl (ν2 , ν2 )          2ξ 2


where the second step represents a Taylor expansion about a power law, and
(since all odd terms must vanish) is the lowest order deviation from complete
correlation. The parameter ξ is the “correlation length;” smaller values of ξ
imply more rapid decorrelation over a fixed frequency separation. Note that
Il can be l-dependent (e.g., if sources with different spectral indices α have
different power spectra Cl on the sky), so in general decorrelation will also be
scale-dependent.

Obviously, the crucial parameter is ξ. What is its value for realistic fore-
50 Note as well that continuum foregrounds have not been probed with such high

frequency resolution before; one might worry for instance that the Galactic fore-
ground could exhibit tiny ∼ 10−4 temperature blips at these small frequency scales
due to irregularities in the electron momentum distribution in synchrotron knots.
Fortunately, this is highly unlikely because (i) one averages over a huge number of
electrons along each line of sight, and (ii) the range of frequencies over which a single
electron emits either synchrotron or free-free radiation is broad. The convolution
of this broad emission profile with the electron momentum distribution washes out
any sharp features in the latter [411].


                                          150
grounds? For Poisson fluctuations, ξ = 1/∆α, where ∆α = h(α − ᾱ)2 i1/2 is
the dispersion in spectral indices among sources [412]. If, on the other hand, Cl
is dominated by clustering, and in the simple case d(ln Cl )/d(ln α) = 0, then
ξ = σα /∆α2 , assuming that angular correlations between sources with spectral
indices α1 and α2 fall off as exp[−(α1 − α2 )2 /(2σα2 )] [158]. To the extent that
all sources trace the underlying dark matter distribution, we expect them to
be well-correlated on the sky. Even if they have different linear bias factors, we
would have perfect correlation σα = ∞ so long as they all still trace the same
dark matter distribution; only the stochastic part of the bias contributes to
the decorrelation. Thus, we expect σα ≫ ∆α; a firm limit might be σα = ∆α.
In that case, even though source clustering is expected to be the dominant
source of angular fluctuations [404,274], the Poisson component likely provides
an upper bound to frequency decorrelation. For extragalactic radio sources,
∆α ≈ 0.2 [414], and for the Galactic foreground, ∆α ≈ 0.15 [413]. 51

Thus, assuming ξ ≈ 1/∆α ≈ 5, ν1 = 150 MHz, and ∆ν = 1 MHz, equation
(160) yields (1 − I) ≈ (1–9) × 10−7. It can be shown from a simple χ2 or Fisher
matrix calculation that fitting for this frequency coherence will suppress fore-
ground power spectra by a factor (1 − I); thus, as long as (1 − I)Clfg ≪ Cl21cm ,
foregrounds can be effectively removed. Even for the most pessimistic esti-
mates, the raw foreground spectrum has Clfg /Cl21cm < 105 [406], so suppression
by (1 − I) suggests that residual foreground contamination should be small.
In fact, cleaning can be even more effective, because this estimate used only
one pair of maps, instead of the N(N − 1)/2 pairs generated with N frequency
channels. However, their errors are correlated, and difference maps from larger
frequency separations have greater frequency decorrelation, so the net errors
on N maps will improve more slowly than ∼ [(N − 1)/2]1/2 . More precise error
forecasts can be achieved via a Fisher matrix calculation [407].

Over large bandwidths, the increasing decorrelation with larger frequency
separation implies that the Taylor expansion in equation (160) is no longer
valid, so the (unknown) exact form of the coherence function, I(ν1 , ν2 ) =
f (log[ν1 /ν2 ]/ξ) becomes important. The results can then be counterintuitive
and careful study is required [407]. One could attempt to fit a parametric func-
tion to the coherence function of the data, which could improve the accuracy of
the analysis. Two general points are worth noting. Accuracy diminishes toward
the ends of the frequency interval, since there are fewer neighboring channels
to correlate against. Also, these estimates assume that the 21 cm signal has
no frequency coherence, with each channel probing a statistically independent
slice of the universe. Obviously this assumption fails with narrower channel

51 Note that the dominant contribution to both of these spectral index fluctuations

is synchrotron emission; the flat spectrum of free-free emission – which varies only
slightly due to the temperature dependence of the Gaunt factor and the exponential
cutoff – provides ∆αff ∼ 0.03 [407].


                                       151
widths. This (together with the increasing receiver noise) imposes a limit on
how narrow a bandwidth one should use for foreground cleaning, even though
in principle I → 1 as ∆ν → 0. The relative distribution of large- and small-
scale power in foregrounds and the 21 cm signal also affects the appropriate
set of basis functions to use for foreground cleaning, as described below.

Thus the astrophysics itself does not present an insurmountable problem.
Much more worrisome is how this blanket of sources couples with practical
telescope design issues. The most important aspect is that the diffraction limit
of the telescope (and hence the uv vector corresponding to each baseline, the
field of view, and the sidelobes) scales with wavelength. Thus the beamsize in-
creases steadily toward smaller frequencies, and new sources are added to each
frequency channel. This provides another – and probably more important –
source of de-correlation than the spectral index fluctuations [274]. For example,
in the simplest approximation we would have I ≈ 1−(ν1 /ν2 )2 from adding new
sources (with a constant density on the sky) to the beam. With ν1 = 150 MHz
and ∆ν = 1 MHz, we would therefore have 1 − I ≈ 4 × 10−5 , which could
introduce fluctuations comparable to the cosmological signal. Clearly, careful
attention must be paid to the beam pattern. Moreover, the changing uv cover-
age implies that simply binning the data in a frequency-independent manner
will introduce artifacts into the measurements that must be modeled properly,
especially when the uv coverage is not dense. Monte Carlo runs with simulated
data will allow us to understand the amplitude of such effects, and develop
optimal binning strategies.

How will foreground removal be done in practice? The first step is to excise
all bright point sources which exceed some detection threshold. Ideally, this
should be done directly from the uv visibilities to account for the instrumental
response and sidelobes, though reality may require more complicated algo-
rithms (see §9.1.5). The remaining unresolved sources (and fitting errors from
the subtraction of bright sources) are then the target of foreground cleaning
procedures.

The next step excises the spectrally smooth component of the observed sky. Of
course this will be done on the three-dimensional datacube, so the algorithms
differ in detail from the ones we have described above. In fact, there are many
possible variants with no one optimal procedure for foreground cleaning; the
best solution will likely depend on what statistic one is trying to extract
from the data. The most widely discussed approach – which we focus on –
is to fit and subtract a smooth function to the spectral data, generally on
a pixel-by-pixel basis (e.g., [415,?,294,278,411]). This process has a rigorous
statistical justication as a means of extracting a tiny fluctuating signal from
a huge, slowly varying background [417] (in statistical parlance, it is often
called trend removal). Similar problems crop up in time series analysis, and
trend removal has also been used in analysis of quasar absorption spectra to


                                      152
estimate the underlying continuum before extracting the Lyα forest [418]. We
summarize the present understanding for 21 cm foreground cleaning below.

Consider the foreground amplitude fi = f (k⊥ , νi ) in a pixel with angular
index k⊥ and frequency νi . We let the vector f denote f measured at the
frequencies ν = (ν1 , .....νN ) with resolution ∆ν. The fundamental idea is to fit
f with a set of smooth basis functions. This corresponds to projecting out or
marginalizing over the corresponding modes in the data [278]; thus to remove
the slowly varying foregrounds, we only fit low-order, slowly-varying basis
functions. Such techniques are commonly used in CMB analyses to marginalize
over the temperature monopole and dipole, which suffer strong contamination.
If the set of basis functions is complete and orthonormal (such as the Legendre
polynomials), then the error analysis can be performed analytically. 52 The
residual foreground contamination after cleaning with n basis functions is:
                                 n                        ∞
                                                !
                                       Pl PTl                     Pl PTl f.
                                 X                        X
                      f̃ = 1 −                      f=                          (161)
                                 l=0                     l=n+1



The power spectrum of residual foregrounds is then given by [278]:

                                                 µ†k f̃ f̃ † µk
                            Qk⊥ (k, n) ≈                    2 ,               (162)
                                                w µ̃†k µ̃k


where the Fourier vector µk ∝ exp[iykν]. Here w ≈ λ2 B 2 /(Ae ℓ2 ∆ℓ); see
§9.2 for definitions of its components. Qk⊥ is simply the square of the Fourier
coefficients of f̃, appropriately normalized. Foreground cleaning is effective
provided that Qk⊥ (k, n) ≪ P∆T .

Of course, during this cleaning process, the signal s will be attenuated as
well: s → s̃ = ∞              T
                  l=n+1 Pl Pl s. The fundamental assumption of this procedure
                P

is that the scales on which the signal and foregrounds have significant fluc-
tuation power are sufficiently well-separated that the signal is unaffected by
foreground removal (or, at least, one is willing to sacrifice the smoothly vary-
ing modes in the signal). One must then determine the optimal cleaning basis
Pl , which will maximize hs̃s̃† i while minimizing hf̃ f̃ † i. For instance, the order
n of a fitting polynomial plays an analogous role to the smoothing parameter
in any regularization problem, yielding a trade-off between smoothness and
fidelity to the data. If n is too low, there are insufficient degrees of freedom to
remove the foregrounds efficiently; if n is too high, some of the cosmological

52 Note that the most intuitive set of basis functions, polynomials in log(ν) – corre-

sponding to a Taylor series around a power law foreground – is not orthogonal, so
the error analysis is somewhat more complicated.


                                           153
                                                  Quadratic                           Cubic
                                                                                                        −1
                                                          k = .04 Mpc−1                    k = .04 Mpc
                                                                                           ⊥
                                                          ⊥




            P∆ T(k⊥, k||) (mK2 Mpc3)
                                        0
                                       10




                                        −3
                                       10




                                             −2      −1             0      −2         −1             0
                                            10     10             10      10         10            10
                                                                                −1
                                                                    kII (Mpc )

Fig. 33. Foreground removal for a 1000 hour observation with the MWA over a
bandwidth B = 6 MHz at z = 8, using a quadratic (left panel) or cubic (right
panel) Legendre polynomial. The dark thin solid curve is the 21 cm signal for a
neutral universe. The thick top curves show the sensitivity for a single Fourier pixel,
while the medium width bottom curves are the foreground residual power spectra
(eq. 162). In each set, the solid, dashed, and dot-dashed curves assume that 6, 12,
and 24 MHz spectral chunks are used to fit the foregrounds. Note how foreground
cleaning reduces sensitivity on large scales, especially for a high-order polynomial
fit to a small spectral length. On the other hand, the same procedure also more
effectively removes foregrounds. From [278].

signal is removed. The choice of expansion basis (Chebyshev polynomial, Leg-
endre polynomial, broken power law, smoothing spline, etc) likewise affects
the relative amounts of foregrounds and cosmological signal removed [411].

Fortunately, the effects of a particular basis choice on a particular power spec-
trum can be calculated a priori (thus quantifying the amount of downward bias
in the recovered large scale 21 cm power spectrum). Figure 33 (from [278])
shows an example. As mentioned above, foreground cleaning reduces the sen-
sitivity to the signal at large scales, and increasing n removes more of both
the cosmological signal and the foregrounds. The scales over which foreground
cleaning is performed also plays an important role: over a smaller bandwidth,
more of the small-scale cosmological signal is removed (conversely, over a larger
bandwidth, a higher order polynomial is required to fit the foregrounds effec-
tively). A simple rule of thumb is that, for a given bandwidth, one should
choose the minimum n such that Qk⊥ (k, n) ≪ P∆T (k⊥ , µ) [278].

Of course, each stage of foreground removal (including point source removal
and spectral fitting) is imperfect. Thus the final stage, performed simultane-


                                                                  154
ously with the signal extraction, is to fit for these residuals statistically using
prior knowledge of their systematic shapes [416]. The details of this phase will
depend sensitively on the instrument and algorithms chosen, so its effective-
ness has not yet been explored quantitatively.

The requirement in these foreground removal algorithms that the signal and
foregrounds fluctuate on highly disparate scales appears to impose a funda-
mental limit on our ability to probe the large-scale 21 cm signal. However,
at least in the high S/N regime where individual HII bubbles can be im-
aged (§8.4), this limitation can be broken: since HII regions should contain
pure foreground emission, they provide firm calibration points that can be
renormalized to δTb = 0 K in the foreground-cleaned maps. Calibration using
Monte Carlo simulations of an analytic bubble size distribution (from [341])
show that, without such a correction, any measurement of the pixel PDF or
    ¯ b (z), as well as the recovered map itself, will have severe artifacts from
of δT
large scale unphysical features introduced by foreground removal [411]. How-
ever, once the recalibration is done, fidelity to the input maps – as well as
detailed statistics, including the PDF and large-scale power spectrum – is re-
markable, except possibly near the box edges. Figure 34 shows an example of
the reconstruction. The main limiting factor becomes the number density of
sufficiently large bubbles that can be unambiguously identified as such. Their
                                       1/3
number density must be of order nbub ∼ k to perform reliable foreground
recalibration on wavenumber k.

As with the optimal set of basis functions, many of the details of foreground
cleaning – such as the appropriate space to work in (real, Fourier, or some
admixture) – depend on the details of one’s application (e.g., foreground re-
calibration is only possible in real space), as well as the particulars of array
design. They are likely best addressed in end-to-end simulations where full
error probability distributions (and not just the Fisher matrix approximation,
because systematic errors introduced by cleaning may not be gaussian) and
biases (such as the reduction of large scale power) can be carefully quantified.




9.4 Other Systematics


The Galactic and extragalactic backgrounds (including the polarized compo-
nent; see §9.1.4 and 9.3) are only two of many systematic concerns for these
experiments. Below we will briefly describe three additional concerns: fore-
ground lines, terrestrial interference, and ionospheric distortion.




                                       155
             (a) Input box                                (b) Recovered box

Fig. 34. A simulation of foreground removal for the SKA, when telescope noise is low
and 21 cm tomography might be possible. The main features of the box, especially
the largest ionized bubbles (shown in black), are robustly recovered. This simulation
utilizes a fifth-order Chebyshev polynomial basis for foreground removal, as well as
the additional step described in the text of zeroing the large bubbles to calibrate
the foregrounds. The box is ∼ 400 comoving Mpc across at z ∼ 9 and contains 1283
pixels. From [411].

9.4.1 Radio Recombination Lines

Unlike free-free and synchrotron emission, foreground radio recombination
lines (RRLs) can introduce significant structure in frequency space. These
lines, which are generated by recombination cascades through high-n elec-
tronic levels in HII regions, could therefore be serious contaminants. Little is
known about the RRL background at the low radio frequencies accessed by
redshifted 21 cm instruments; indeed, these experiments could turn out to be a
major source of new information about both galactic and extragalactic RRLs.
Here we briefly summarize our existing knowledge of the RRL background (for
a comprehensive review, see [419]; see also the discussions in [272,274,420]).

The most likely source of contamination is our Galaxy. The frequency of a
hydrogen RRL between levels n and n − ∆n is
                                                  −3
                                             n
                                        
                           ν ≈ 153∆n                    MHz.                   (163)
                                            350

Observationally, the lines tend to occur every 1–2 MHz over the frequency
range of interest. Galactic ridge RRLs make the transition from emission to
absorption in the range 100–200 MHz and so are at a minimum at the relevant
frequencies. They can reach peak brightness temperatures of TL = 1 K, but


                                        156
their narrow line widths (∆ν ∼ 3 kHz at 100 MHz) imply that their spectral
occupancy is quite small. The first line of defense is therefore to simply excise
contaminated regions of the spectrum (which can be identified a priori); all
of the experiments must already work at high spectral resolution to excise
terrestrial interference (see below).

The degree to which this will be necessary depends on whether RRLs will
provide a significant source of contamination along lines of sight outside the
Galactic plane (see Fig. 25). Unfortunately, there have been only a few RRL
line searches outside the Galactic plane (except toward known bright sources),
and in any case RRL surveys generally have low-frequency detection limits well
above the strength of the 21 cm features we seek. We can, however, place a
useful limit using the fact that the observed brightness  of both RRL and Hα
emission depends on the emission measure EM = dsn2e , where ne is the
                                                       R

local electron density and s is the path length along the line of sight, and that
optical Hα surveys have much lower limiting sensitivities. Fabry-Perot surveys
have detected Hα emission from every Galactic latitude, with minimal values
0.25–0.8 Rayleighs 53 toward the Galactic poles [421]. The emission measure
corresponding to an observed Hα intensity Iα (in Rayleighs) is: EM(Hα) =
2.75 T40.9Iα cm−6 pc, where T4 = Te /(104 K) and Te is the temperature of the
emitting region. Assuming local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE) and that
TL ≈ τRRL Te (see §2.1), we find [274]:
                              −3/2                 !           −1
                     Te                   EM               ∆ν
                    
          TL = 1.3                                                     µK.   (164)
                   8000 K             0.5 cm−6 pc        1 MHz


Thus, unless stimulated emission becomes important at low frequencies, the
Galactic hydrogen RRL background should be negligible away from the Galac-
tic plane.

Carbon radio recombination lines are another possible source of contamina-
tion. They have been detected at ν = 34–325 MHz toward Cass A in the
Galactic plane [422] and also in a 327 MHz survey centered at Galactic lon-
gitude l = 14◦ [423]. Optical depths are generally τ ∼ 10−3 , and the lines are
thought to arise in dense, cold (Te ∼ 20–200 K), partially ionized regions where
non-LTE effects are important. Carbon RRL emission is generally confined to
latitudes b < 3◦ , and its intensity out of the plane is probably small [423].

Because Galactic lines can probably be excised anyway, a much more wor-
risome contaminant could be emission from unresolved extragalactic sources:
since these would be randomly distributed in redshift and hence frequency, the
line structure would be much harder to remove. There are no observations of
extragalactic RRLs at these low frequencies and hence any estimate has con-
53 Note 1 Rayleigh = 106 /4π photons cm−2 s−1 sr−1 .




                                      157
siderable uncertainty, but at present such contamination is not expected to
pose a significant threat [420]. Neglecting stimulated emission, a star forming
galaxy producing a brightness temperature perturbation TL ∼ 0.01 K would
have to lie within a distance
                           −1/2                 !1/2            −1/2            −3/4        !−1
                 TL                    SFR                  ∆ν                Te            θ
                  
    D < 11 Mpc                                                                                         ,(165)
               0.01 K              100 M⊙ yr−1            1 MHz             104 K           5′


where θ is the angular resolution of the beam. Such bright nearby sources
can easily be identified and excised. The integrated RRL background from
unresolved sources is similarly small [420]. However, one large uncertainty is
the role that non-LTE effects and stimulated emission could play in boosting
the RRL flux; these may be important at low frequencies because τRRL ∝
ν −1 . It was previously thought that emission stimulated by the continua of
radio galaxies and quasars could allow much more distant sources to be seen
[424]. But existing observations at higher frequencies (e.g., at 1.4, 8.1, 84, 96,
and 207 GHz [425]) indicate that emission stimulated by luminous sources
outside HII regions is unimportant, probably because the volume filling factor
of HII regions around radio quasars is small [426] (stimulated emission from
internal sources may be important, but it does not significantly boost the flux).
Furthermore, the observed line flux falls off unexpectedly rapidly towards lower
frequencies. Deviations from these expectations would be interesting in their
own right, useful in probing the ISM of galaxies.

Extragalactic RRLs could also be a foreground in the search for 21 cm absorp-
tion against high-redshift radio-loud sources (see §10) [274]. Since high-redshift
objects are potentially much denser, n2e ∝ (1 + z)6 , their emission measures
could be much higher. Thus, for instance, a high-redshift disk galaxy could
have τRRL ∼ 10−2, comparable to that of the IGM or a minihalo in 21 cm
absorption. If such disks are abundant, this could make the task of picking
out the 21 cm forest lines much tougher, though the RRL features themselves
would be a marvelous probe of gas clumping. However, the existence of such
RRL absorbers is extremely speculative, and only a small fraction of lines of
sight are expected to intersect disks [?].


9.4.2 Terrestrial Radio Frequency Interference

Modern society’s needs for high speed communication and precise navigation
rely on intensive use of the radio spectrum. Strong signals from these services
are present in any location in which people live in significant numbers and
form one of the strongest “foregrounds” affecting radio astronomy. In addition
to the strong signals broadcast within specifically allocated frequency bands
(through national and international coordination of the radio spectrum), there
is a forest of spurious emission permeating areas of high population density,


                                      158
because most electrical equipment emits low levels of radio emission that falls
below legal thresholds set by governmental agencies but whose cumulative
effect is substantial given the high sensitivity of radio telescopes.

Radio astronomy’s first line of defense against this radio frequency interference
(RFI) is to situate telescopes in remote locations, far from dense human habita-
tion. Unfortunately, as the world’s population and the demand for broadband
communication services increase, it is becoming difficult to escape RFI. For
example, satellites used to obtain global access to instantaneous communica-
tions cause some radio bands to be occupied at every place on Earth at all
times.

Through the national and international agencies that coordinate spectrum
use, radio astronomers have successfully negotiated legislation that provides
for a number of narrow “protected” bands centered on selected bands of astro-
physical interest, such as the rest frequency of the 21 cm line. Of course, it is
impossible to reserve the sort of large bandwidths necessary for fundamentally
broadband scientific applications such as ours.

Preparation for new observatories, such as the SKA, includes intensive politi-
cal discussion to define “radio quiet zones” in areas of low population density
that are unlikely to see future growth, in order to provide some local protection
for the considerable investment needed to build and operate the telescopes.
These zones will enforce limits on nearby transmissions, but, due to the high
sensitivity of radio telescopes, they are still vulnerable to distant high-power
broadcasts and satellites. In fact, distant TV broadcasts and other ambient
RFI problems have already ruined an early attempt to use the VLA to ob-
serve the putative HII regions around the SDSS quasars (L. Greenhill, private
communication).

Figure 35 compares the radio environment at three sites in Australia with a
range of population densities (Sydney with population ∼4 million, Narrabri
with ∼ 4, 000 and Mileura Station with ∼4). The plot spans 100–300 MHz,
corresponding to z = 13.2–3.7 for the 21 cm line. The tail end of reionization
(at z ∼ 6.2) falls at 197 MHz. This is within the high-VHF television band,
which spans 174–220 MHz throughout most of the world. The band at 87.5 to
108 MHz finds heavy use around the globe for FM radio.

The frequency range from 120 to 140 MHz includes aircraft communications
and a low earth orbit satellite band at 137 MHz; these are hard to avoid since
air traffic and satellite transmitters are likely to pass within the reception
patterns of nearly all Earth-based telescopes from time to time. Fortunately,
these signals have extremely narrow bandwidths, and, in the case of aircraft
communications, have only a tiny temporal duty factor. This means that they
can be efficiently edited (or “blanked”) from the data stream.


                                      159
Fig. 35. Radio environment at three Australian locations: a suburb of Sydney, NSW;
the Australia Telescope Compact Array site near Narrabri, NSW; and the Mileura,
WA site (proposed by Australia for the SKA). The FM radio band (87.5 to 108 MHz
throughout most of the world) enters the spectrum at left. The strong features in
the center of the plot (174 to 230 MHz) are Australian high-VHF television channels
6, 7, 8, 9, 9A, 10, 11 and 12. Shown courtesy of A. Chippendale and R. Beresford
(taken as part of the ATNF SKA Site Monitoring Program).

Not surprisingly, Figure 35 shows that the radio spectrum in densely populated
places is saturated, and nowhere in the Sydney spectrum does the ambient
power level drop down to the baseline set by the instrumental sensitivity.
Fortunately, remote locations such as Mileura are able to escape (for the most
part) the radio and TV contamination of modern civilization. However, it
must be noted that the sensitivity of the measurements shown in the figure
was limited by the equipment used in this monitoring exercise; here -200 db
(W m−2 Hz−1 ) corresponds to radio astronomical flux densities of 106 Jy,
while observations of reionization will need to be sensitive to ∼ 10 µJy signals.
Fortunately, more sensitive measurements [428] at the Mileura site show that
few signals appear in the blank areas of the spectrum in Figure 35, even after
long integrations sensitive to a small fraction of the sky brightness.

Technological advances in high speed digital electronics are now permitting the
development of a range of RFI “mitigation” techniques whose goal is to permit
observations in bands contaminated with human-generated signals. This is
necessary in studies of spectral lines, such as the redshifted 21 cm line, that


                                       160
require measurements in frequency bands already in use. The algorithms and
hardware now being developed are the subject of several recent reviews [429–
431].

RFI mitigation methods include a number of different approaches. Some focus
on efficient automated editing and blanking of signals that have rapid or dis-
tinctive temporal variability or that are confined to narrow frequency ranges.
Since 21 cm emission from z > 6 is relatively smooth on scales . 1 MHz,
narrow signals with widths . 50 kHz can be discarded and the broader band
of interest constructed from the clean bands between the RFI spikes.

Other techniques are being developed to identify, characterize, and ultimately
subtract (or cancel) interfering signals [429–431], permitting astronomical ob-
servations to be performed in actively used communication bands. So far, these
experimental methods work best for broadcast transmitters that are fixed to
the Earth, and there are limits to the achievable precision of the cancellation.
Thus the first line of defense remains locating radio telescopes in the most
benign environments available.

Telescope design also plays a role in mitigating interfering signals. For exam-
ple, the antenna tiles illustrated in Figure 27 project nulls in the their response
patterns toward the horizon. This discriminates against terrestrial transmit-
ters. Furthermore, tiles on the ground gain additional protection from hills
and foliage. But, like all radio telescopes, they remain vulnerable to satellite
emission.


9.4.3 Ionospheric Distortions

Because of its temporally and spatially variable index of refraction, the Earth’s
ionosphere distorts low frequency radio signals as they propagate through it.
This creates significant calibration and imaging problems that must be solved
in order to clean the strong foreground contamination reliably.

Figure 36 is a cartoon sketch of the wavefront distortion experienced by a
compact array [432]. Lines of sight from all the antennae in the array observe
a given celestial radio source through nearly the same “refractive wedge,”
which to first order causes a linear gradient to develop in the phase of a
wavefront as it passes through the ionosphere. This causes the array to perceive
the wave to originate from a different direction on the sky than the true
one. Wavefronts arriving from sources at different locations will pass through
independent wedges, so their apparent positions will be displaced by different
amounts. The net effect is that the radio sources will remain coherent to the
array, but they will appear to wobble on time scales of tens of minutes (the
characteristic scale of fluctuations in the ionosphere). Calibration will require
the inclusion of algorithms to track and update an ionospheric distortion model


                                       161
                                                                Ionospheric Phase screen
                     Undistorted wavefronts




                                                    Distorted wavefronts
                                                    Phase gradient across array




Fig. 36. Cartoon illustration of ionospheric distortions. Wavefronts (represented by
dashed lines) are distorted as they pass through the phase screen of the ionosphere
(solid wavy line) and develop nearly linear phase gradients, which then project onto
the array. The gradient introduced by the screen varies with position across the sky.
From [432].
using an all-sky grid of bright radio sources. The problem and its solutions are
qualitatively similar to adaptive optics in optical astronomy, although here all
the corrections will be done on the software (rather than hardware) level and
the spatial and temporal scales are significantly larger. Foreground subtraction
and imaging will rely on the corrected catalog of source positions.

In addition to the variable index of refraction, the ionosphere also induces
variable Faraday rotation, which rotates the position angle of the electric po-
larization vector so that polarized foregrounds artificially appear to vary in
time at the telescope. This too must be evaluated and calibrated on time scales
of minutes as part of the observational procedures.

Considerable experience with ionospheric distortion has been obtained during
the VLA Low Frequency Sky Survey at 74 MHz [433]. Among the principal
findings has been the significant increase in complexity for interferometer ar-
rays extending over more than a few tens of kilometers, because then the array
samples many independent refractive wedges in the ionosphere. This further
complicates both calibration and imaging. Fortunately, the 21 cm line observa-
tions that concern this review need only short baselines of a few kilometers in
length to be sensitive to the low surface brightness features with characteristic
scales of arcminutes expected during reionization.



10   The 21 cm Forest


To this point we have focused on constructing large-scale three-dimensional
21 cm maps of the IGM (or at least characterizing their statistical properties).


                                              162
Fig. 37. Mock spectra of high-redshift radio sources at zs = 10 (left panel) and
zs = 8 (right panel) produced from cosmological simulations. In each case a source
(with intrinsic luminosity equal to Cygnus A) is placed at the appropriate redshift
and “observed” in a week-long integration with an SKA-class instrument. A “forest”
of absorption features appears blueward of 21(1+zs ) cm, caused by the cosmic web.
Note that the level of absorption depends sensitively on the assumed thermal and
ionization history of the IGM. From [349].



Such observations promise to provide powerful constraints on reionization and
early structure formation, but they pose three major difficulties: (1) they re-
quire TS 6= Tγ and may therefore be impossible during certain epochs; (2)
they cannot realistically resolve structures smaller than ∼ 1 Mpc; and (3)
they present a number of observational challenges (see §9).

A complementary probe immune to most of these problems is the “21 cm
forest” [349,?,?]. The technique, illustrated in Figure 37, is the exact analog
of the Lyα forest that has proved so useful for studying the z . 6 IGM. Neutral
hydrogen along the line of sight to a distant radio source will resonantly absorb
photons that redshift into the 21 cm transition, creating a forest of absorption
features in the spectrum due to the diffuse IGM, sheets and filaments in the
cosmic web, minihalos, and HII regions. The major advantage of this method
is that, with a sufficiently bright source, arbitrarily high frequency – and
hence spatial – resolution can be achieved, allowing us to probe individual
filaments and minihalos. Moreover, because it requires only a high signal-to-
noise spectrum of a relatively bright radio source, the 21 cm forest is a much
simpler observation than tomography.




                                       163
Fig. 38. Mean optical depth in some example reionization histories. (a): Ionization
history, x̄i (z). Note that x̄i is independent of fX , so we only show two curves here.
(b): Optical depth τ . The models follow those in Figs. 7 and 8. From [434].

10.1 Spectral Features


The fundamental quantity of interest for the 21 cm forest is the optical depth,
given by equation (12) for an isolated cloud or equation (15) for the IGM. At
high redshifts, the latter becomes
                                            3/2 "            #"               #
                                      1+z            Tγ (z)        H(z)/(1 + z)
                                  
          τ ≈ 0.011 xHI (1 + δ)                                                 .   (166)
                                       10             TS             dvk /drk


As usual, the observable quantity is the brightness temperature decrement
δTb . However, in this case the background radiation field comes from a source
with brightness temperature Tb ≫ TS ; thus δTb ∝ TS−1 . Unlike tomography,
the forest’s brightness always depends on TS .

We will consider four aspects of the forest. The first is the mean level of
IGM absorption, which is determined by x̄HI (z) and TS (z). We have seen
in §3 that these quantities depend on a number of unknown parameters in
the star formation history, including their spectral energy distribution, star
formation efficiency, escape fraction, and stellar initial mass function. We can
use the same models as in §3 to study the qualitative features of the evolution.
Figure 38 shows the mean optical depth in several of the models from Figures 7
and 8.


                                         164
At sufficiently high redshifts, before the Wouthuysen-Field effect has become
significant, TS = Tγ and τ̄ ∼ 0.02. In most of the models, it then briefly
increases by a factor of a few because Lyα coupling becomes efficient while the
IGM is still cold. However, this period is short-lived, because τ̄ declines rapidly
once X-ray heating begins. As we saw in equations (89) and (90), reionization
is delayed compared to Lyα coupling and X-ray heating. As a result, by the
time reionization begins in earnest and large HII regions appear, TS is already
large and τ̄ ∼ 10−3 . This is a crucial characteristic of the 21 cm forest: in the
most plausible scenarios, τ̄ is only large long before reionization. This is, of
course, unfortunate, because powerful radio sources probably do not appear
until powerful ionizing sources do. Thus lines of sight with strong absorption
are likely to be rare. Simulations find similar results, even if X-ray heating is
neglected (Fig. 37 and [349]). The right-hand panel of Figure 37 has τ̄ ∼ 0.1%
at x̄i ∼ 0.5 (or z = 8 in this particular simulation). Once X-ray heating is
included, the prospects are even worse.

The next set of features come from sheets and filaments. These stand out in
Figure 37 as τ & 2% absorption spikes. Naively, one might expect that these
features would strengthen with time as the cosmic web condenses out of the
IGM. But Figure 37 shows the opposite: they actually grow weaker, because
the increasing spin temperature washes them out. Assuming the absorbers are
near hydrostatic equilibrium (an excellent approximation for the analogous
Lyα forest [435]), the typical overdensity of an absorber with optical depth τ
is [434]
                                              2          3                       !2
                                                                Ωm h2       Ωb h2
                               2                                      !
                         τ             TS             10
                    
       1 + δ ∼ 94                                                                        .   (167)
                        0.01          100 K          1+z        0.15        0.023


Thus, if the IGM has been even moderately heated, only virialized objects
host measurable absorption, and the cosmic web spikes become rare. In the
simulation of [349], TS ∼ 30 K throughout much of the IGM at z = 10, but by
z = 8 it has risen to TS > 100 K everywhere. 54 Over the same interval, the
number density of τ > 0.02 lines drops from ∼ 50 per unit redshift at z = 10
to ∼ 4 at z = 8. Again we see that strong cosmic web absorption probably
requires finding bright radio sources that shine long before reionization begins.
These features are also narrow, with ∆νobs ∼ 2 kHz, determined by thermal
and Hubble broadening.

Minihalos also contribute to the forest [427]. We described 21 cm emission from
these objects in §6.1; while it can be reasonably strong, it is nearly impossible
to distinguish from that of the diffuse IGM without high sensitivity on small
scales. But the 21 cm forest suffers no such confusion, because it allows us
54 It is worth noting again that this simulation lacked X-ray heating, so it probably

underestimates the temperature.


                                              165
to resolve individual objects; indeed, it is the only known method to study
these objects in detail. The excess optical depth through a minihalo depends
in detail on its gas density profile and temperature distribution [427]. But we
can estimate the typical central optical depths by assuming NHI ≈ nHI rvir ≈
∆vir n̄H rvir (where ∆vir ≈ 18π 2 is the mean overdensity of virialized objects;
see [436] for a numerical fit) and that TS ≈ TK (because the gas is so dense).
Then, using equation (13), we have (at line center) 55

                                         1/2           !−2/3
                                1+z                m
                                 
                    τmh ≈ 0.026                   7
                                                                .             (168)
                                 10             10 M⊙


Thus the optical depths can even exceed those of sheets and filaments, and
they are much more robust to uncertainties about the Lyα background and
the IGM temperature. The typical line widths (due to thermal broadening)
are ∆νobs ∼ 2 kHz, comparable to those of sheets and filaments.

Figure 39 shows the resulting differential number densities of minihalo ab-
sorbers at z = 10 and 20 (solid and dashed lines, respectively). At each red-
shift, the top curves assume TK = Tad (the temperature without X-ray heating;
shown in Fig. 6). The remaining curves use TK = 20, 100, and 1000 K, from
top to bottom, to compute the Jeans mass. In a cold IGM, the number of
minihalo features is large (with & 100 absorbers per unit redshift at z = 10)
and they can be rather strong (with & 20 absorbers with τ > 0.1 per unit red-
shift). Minihalos are of course much rarer at z = 20, simply because structure
formation is so much less advanced at that time.

Clearly the number of absorbers decreases rapidly as TK increases, especially
for large optical depths. This is because the smallest minihalos produce the
strongest features; increasing the Jeans mass by even a small amount sup-
presses them. The weaker absorption features with τ ∼ 0.01 are more robust to
TK because they come from larger halos. Comparison with simulations shows
that minihalo features have comparable abundance to those of the cosmic
web [349,427], although minihalos do probably persist longer during reioniza-
tion once X-ray heating is included [434].

Measuring the frequency of minihalo features is thus a sensitive probe of the
thermal history of the IGM. More sophisticated models of minihalo formation
in the presence of thermal feedback show that the lack of a minihalo forest, in
combination with large-scale 21 cm emission, could identify warm regions in
which an HII bubble had recombined [321]. Such regions would be invisible in
most other ways.

55 The total equivalent width of a minihalo line is proportional to m−1/3 .




                                        166
Fig. 39. Differential number density of minihalo absorption features at z = 10
(solid curves) and z = 20 (dashed curves). From top to bottom, each set takes the
minimum minihalo mass to be that of a uniform medium at T = Tad (z), 20, 100
and 1000 K, from top to bottom. From [434].

Ionized bubbles create gaps in the absorption, with an amplitude equal to
the mean optical depth of the neutral gas. Figure 40 shows the resulting
distribution of absorption features (transformed into differential form) for
x̄i = 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, and 0.9 at z = 10. It has a number of interesting
features. First, except at x̄i = 0.1, the distribution is flat with ∆νobs . This is
because nb (m) has a well-defined characteristic size in this model. Crucially,
because the bubbles are relatively large, the spectral features are quite wide
– more than an order of magnitude larger than those of filaments or miniha-
los, even when x̄i = 0.1. Thus they may indeed be the simplest features to
identify, despite their relatively small contrast (see Fig. 38). Second, the total
number of HII regions per unit redshift remains roughly constant throughout
reionization, from ∼ 20 at x̄i = 0.1 to ∼ 6 at x̄i = 0.9. This is because most
ionizations occur as existing bubbles grow larger rather than by creating new
bubbles [22]. However, the overall distribution of ∆νobs does evolve rapidly
as x̄i increases, so the forest will certainly prove useful in constraining the
reionization history.

Finally, for completeness, dense neutral gas inside galaxies (similar to DLAs
at z . 4 [437]) can induce rather large optical depths. But such lines of sight
are rare (dn/dz ∼ 0.1 [427]), so collecting a large sample will be difficult.




                                       167
Fig. 40. Size distribution of HII region forest gaps intersected per unit redshift at
z = 10. The dotted, dot-dashed, short-dashed, long-dashed, and solid lines take
x̄i = 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, and 0.9, respectively. From [434].
10.2 Is It Feasible?


As we mentioned above, 21 cm forest observations are much simpler than to-
mography, because they can essentially ignore most of the challenges discussed
in §9. Their feasibility boils down to two questions: raw sensitivity and the
existence of background sources. Detecting a feature with signal-to-noise ratio
S/N requires a source brightness (assuming simultaneous observations of two
orthogonal polarizations)
                                                                      !1/2
                           S/N 0.01 2500 m2 /K
                                                  !
                                                       1 kHz 1 week
        Smin = 16 mJy                                                        ,   (169)
                            5   τ    Aeff /Tsys        ∆νch tint


where ∆νch is the bandwidth of each channel (assumed smaller than the feature
of interest) and tint is the total “on-source” integration time. These telescope
parameters are similar to those expected for the SKA at z = 10, shown in the
mock spectra of Figure 37. Clearly, observing any of the narrow features de-
scribed above requires long integrations on SKA-class instruments and rather
bright sources; for example, Cygnus A would have Sν . 20 mJy if it existed
at such redshifts.

This requirement can be alleviated in some circumstances. First, minihalos and
filaments introduce an extra fluctuating component to the spectra that could


                                        168
be detected statistically by, for example, computing a running rms noise statis-
tic. This reduces Smin by a factor of at least three [349]. Second, HII regions
can have significantly larger widths. Bubbles with ∆νobs ∼ 100 kHz reduce
the required optical depth to τ ∼ 10−3 at Smin = 16 mJy, and significantly
weaker sources would suffice if τ is larger.

Unfortunately, these thresholds are still relatively large. Interestingly, when
extrapolated to higher frequencies, the possible background sources are well
within reach of existing surveys (such as FIRST [438]), assuming that they
have spectra typical of radio galaxies. Thus, appropriate sources may have
already been detected. Of course, none have been identified so far, and that
step will pose the real challenge.

The most promising background sources are radio-loud quasars, although their
luminosity function is relatively unconstrained at z & 4 [439]. Under the rea-
sonable assumption that their abundance declines along with the bright optical
quasars, the sky would contain ∼ 1000 (10) sources at z > 8 (12) [349]. Models
of the radio luminosity function over a range of redshifts (matching existing
data where available) predict ∼ 2000 sources across the sky with S > 6 mJy
at 8 < z < 12 [440] (although this is quite sensitive to the assumed radio-
loudness parameter). According to this model, the FIRST survey should have
already found & 103 objects with z > 7 – albeit out of a total sample of
∼ 750, 000 sources! These estimates predict reasonably large number of lines
of sight to z < 12. Beyond that point, however, we will likely be limited to
just a few extreme objects. This is unfortunate in light of Figs. 38–40, which
show that the absorption rapidly weakens during reionization itself. The rare,
high-redshift sources have the potential to provide the most information about
the early universe, but guessing at their abundance is nearly impossible. It is
therefore crucial to push searches to the highest possible redshifts.

Fortunately, there are no fundamental reasons to expect a cutoff in the radio
source population at high redshifts. While the evolving IGM will affect ex-
tended radio lobes, compact radio sources are driven by local jet physics and
so should not depend on the large-scale environment [440]. The CMB energy
density does increase at higher redshifts, increasing the importance of inverse-
Compton cooling relative to (radio) synchrotron emission. The two become
energetically comparable at z ∼ 6, but this should only steepen the spectrum
rather than quench the radio emission [349]. Such steepening could be useful
in identifying high-redshift radio sources. Most persuasively, the fraction of
radio-loud objects does not seem to evolve, even to z ∼ 6 [441,442].

Another possible set of sources are GRBs and hypernovae. Unfortunately,
although they should occur at high redshifts [27,?], afterglow models predict
that only the most energetic events achieve the required flux densities, and only
then if they occur in exceptionally diffuse environments [443]. Thus it seems


                                      169
unlikely that transient sources can be used for the 21 cm forest, although
detecting 21 cm absorption from their host galaxies is not at all unreasonable
[427].



11   Complementary Observations


Before closing, we wish to consider 21 cm observations in relation to other
probes of the high-redshift universe. As we shall see, all of these other tech-
niques require luminous sources and so focus on the eras of the first luminous
objects and of reionization (§7 and 8). Between the surface of last scattering
and the time that the first luminous sources appear, the 21 cm sky is the only
known probe available to us (assuming that galaxies reionize the Universe, of
course).


11.1 Galaxy Surveys


The utility of comparing 21 cm surveys to the galaxy (and quasar) distribution
is obvious: it will identify the sources responsible for reionizing each slice
of the IGM (or at least their descendants). Of course, such galaxy surveys
are intrinsically difficult, as the sources are extremely faint (because of their
distance and small sizes). Moreover, Lyα absorption by the intervening IGM
is essentially complete for rest wavelengths blueward of 1216 Å at z & 6,
requiring near-infrared cameras that are generally less advanced than their
optical counterparts.

Nevertheless, surveys have already begun to probe the reionization epoch.
Deep integrations with the Hubble Space Telescope, such as the GOODS survey
and the UltraDeep Field, have detected a number of galaxies at z ∼ 6 using the
photometric dropout technique (e.g., [444,?,?]) and perhaps even some objects
at higher redshifts [447,?]. Population synthesis models, in conjunction with
optical and infrared observations, can also be used to identify high-redshift
candidates; this technique has already led to some surprising identifications
of massive (M⋆ & 1011 M⊙ ) galaxies at z ∼ 6–7 [449]. Large-format ground-
based surveys have also successfully identified photometric dropouts [450,?].

An alternative to dropout surveys (which require deep spectroscopic followup
for confirmation) is to search for objects with strong Lyα emission lines. Spe-
cific redshift windows can be searched with narrowband filters, which offer the
enormous advantage of working between the bright sky lines that nearly blan-
ket the near-infrared sky. Observations in one such window at z = 6.56 have
already found dozens of objects [452,?,?,?,?], and windows at z ∼ 8–10 are


                                      170
now being explored [457,?,?,?]. Unfortunately, these surveys can only detect
the brightest objects (although gravitational lensing can probe further down
the luminosity function in small patches of sky [461,?,?]). Substantial samples
of less unusual galaxies must await larger telescopes more optimized for the
near-infrared, such as the James Webb Space Telescope or a ground-based 30
meter telescope. Such surveys are interesting for any number of reasons, but
drawing conclusions about reionization is difficult because of the many uncer-
tainties in the stellar initial mass function, metallicity, escape fraction, and
the IGM recombination rate [463,?]. Thus the correlation with 21 cm maps
may in the end prove the best way to learn about this aspect of the sources.
Of course, such a comparison will be easiest with a well-understood galaxy
population (which is relatively difficult for Lyα-selected galaxies).

Quasar searches have also reached z ∼ 6, although again only at the bright
end of the luminosity function [4,?,?,?,?]. Nevertheless, these surveys have
already taught us that bright quasars are much too rare to be responsible for
reionization. These luminous objects also provide an intriguing set of targets
for 21 cm imaging, because their HII regions are likely to be much larger than
average (see §8.4).

While the merits of comparing the galaxy distribution with HII regions de-
tected by 21 cm observations are clear, galaxy observations can also teach us
about the ionized gas distribution on their own. Consider a galaxy embedded
in the neutral IGM. Some ionizing photons leak out into the IGM and create
an HII region, but most are absorbed within the galaxy and reprocessed into
Lyα photons. When these photons diffuse out of the galaxy, they will ini-
tially propagate through the HII region, suffering relatively little absorption.
However, once they encounter the neutral IGM, they will quickly be absorbed
unless they have traveled far enough to redshift out of line center. Of course,
the amount of redshifting depends on the size of the host HII region; thus we
expect strong Lyα lines to gradually fade toward higher redshifts [37,?,?].

Quantitatively constraining x̄i (z) with this tool is difficult for two reasons.
First, the intrinsic characteristics of the galaxies – especially their winds – can
strongly affect their Lyα line properties [40]. This problem can be alleviated
(to some extent) by comparing galaxy populations at two different redshifts
(preferably closely spaced enough in time to avoid significant cosmic evolu-
tion). For example, Lyα-selected samples at z = 5.7 (which we know to be
after reionization) and at z = 6.5 (which may be in medias res) show no
significant differences between their luminosity functions, at least within the
statistical errors of the observations [16]. The second “problem” is that the
bubble sizes depend on the sources of reionization [465,?,?,?]; see Figure 41
for an illustration of the constraints that can be set.

Fortunately, this second “bug” is actually a powerful tool for studying reion-


                                       171
Fig. 41. (a): Lyα luminosity functions at z = 6.5. The thick solid line shows an
assumed intrinsic function, with luminosity L ∝ mgal . The observations require the
measured luminosity function to lie above the thin solid line [16]. The other curves
show how IGM Lyα absorption affects the luminosity function at several different
x̄i . (b): Ratio of attenuated to intrinsic luminosity functions. From [17].

ization. Although large bubbles weaken the absorption, their existence at rel-
atively early times also implies that Lyα surveys will successfully find galax-
ies throughout the middle stages of reionization. Moreover, the survey selec-
tion function will be modulated by the ionized bubbles: lines of sight passing
through large HII regions will contain many galaxies while other lines of sight
will appear entirely empty even though their intrinsic galaxy densities could
be nearly as large [466,?]. Thus Lyα surveys can be used to map the bubble
distribution (albeit only indirectly), making them the best known alternative
to 21 cm measurements. The major difficulties are surveying sufficiently large
volumes to the required sensitivities and understanding the intrinsic Lyα prop-
erties and clustering of the galaxies (which is probably easiest in conjunction
with dropout surveys). Nevertheless, comparing the two kinds of maps offers
exciting possibilities to learn about the sources and their interaction with the
IGM.

Galaxies can also be studied indirectly through the near-infrared (NIR) back-
ground and its fluctuations [468]: these same Lyα photons travel through the
IGM without being destroyed (only scattered) and eventually redshift to wave-
lengths & 1 µm at the present day. Thus the NIR background contains infor-
mation about the recombination history (which, of course, also constrains the
ionizing luminosity) [469,470]; provided that most recombinations occur inside


                                       172
or near galaxies (as is true if fesc ≪ 1), its fluctuations directly trace those
of the galaxy population [471,?,?] and are therefore complementary to 21 cm
tomography of the IGM. However, studies of the NIR background suffer from
many of the same challenges as 21 cm observations: the signal is strongly dom-
inated by foregrounds (in this case the zodiacal light and moderate redshift
galaxies), which must somehow be separated from the cosmological signal. As
a result, the recent claimed detection of Pop III stars via their fluctuations
in deep Spitzer fields [474] remains controversial [475,?]. There may be useful
synergies between the data analysis techniques of both fluctuation searches
and in cross-correlation of the two datasets (to eliminate those foregrounds
that contribute to only one probe); the main challenge is the large disparity
in angular scales subtended by the relevant telescopes: the NIR searches use
fields . 30 arcmin across, while 21 cm observations will span hundreds of
square degrees.


11.2 Quasar and GRB Spectra


Just as with the 21 cm line, Lyman series absorption in the spectra of high-
redshift quasars traces neutral hydrogen in the early Universe. However, since
the cross sections for such permitted transitions are ∼ 107 times larger, opti-
cal/UV absorption spectra saturate much more rapidly than the 21 cm line
(which is still optically thin even in a fully neutral universe). Quasar spectra
are therefore primarily useful for studying the tail end of reionization, when
the neutral fraction is small. This very property makes quasar absorption spec-
tra highly complementary to 21 cm probes, because they are most powerful
precisely when x̄HI (and the 21 cm signal) are plummeting. On the other hand,
despite the small neutral fraction, the tail end of reionization has rich physics
and any number of unanswered questions. For example, how does the tran-
sition from the “bubble-dominated” topology characteristic of reionization to
the “web-dominated” topology we see at lower redshifts (where Lyman-limit
systems embedded in filaments consume most of the ionizing photons) occur?
How large do the ionized bubbles get? How does the IGM clumpiness evolve
as the Universe is ionized and heated? Quasar spectra are ideally suited to
answer these and other questions that arise when the 21 cm sky is fading.
However, we must keep in mind that, while quasar spectra can potentially
constrain the global neutral fraction and topology of reionization, in practice
these are difficult questions, because making inferences about the ionization
state of the universe from a saturated absorber is fraught with uncertainty.

As with many topics we have discussed in this review, our understanding
of the z ∼ 6 universe as revealed by quasar spectra is evolving rapidly; to
date, 19 quasars with redshifts 5.74 < zem < 6.42 have been discovered in
the SDSS [7]. Thus far, the following spectral features have been used to


                                      173
deduce IGM properties: (i) the evolution of the mean Gunn-Peterson optical
depth in Lyα, β, and γ transitions, as well as its line-of-sight scatter; (ii)
the distribution of lengths of dark absorption gaps and transmission spikes;
(iii) the detection of damping wings; (iv) the size of HII regions around high-
redshift quasars; and (v) metal absorption lines. We will discuss each of these
in turn (see Fig. 1 for a summary of some of the resulting constraints).

Because only a small fraction of the IGM need be neutral for Lyα Gunn-
Peterson absorption to saturate (see eq. 43), Lyβ and Lyγ absorption provide
better limits by a factor of 2–4, though they are affected by uncertainty in
the foreground absorption from lower-order transitions. 56 Since most trans-
mission arises in underdense voids (where the recombination time is longest),
quasar spectra provide little information about regions of the IGM where most
baryons reside [9]; thus, estimates of the neutral fraction can at best constrain
x̄HI ≥ 10−3 –10−2 and are dependent on theoretical models of the IGM density
distribution. Nonetheless, striking observational patterns emerge for some rea-
sonable models. According to [7] (who use the IGM model of [10]), the effective
optical depth τeff = −lnhT i (where T is the transmission fraction) increases
rapidly at high redshift, accelerating from τeff ∝ (1 + z)4.3 to (1 + z)≥11 at
z > 5.7. This rapid evolution has been interpreted by some to indicate sudden
evolution in the radiation field and mean free path of ionizing photons, as
might be expected when the ionized bubbles percolate (e.g., [477,478,11]). On
the other hand, an empirically motivated model of the mean optical depth evo-
lution does not show such a break and implies that no such dramatic event is
occurring [479] (see also [8]). Better data and modeling will clearly be needed
to settle this debate.

Accompanying this sudden evolution is a rapid increase in the dispersion of τeff ,
even when it is smoothed on scales & 50h−1 Mpc. Figure 42 shows the most
dramatic example, the clear detection of transmission throughout the line of
sight to SDSS J1148+5251 (z = 6.42) [480,481,9] despite uniformly complete
absorption in the Lyα, β, and γ troughs of SDSS J1030+0524 (z = 6.28)
[33,480]. This has been interpreted as evidence for patchy reionization, or at
the very least for a strongly fluctuating radiation field, which is expected near
the end of reionization [34,?]. However, such claims should be viewed with
caution: numerical simulations show that the observed sightline-to-sightline
variance is in fact consistent with density fluctuations in a uniform radiation
field [35] (see also [36]). Transmission fluctuations can be of order unity on
large (∼ 50 h−1 Mpc) scales for two reasons: (i) transmission spectra are highly
biased tracers of the underlying density fluctuations, because they are mainly
sensitive to rare voids, and (ii) projected power from small-scale transverse

56 In a clumpy IGM, τ eff /τ eff and τ eff /τ eff are a factor 2–4 smaller than the ratio
                     α      β         α      γ
of oscillator strengths would suggest, reducing the leverage granted by these higher
order transitions [8,9].


                                          174
Fig. 42. Quasar absorption spectra. In each panel, the lower curve shows the ob-
served spectrum in the Lyα forest region; the overlaid curve shows the corresponding
Lyβ spectrum. J1030+0524 (z = 6.28) shows saturated absorption in both transi-
tions from z ≈ 5.95–6.2, while J1148+5251 (z = 6.42) shows transmission through-
out the spectrum over the same interval (and even to higher redshifts). From [480].

modes is aliased to long wavelength line-of-sight modes. Thus, although it is
quite likely that the ionizing background does contain substantial fluctuations
at these epochs, it is extremely difficult to detect them.

A useful statistic related to the observed scatter in transmission is the “dark
gap distribution,” or the size distribution of regions with τ > τmin [482,8,483,484,466,485,200,486].
Because it still provides useful information when absorption is saturated, this
is potentially the most useful quasar absorption probe in the nearly saturated
limit. Although the relation between dark gaps and x̄HI is model-dependent,
the relative evolution of gap lengths is a robust statistic. Indeed, simulations
find that reionization causes a dramatic decrease in the average length of dark
gaps, as well as its dispersion [485,200]. Only recently have simulations reached
sizes comparable to dark gaps [374,486], which is essential for making quan-
titative comparisons. The data show a dramatic increase in mean dark gap
length (defined with τmin = 3.5) from Rdark < 10 to Rdark > 80 comoving Mpc
at z ∼ 5.7 [7], with large line of sight variations: dark gaps as long as 50 Mpc
appear by z ∼ 5.5, while some lines of sight at z > 6 are still transparent [7].
This abrupt transition may or may not be consistent with a simple thicken-
ing of the Lyα forest [36]; there is probably more information to be mined
from dark gaps. One recent study found that, with ∼ 10 z > 6 quasars, the
dark gap distribution can sharply distinguish between different reionization
histories [486]. It could also constrain the topology of reionization, at least in
principle [484].

Note that a large dark gap does not necessarily correspond to a large neutral
region, because the strong damping wings of Lyα can mask ionized regions.


                                       175
Given an estimate for the size distribution of HII regions, the absence or pres-
ence of transmission spikes constrains x̄HI by limiting the total contribution
from damping wings (see §11.1 for the application of this to Lyα emitting
galaxies). Again, large HII regions, created by clusters of high-redshift galax-
ies, increase the probability of transmission spikes [466]. A novel test for damp-
ing wings compares the Lyα and Lyβ transmission near the boundary of an
HII region [14]. The presence of Lyβ transmission coupled with saturated Lyα
absorption over a contiguous region ∆z ∼ 0.02 in the proximity zone around
SDSS J1030+0534 (z = 6.28) requires strong damping wing absorption in this
region. If the absorption were solely due to the fluctuating opacity of residual
HI in mostly ionized gas, there should have been a transmission spike due
to an underdense region somewhere inside such a large stretch. The required
damping wing implies x̄HI ≥ 0.2. However, this feature has only been seen in
one quasar, and its statistical significance is still not clear.

Yet another probe of the high-redshift IGM is the size of proximity zones
around high redshift quasars. Provided that the region in which Lyman se-
ries transmission can be seen corresponds to the edge of an HII region, this
                         −1/3
should scale as R ∝ x̄HI Ṅion tQ (1 + z)−1 in a uniform IGM, where Ṅion is
the production rate of ionizing photons and tQ is the quasar lifetime. Given
appropriate ansatzen for these two parameters, it should be possible to infer
x̄HI ; several authors have suggested, from the relatively small sizes of quasar
HII regions around z ∼ 6 quasars, that x̄HI ≥ 0.2 [23,15,21]. These estimates
are afflicted by uncertainties in the quasar lifetime, redshift (e.g., most quasar
redshifts are determined by high-ionization lines such as CIV and SiIV, which
are systematically offset from the host galaxy’s redshift), spectral template
(i.e., Ṅion for a given observed luminosity), IGM clumping factor, and the
effects of nearby galaxies. Nonetheless, the differential change in proximity
zone sizes should be a reasonably robust indicator of evolution in the neutral
fraction. The observed sizes decrease rapidly toward high redshift, as might
be expected if the IGM were becoming more neutral (see Fig. 1) [7].

Finally, an alternative probe of the IGM ionization state is to use metal ab-
sorption lines such as OI, SiII, and CII [487], which tend to trace HI and
have transitions redward of Lyα. Since metal atoms are ∼ 10−5 –10−7 times
less abundant than hydrogen in the IGM, their absorption does not saturate
even in a fully neutral IGM. OI is a particularly attractive tracer: its ion-
ization potential differs from hydrogen by only ∆E = 0.02 eV, so it should
sit in tight charge exchange equilibrium with HI. It is nevertheless imper-
fect, because metals do not fill all of space and tend to lie preferentially in
the ionized regions around galaxies. However, if there is substantial early star
formation (and hence metal pollution), and if metals lie in overdense regions
(which recombine quickly once nearby ionizing sources shut off), the test may
prove useful. Recent high-resolution observations found a sharp rise in the
abundance of OI absorbers at high redshifts, with abundances comparable to


                                      176
the predicted number of Lyman limit systems [479]. However, there are strik-
ing line-of-sight variations; four of the six observed systems lie toward SDSS
J1148+5251 (z = 6.42), even though nine lines of sight were observed. It is
highly unlikely that this is due to variations in sensitivity or random fluctu-
ations. The interpretation of this puzzling result is still unclear, but it likely
signals inhomogeneous metal pollution and/or reionization.

Throughout this section, we have referred exclusively to quasar spectra, but
of course any other luminous, high-redshift background source will do. GRBs
are a particularly interesting alternative, because they likely occur at high
redshifts (so long as they approximately trace the star formation history of
the Universe [27]). Moreover, cosmic time dilation implies that, as the burst
redshift increases, a fixed observer time corresponds to earlier and earlier times
in the frame of the burst; because bursts fade rapidly, this helps counteract
the usual decline of flux with luminosity distance and makes GRBs visible
to higher redshifts than naively expected [28,?]. They have the theoretical
advantage of simpler intrinsic spectra, without large proximity zones or Lyα
emission lines, that should in principle allow easier extraction of the shape
of the red damping wing – which in turn offers a sensitive constraint on the
neutral fraction [24,?]. However, most GRBs have strong damped-Lyα ab-
sorbers from the host galaxies, making the damping wing test much more
difficult (though it can still be applied, because the line profiles differ in the
two cases; see §1.1). The first (weak) constraints came from GRB 050904 at
z = 6.3 [30,?], which was observed 3.4 days after the burst. Faster identifica-
tion and followup of high-redshift GRBs will allow even more sensitive tests
of the damping wing (especially because some GRBs do appear to have weak
local absorbers; see the compilation in [31]), and of course measurements of
the intervening IGM are independent of the local absorption.

In summary, the picture painted by quasar absorption studies of the z ∼ 6 IGM
is highly complex and unclear: interpretations range from significantly neutral
to highly ionized, and the topology of reionization remains quite controversial.
Prospects for improvement are good, but they require more lines of sight to be
identified and better modeling of the existing data. Ultimately, 21 cm studies
have the power to strip away most of these uncertainties!



11.3 CMB Polarization


While 21 cm observations are sensitive to the neutral hydrogen density, CMB
polarization experiments are sensitive to the free electron density, and there
is obviously a good deal of potential for synergy between the two.

CMB temperature anisotropies are relatively unaffected by reionization on


                                      177
large scales, but Ron small scales they are suppressed by a factor exp(−2τes ),
where τes ≡ σT 0η dη ′ ne is the electron scattering optical depth and η is
the conformal time. The characteristic angular scale dividing these regimes
is lr = DA [z(ηr )]/ηr , where ηr is the visibility-weighted conformal time (es-
sentially describing the distance to the reionization surface; see below for a
precise definition of the visibility function) [488]. Similarly, the angular power
spectrum of polarization is suppressed on small scales by the same factor
exp(−2τes ). However, on large scales, the rescattering of photons also cre-
ates a broad peak in polarization power at l ∼ lr [305,?]. This polarization
anisotropy is sourced by the temperature quadrupole seen by scatterers dur-
ing reionization, which is much larger than the temperature quadrupole at the
surface of last scattering. The amplitude of the bump depends most strongly
on τes and on the amplitude of primordial potential perturbations. Other pa-
rameters matter much less; for instance, the signal is nearly independent of
the baryon density, because the modes contributing to the reionization signal
have k ∼ 2/ηr and enter the horizon well after reionization.

Particularly if τes is large, most of the information on reionization comes from
                                            l
the auto-correlation power spectrum CEE        , rather than the cross-correlation
CT E between polarization and temperature. 57 This is primarily because CEE
  l                                                                           l
                                                                                 ∝
 2               l
τes , whereas CT E ∝ τes . Also, in the cosmic variance limit, the fractional
                   l
uncertainty in CEE      is smaller than the fractional uncertainty in CTl E unless
they are perfectly correlated. Furthermore, CTl E correlates quantities which
at fixed k have different angular frequencies on the sky, because the tempera-
ture anisotropies are projected from the more distant surface of last scattering.
                                          l
The matching angular frequencies of CEE       create well-defined secondary peaks,
                               l
whereas the mismatch in CT E washes out fluctuation power, suppressing the
peaks.

The first detection of reionization in CMB data was reported by the WMAP
team with their first year data; from CTl E , they found τes = 0.17 ± 0.08 (2σ)
[44,43]. Two more years of data significantly improved the measurement, espe-
                                           l
cially because they were able to detect CEE   . The present best-fit value (using
                                      +0.028
WMAP data alone) is τes = 0.088−0.034 [45,?]. Because τes suppresses the
amplitude of the CMB, other constraints on the power spectrum normaliza-
tion (such as large-scale structure) are also useful; the best fit measurement
including several other cosmological datasets is τes = 0.069+0.026
                                                             −0.029 .


Is any other information available beyond a simple measure of the integrated
optical depth τes ? Unfortunately, the dominant modes in the large scale po-
larization signal have k ∼ 2/ηr . We expect little correlation between ionized
bubbles on horizon scales, and CMB polarization is essentially independent of

57 Here “E” refers to spin-free or E-mode polarization [489,?,?]; reionization does

not generate the complementary divergence-free or B-mode polarization.


                                       178
the topology of reionization. However, even if CMB polarization experiments
cannot probe patchy reionization, future high-precision measurements could
constrain the global reionization history x̄i (z) and distinguish reionization sce-
narios with identical total optical depths τes [492,493].

The leverage comes from the shape of the power spectrum; for models with
substantial partial reionization at high redshifts, there is significantly more po-
larization power at smaller angular scales. Qualitatively, this occurs because
the horizon is smaller at high redshifts. Again, most of the information comes
          l
from CEE    ; we show some example power spectra, together with their corre-
sponding reionization histories, in Figure 43 (from [493]). Here the error bars
include cosmic variance only; thus, even with these radically different reioniza-
tion histories, the observable differences are relatively small and constraints
will be crude. CMB analyses typically characterize reionization as a sharp
step-function at some redshift zr . Such an unrealistic reionization history can
significantly bias the estimate of τes in a manner that depends on the true
x̄i (z) [492,493]. This bias is smaller than the statistical errors of WMAP but
could easily be δτes ≥ 0.01 for the Planck satellite, compared with statistical
errors δτes ∼ 0.005 and the cosmic variance limit of δτes ∼ 0.002–0.003 [493].
It can be reduced by fitting slightly more complicated reionization histories
(such as two-stage reionization), though uncertainty in this modeling may ul-
timately prevent optical depth measurements from reaching the true cosmic
variance limit. The accuracy with which polarization can constrain the reion-
ization history is likely similar, with information on only ∼ 2–3 broad redshift
bins. The accuracy of 21 cm experiments in tracking the volume filling fraction
of ionized regions should be much higher (see §8).

In practice, foregrounds are likely to be the key difficulty, and cleaning strate-
gies are still under development (see [45] for an example). If foregrounds do
impose a limit well above cosmic variance, the advantages of all-sky surveys
are less apparent, and ground-based polarization experiments could be com-
petitive with space-based missions [494]. We refer the interested reader to [3]
for a more in-depth discussion of the future prospects of CMB polarization
measurements.



11.4 Small-Scale CMB Anisotropies


The same scattering processes that produce large-scale polarization also im-
print temperature anisotropies on the CMB through the peculiar velocity of
the scattering medium, which imparts a blue- or redshift to the scattered pho-
tons. This “Doppler” or “kinetic Sunyaev-Zeldovich” (kSZ) effect has several
observable consequences.


                                       179
Fig. 43. Large-scale CMB polarization power spectra (right panel) for five different
reionization histories (left panel). All are normalized to have identical power at
l = 50. The thin dashed curves in the right panel show the best fit instantaneous
reionization histories to models 4 and 5. The error bars show the cosmic variance
limit. From [493].

The Doppler anisotropy toward direction n̂ on the sky is

                        ∆T          Z
                           (n̂) = σT dη e−τes a ne n̂ · v,                     (170)
                        Tγ


where v is the local peculiar velocity. We define gv (z) = τ˙es e−τes = σT ne a e−τes
as the visibility function; it is the probability that a photon last scattered at
η ± dη. (Throughout this section, an overdot will represent ∂/∂η.)

From equation (170), one might hope that linear order velocity fluctuations
would source temperature perturbations. Unfortunately, the kSZ effect van-
ishes to linear order, because the crests and troughs of a perturbation produce
equal and opposite Doppler shifts [495]. Thus anisotropy only appears if either
v or g evolve across the perturbation, and it is a second order effect. Obviously,
gv (z) can only evolve significantly across a perturbation that spans relatively
large scales. For reasonable reionization histories, the signal has a broad peak
at l . 100; on larger scales, the previously described cancellation damps out
the anisotropies. However, even at l ∼ 100, the Doppler contribution is more
than an order of magnitude smaller than the primary CMB anisotropies [283]:
we need some way to isolate the contribution from reionization.

The 21 cm background provides exactly such a tool [287], because it traces
both large scale overdensities (which source velocity perturbations) and fluc-
tuations in the ionized fraction. For example, consider an overdense region
during (uniform) reionization. On the far side of the perturbation, the Uni-


                                        180
verse will be mostly neutral and hence little scattering will occur; the near
side, on the other hand, will be mostly ionized, imparting a net redshift to
the CMB. Thus, in the simplest model (in which overdense regions are not
ionized significantly earlier than underdense regions), the 21 cm signal and
the CMB will be anti-correlated. On large scales, the cross-correlation can be
written [287]

     l 2 Cl        ¯ b D(z)
                              "                     !                        !#
               Tγ δT              4             l                        l        ∂
            ≈−                      x̄HI PδδL           − x̄i (z) PxδL               [Ḋgv ]. (171)
       2π           2π            3             r                        r        ∂η


As in equation (133), δL denotes the linear density field and marks those
terms arising from the velocity fluctuation in equation (170). The first term
in square brackets comes from the correlation of this velocity with the large
scale density fluctuations in the 21 cm signal; the PxδL term arises from the
evolution of the ionized fraction across the density fluctuation. Note that these
terms have opposite signs: ionizing overdense regions first cancels part of the
cross-correlation by moderating the evolution of the electron fraction across
the perturbation. In realistic models, this term can easily dominate [287], so
the sign of the correlation provides information on reionization. It obviously
peaks at x̄i ∼ 0.5 and therefore constrains x̄i (z) directly as well. Simple models
predict peak signal strengths ∼ 200–500 µK2 [287], within reach of SKA-
class observatories (although foregrounds could pose a problem on these large
scales).

This linear Doppler effect peaks on large scales (hundreds of Mpc) and hence
does not depend strongly on the bubble properties (except insofar as their
bias affects PxδL ). It also ignores the effect of small-scale inhomogeneities in
either the density or ionized fraction on gv (z). By including these in equation
(170), we see that the anisotropies depend on q ≡ v(1 + δ + δx ). The angular
power spectrum then has significant contributions from Pvv Pδδ , Pvv Pxx , and
Pvv Pδx (as well as four-point terms) [496,?]. The first of these (the Ostriker-
Vishniac or OV effect) depends only on the density field and x̄i (z) [497]. At the
relevant scales the OV effect is dominated by nonlinear structure formation at
low redshifts [498,?] and only depends weakly on reionization [368,?] (though
see [500]).

More interesting from our point of view are the so-called “patchy reioniza-
tion” terms Pvv Pxx and Pvv Pδx [501,?,?]. Physically these are sourced by HII
regions subtending only part of a large-scale velocity fluctuation: the non-
uniform ionized fraction prevents the usual linear-order cancellation. The scale
dependence of the patchy signal will therefore depend on the bubble size dis-
tribution, and its amplitude on the duration over which patchiness persists.
The resulting signals have been calculated analytically [501,?,?,?,?,?] and via
simulations [502,?,?,?] for a number of different reionization scenarios. Fig-
ure 44 shows some illustrative examples for a range of reionization histories.


                                          181
                                                  1

                                                 0.9

                                                 0.8




l ( l + 1) C / 2 π
                                                 0.7
            l
                      −12                        0.6
                     10
                                             Q
                                                 0.5

                                                 0.4

                                                 0.3

                                                 0.2

                                                 0.1
                      −13
                     10                           0
                            3        4             8   10   12   14   16   18   20   22   24
                          10        10
                                l                                      z

  Fig. 44. Kinetic Sunyaev-Zeldovich anisotropies (left panel) from several different
  reionization histories (right panel; here Q is the mean ionized fraction). In the left
  panel, the lower set of curves shows the “patchy reionization” component while the
  upper set includes the patchy, OV, and primary CMB anisotropies. We also show
  the anticipated 1σ error bars for the Atacama Cosmology Telescope [505], assuming
  perfect foreground removal. From [356].

  We plot the patchy reionization component (the lower set of curves) along
  with the “total” signals (including the patchy, OV, and primary anisotropies,
  but neglecting the thermal Sunyaev-Zeldovich component). This calculation
  is based on the bubble model presented in §8.2 (see also [341]); the peak at
  l ∼ 3000 corresponds to the characteristic bubble size at x̄i ∼ 0.5 in these
  models. Comparison with the x̄i (z) curves in the right panel clearly shows
  that the overall amplitude depends strongly on the duration of reionization,
  because persistent patchiness helps to build up the signal. Simulations yield
  similar amplitudes [364,?].

  Small-scale CMB temperature anisotropies therefore provide an integrated
  measurement of the duration of reionization as well as some limited informa-
  tion on the bubble size distribution. (Note as well that patchy reionization
  will bias cosmological measurements that use the tail of the primary CMB
  anisotropies [368,?].) The expected amplitudes are well within reach of the
  next generation of ground-based CMB experiments (see the sample error bars
  in Fig. 44). The main difficulty, as usual, is foreground contamination. At
  most frequencies, the thermal Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect dominates by a large
  factor; fortunately, it has a null at ν = 218 MHz and can be cleaned efficiently
  through multifrequency measurements. More worrying is point source contam-
  ination, which could present a substantial problem [506]. Finally, Figure 44
  also shows that the patchy contribution will be smaller than the OV effect from
  low redshifts, which must be modeled properly to isolate the contribution from
  reionization.

  Intuitively, one would expect these patchy anisotropies to be anti-correlated
  with 21 cm fluctuations, because both are produced by ionized bubbles during


                                          182
reionization. However, there has been some controversy over this naive expec-
tation. The cross-correlation has terms proportional to Pvδ Pxx and Pvx Pδx . In
analytic models, there is a scale mismatch between the arcminute 21 cm fluc-
tuations and the velocity fluctuations that source the CMB anisotropies [283].
The CMB signal must be integrated along the line of sight, and the highly
oscillatory mode-coupling integral cancels out most of the signal. One can
avoid the cancellation by constructing a bispectrum (the Fourier-space equiv-
alent of the three-point function) between the 21 cm signal, the small-scale
kSZ anisotropy, and the large-scale Doppler anisotropy, because the last of
these directly samples the velocity field [283]. Unfortunately, even with ideal
experiments extracting the signal will be a challenge.

However, direct calculations with numerical simulations show that the cross-
correlation between 21 cm fluctuations and small-scale CMB anisotropies does
not vanish [504]; instead they are anti-correlated on scales smaller than the
characteristic bubble size at the appropriate redshift. The evolution of the
zero point therefore constrains the growth of HII regions during reionization
and can help extract information from the 21 cm signal. The reasons for the
discrepancy with the analytic predictions is not clear, but it most likely lies
in the assumption Pxx ∝ Pδδ made in the analytic model. As we have seen
(§8.2), the bubble power spectrum actually has features on much larger scales
than the density field and is imperfectly correlated on smaller scales. Thus the
apparent cancellation may be a result of the simplified analytic model used
by [283].

Another CMB signature of early structure formation could take the form of
the thermal rather than the kinetic SZ effect: energy from high-redshift super-
novae must have been deposited in the CMB via Compton cooling, and the
strong clustering bias of high-redshift halos means that strong anisotropies
can develop without violating constraints on the Compton y-distortion pa-
rameter [507]. While uncertainties are large, a thermal SZ contribution from
high-redshift supernovae could in principle explain the excess anisotropy at
arcminute scales seen in the CBI [508], BIMA [509,510], and ACBAR [511]
experiments. If they are due to thermal SZ from galaxy clusters, the observed
anisotropies require σ8 ∼ 1 [512]; since the cluster SZ signal is cl ∝ σ87 [513],
the tension increases still further given the lower value σ8 = 0.74+0.05
                                                                     −0.06 found
in the three-year WMAP data. Because star-forming halos source HII regions
an anti-correlation between the small-scale SZ and 21 cm signals may be de-
tectable [514]. The true source of this small-scale CMB anisotropy will become
clearer with more sensitive experiments such as the Atacama Cosmology Tele-
scope, which will be able to resolve out the cluster contribution (but not the
high-redshift contribution).

Finally, inhomogeneous scattering during reionization also produces small-
scale anisotropies in the CMB polarization [498]. These are, unfortunately,


                                      183
much smaller than the primary polarization anisotropies at the relevant scales,
so isolating them requires a tracer field such as the 21 cm signal [284]. The
simple cross-correlation vanishes because the polarization depends on the
background CMB quadrupole (which is uncorrelated with the 21 cm fluc-
tuations), so the signal can only be extracted through the bispectrum of the
large-scale CMB temperature anisotropies, the small-scale CMB polarization
anisotropies, and the 21 cm (or some other tracer) field [284]. It may be de-
tectable with the combination of high signal-to-noise CMB polarization maps
and SKA-class 21 cm telescopes.



12   Concluding Remarks


We hope to have convinced the reader of the unparalleled promise of 21 cm
observations for unlocking the mysteries of the high-redshift Universe – as
well as the pitfalls that lie ahead before observations can be successful. These
challenges – including (but most likely not limited to) terrestrial interference,
ionospheric distortions, foreground contamination (especially by the polarized
component), and beam-shape control – are formidable indeed and should not
be underestimated. But, already in the past three years, enormous strides
have been made both on the instrumental and data analysis sides, and we
have every hope that each of these difficulties can be overcome. In many
ways, the 21 cm community today is analogous to the CMB community in
the 1980s: a clear observational goal exists, but experiments are just starting
to explore the landscape. We do not know, of course, how the potholes along
this road compare to those along the path toward the CMB, but the scientific
return is clearly large enough that sustained exploration is worthwhile. On the
other hand, the final destination (∼ 20 mK fluctuations from HII regions and
∼ 3 mK fluctuations from the underlying density field) is better known (or so
we hope), because CMB and other observations have lifted the fog concealing
the basic cosmological and structure formation parameters.

The richness of the physics available through the 21 cm line clearly makes
even a long journey down this road worthwhile. Because it is (by definition)
the last epoch to produce a strong signal, and because the observational chal-
lenges are smallest at high frequencies, the era most amenable to observations
is reionization itself – which is, fortunately, also the most interesting epoch
from an astrophysical perspective. What sources are responsible for it? How
does feedback affect them? How do these galaxies interact with the IGM? In
conjunction with the other methods described in §11, the first generation of 21
cm experiments promises to open reionization for detailed study. But the 21
cm transition is unique in that only it can directly probe the three-dimensional
morphology and evolution of HII regions. Our most nagging concern about the
potential for these experiments to study reionization – that it may have oc-


                                      184
curred at such high redshifts that it will lie beyond their reach – seems less
pressing with the latest WMAP data [45,?].

Although foregrounds make higher redshifts more difficult to observe, those
epochs also contain fascinating information – the 21 cm line could allow us
to probe structure formation from its earliest, linear phases (z & 50) through
the formation of the cosmic web and the first luminous sources. At the highest
redshifts, the 21 cm line provides a rich testbed for cosmology, probing much
smaller scales than the CMB and making three-dimensional measurements
over a wide redshift range. Once the first stars and galaxies form, the 21 cm
line becomes a sensitive measure of their influence on the IGM – providing
perhaps our first view into the secrets of these objects (albeit an indirect one).

The first generation of 21 cm experiments, which are now under construction,
will make the first strides down this road, and the next several years promise
to be a truly exciting time in cosmology.

We are grateful to our editor and referee, Marc Kamionkowski, for his patience,
careful reading of the manuscript, and incisive criticism. We also thank C.
Carilli, M. Morales, J. Pritchard, and O. Zahn for their helpful comments
on earlier versions. SRF thanks the Tapir group at the California Institute
of Technology for hospitality while most of this work was completed. We are
grateful to all of our collaborators on the many projects described here for
sharing their insights and hard work. We also thank M. McQuinn and K.
Sigurdson for helpful discussions about various aspects of this review. We are
grateful to R. Barkana, R. Beresford, J. Bowman, C. Carilli, A. Chippendale,
W. Cotton, X. Fan, G. Holder, M. Kuhlen, G. Mellema, K. Sigurdson, and
R. White for permission to use their figures and/or data. Finally, we thank J.
Pritchard and M. McQuinn for assistance in generating some of the figures.



References


[1]   W. W. Sargent, The Origin and Evolution of Large-Scale Structure in the
      Universe, in: The Lesson of Quantum Theory (Symposium to celebrate the
      100th Anniversary of Niels Bohr), eds. J. de Boer, E. Dal & O. Ulfbeck (North
      Holland: Amsterdam), 1986, pp. 263–283.

[2]   A. Loeb, M. Zaldarriaga, Physical Review Letters 92 (21) (2004) 211301.

[3]   X. Fan, C. L. Carilli, B. Keating, Ann. Rev Astron. Astrophys. 44 (2006)
      415–462.

[4]   X. Fan, et al., Astron. J. 122 (2001) 2833–2849.

[5]   X. Fan, et al., Astron. J. 125 (2003) 1649–1659.


                                       185
[6]   X. Fan, et al., Astron. J. 128 (2004) 515–522.

[7]   X. Fan, et al., Astron. J. 132 (2006) 117–136.

[8]   A. Songaila, L. L. Cowie, Astron. J. 123 (2002) 2183–2196.

[9]   S. P. Oh, S. R. Furlanetto, Astrophys. J. 620 (2005) L9–L12.

[10] J. Miralda-Escudé, M. Haehnelt, M. J. Rees, Astrophys. J. 530 (2000) 1–16.

[11] X. Fan, et al., Astron. J. 123 (2002) 1247–1257.

[12] G. D. Becker, M. Rauch, W. L. W. Sargent, submitted to Astrophys. J. .

[13] A. Songaila, Astron. J. 127 (2004) 2598–2603.

[14] A. Mesinger, Z. Haiman, Astrophys. J. 611 (2004) L69–L72.

[15] J. S. B. Wyithe, A. Loeb, C. Carilli, Astrophys. J. 628 (2005) 575–582.

[16] S. Malhotra, J. E. Rhoads, Astrophys. J. 617 (2004) L5–L8.

[17] S. R. Furlanetto, M. Zaldarriaga, L. Hernquist, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 365
     (2006) 1012–1020.

[18] S. Malhotra, J. E. Rhoads, Astrophys. J. 647 (2006) L95–L98.

[19] T. Totani, N. Kawai, G. Kosugi, K. Aoki, T. Yamada, M. Iye, K. Ohta,
     T. Hattori, Proc. Astron. Soc. Japan 58 (2006) 485–498.

[20] D. N. Spergel, et al., submitted to Astrophys. J. (astro-ph/0603449).

[21] Q. Yu, Y. Lu, Astrophys. J. 620 (2005) 31–43.

[22] S. R. Furlanetto, S. P. Oh, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 363 (2005) 1031–1048.

[23] J. S. B. Wyithe, A. Loeb, Nature 427 (2004) 815–817.

[24] J. Miralda-Escudé, Astrophys. J. 501 (1998) 15.

[25] T. Piran, Reviews of Modern Physics 76 (2005) 1143–1210.

[26] R. Barkana, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 601 (2004) 64–77.

[27] V. Bromm, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 575 (2002) 111–116.

[28] B. Ciardi, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 540 (2000) 687–696.

[29] D. Q. Lamb, D. E. Reichart, Astrophys. J. 536 (2000) 1–18.

[30] N. Kawai, et al., Nature 440 (2006) 184–186.

[31] P. M. Vreeswijk, et al., Astron. Astrophys. 419 (2004) 927–940.

[32] H.-W. Chen, J. X. Prochaska, J. S. Bloom, I. B. Thompson, Astrophys. J. 634
     (2005) L25–L28.

[33] R. H. Becker, et al., Astron. J. 122 (2001) 2850–2857.


                                       186
[34] J. S. B. Wyithe, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 646 (2006) 696–702.

[35] A. Lidz, S. P. Oh, S. R. Furlanetto, Astrophys. J. 639 (2006) L47–L50.

[36] J. Liu, H. Bi, L.-L. Feng, L.-Z. Fang, Astrophys. J. 645 (2006) L1–L4.

[37] J. Miralda-Escudé, M. J. Rees, Astrophys. J. 497 (1998) 21.

[38] P. Madau, M. J. Rees, Astrophys. J. 542 (2000) L69–L73.

[39] Z. Haiman, Astrophys. J. 576 (2002) L1–L4.

[40] M. R. Santos, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 349 (2004) 1137–1152.

[41] Z. Haiman, R. Cen, Astrophys. J. 623 (2005) 627–631.

[42] N. Sugiyama, J. Silk, N. Vittorio, Astrophys. J. 419 (1993) L1.

[43] A. Kogut, et al., Astrophys. J. Supp. 148 (2003) 161–173.

[44] D. N. Spergel, et al., Astrophys. J. Supp. 148 (2003) 175–194.

[45] L. Page, et al., submitted to Astrophys. J. (astro-ph/0603450).

[46] R. Barkana, A. Loeb, Phys. Rep. 349 (2001) 125–238.

[47] Z. Haiman, The First Nonlinear Structures and the Reionization History of
     the Universe, in: Coevolution of Black Holes and Galaxies, 2004, p. 67.

[48] B. Ciardi, A. Ferrara, Space Science Reviews 116 (2005) 625–705.

[49] A. Loeb, astro-ph/0603360.

[50] G. B. Field, Astrophys. J. 129 (1959) 525.

[51] R. A. Sunyaev, Y. B. Zeldovich, Astron. Astrophys. 20 (1972) 189.

[52] C. J. Hogan, M. J. Rees, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 188 (1979) 791–798.

[53] H. C. van de Hulst, Ned. Tijdschr. v. Natuurkunde 11 (1945) 201.

[54] H. C. van de Hulst, ARAA 36 (1998) 1–16.

[55] H. I. Ewen, E. M. Purcell, Nature 168 (1951) 356.

[56] C. A. Muller, J. H. Oort, Nature 168 (1951) 357–358.

[57] J. I. Pawsey, Nature 168 (1951) 358.

[58] H. C. van de Hulst, C. A. Muller, J. H. Oort, B.A.N. 12 (1954) 117–149.

[59] H. C. van de Hulst, E. Raimond, H. van Woerden, B.A.N. 14 (1957) 1.

[60] J. P. Wild, Astrophys. J. 115 (1952) 206.

[61] S. J. Goldstein, Astrophys. J. 138 (1963) 978.

[62] A. A. Penzias, E. H. Scott, Astrophys. J. 153 (1968) L7.


                                      187
[63] A. A. Penzias, R. W. Wilson, Astrophys. J. 156 (1969) 799.

[64] R. J. Allen, Astron. Astrophys. 3 (1969) 382.

[65] K. R. Lang, Astrophys. J. 206 (1976) L91–L93.

[66] S. A. Wouthuysen, Astron. J. 57 (1952) 31.

[67] G. B. Field, Proc. I.R.E. 46 (1958) 240.

[68] G. B. Field, Astrophys. J. 129 (1959) 536.

[69] G. B. Field, Ann. Rev Astron. Astrophys. 10 (1972) 227.

[70] Y. B. Zel’Dovich, Astron. Astrophys. 5 (1970) 84–89.

[71] R. A. Sunyaev, I. B. Zeldovich, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 171 (1975) 375–379.

[72] J. H. Oort, Astron. Astrophys. 139 (1984) 211–214.

[73] J. M. Uson, D. S. Bagri, T. J. Cornwell, Physical Review Letters 67 (1991)
     3328–3331.

[74] K. Subramanian, G. Swarup, Nature 359 (1992) 512–514.

[75] D. Scott, Astrophys. J. 401 (1992) L53–L56.

[76] A. M. Wolfe, D. A. Turnshek, H. E. Smith, R. D. Cohen, Astrophys. J. Supp.
     61 (1986) 249–304.

[77] A. M. Wolfe, E. Gawiser, J. X. Prochaska, ARAA 43 (2005) 861–918.

[78] M. A. Zwaan, J. M. van der Hulst, F. H. Briggs, M. A. W. Verheijen, E. V.
     Ryan-Weber, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 364 (2005) 1467–1487.

[79] D. H. O. Bebbington, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 218 (1986) 577–585.

[80] I. M. Avruch, B. F. Burke, M. M. Davis, P. Horowitz, D. Leigh, J. Weintroub,
     Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society 27 (1995) 1363.

[81] R. D. Davies, A. Pedlar, I. F. Mirabel, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 182 (1978)
     727–733.

[82] A. Taramopoulos, F. H. Briggs, D. A. Turnshek, Astron. J. 107 (1994) 1937–
     1941.

[83] F. H. Briggs, E. Brinks, A. M. Wolfe, Astron. J. 113 (1997) 467–473.

[84] N. Kanekar, J. N. Chengalur, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 292 (1997) 831.

[85] J. M. Uson, D. S. Bagri, T. J. Cornwell, Astrophys. J. 377 (1991) L65–L68.

[86] F. H. Briggs, E. Sorar, A. Taramopoulos, Astrophys. J. 415 (1993) L99.

[87] A. G. de Bruyn, H I at High Redshift, in: ASSL Vol. 206: Cold Gas at High
     Redshift, 1996, p. 171.


                                       188
[88] P. Chandra, G. Swarup, V. K. Kulkarni, N. G. Kantharia, Journal of
     Astrophysics and Astronomy 25 (2004) 57.

[89] M. H. Wieringa, A. G. de Bruyn, P. Katgert, Astron. Astrophys. 256 (1992)
     331–342.

[90] R. Subrahmanyan, G. Swarup, Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy 11
     (1990) 237–253.

[91] L. Noreau, E. Hardy, Astron. J. 96 (1988) 1845–1849.

[92] R. Subrahmanyan, K. R. Anantharamaiah, Journal of Astrophysics and
     Astronomy 11 (1990) 221–235.

[93] A. Taramopoulos, R. Garwood, F. H. Briggs, A. M. Wolfe, Astron. J. 109
     (1995) 480–485.

[94] D. Scott, M. J. Rees, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 247 (1990) 510.

[95] K. Subramanian, T. Padmanabhan, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 265 (1993)
     101.

[96] A. Kumar, T. Padmanabhan, K. Subramanian, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 272
     (1995) 544–550.

[97] J. S. Bagla, B. Nath, T. Padmanabhan, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 289 (1997)
     671–680.

[98] P. Madau, A. Meiksin, M. J. Rees, Astrophys. J. 475 (1997) 429.

[99] M. Viel, M. G. Haehnelt, A. Lewis, submitted to Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.
     (astro-ph/0604310).

[100] U. Seljak, A. Slosar, P. McDonald, submitted to Phys. Rev. D (astro-
      ph/0604335).

[101] W. H. Press, P. Schechter, Astrophys. J. 187 (1974) 425–438.

[102] A. Cooray, R. Sheth, Phys. Rep. 372 (2002) 1–129.

[103] D. J. Eisenstein, W. Hu, Astrophys. J. 496 (1998) 605.

[104] R. K. Sheth, G. Tormen, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 308 (1999) 119–126.

[105] A. Jenkins, C. S. Frenk, S. D. M. White, J. M. Colberg, S. Cole, A. E. Evrard,
      H. M. P. Couchman, N. Yoshida, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 321 (2001) 372–
      384.

[106] H. Jang-Condell, L. Hernquist, Astrophys. J. 548 (2001) 68–78.

[107] D. Reed, J. Gardner, T. Quinn, J. Stadel, M. Fardal, G. Lake, F. Governato,
      Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 346 (2003) 565–572.

[108] I. T. Iliev, G. Mellema, U.-L. Pen, H. Merz, P. R. Shapiro, M. A. Alvarez,
      Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 369 (2006) 1625–1638.


                                       189
[109] O. Zahn, A. Lidz, M. McQuinn, S. Dutta, L. Hernquist, M. Zaldarriaga, S. R.
      Furlanetto, submitted to Astrophys. J. (astro-ph/0604177).

[110] G. B. Rybicki, A. P. Lightman, Radiative Processes in Astrophysics, New York:
      Wiley, 1979.

[111] C. M. Hirata, K. Sigurdson, submitted to Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. (astro-
      ph/0605071).

[112] E. M. Purcell, G. B. Field, Astrophys. J. 124 (1956) 542.

[113] A. Dalgarno, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 262 (1961) 132–135.

[114] F. J. Smith, Plan. Space Sci. 11 (1963) 1126–1128.

[115] A. Dalgarno, R. J. W. Henry, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 286 (1964) 519.

[116] F. J. Smith, Plan. Space Sci. 14 (1966) 929–936.

[117] A. C. Allison, A. Dalgarno, Astrophys. J. 158 (1969) 423.

[118] B. Zygelman, Astrophys. J. 622 (2005) 1356–1362.

[119] N. F. Mott, H. S. W. Massey, The Theory of Atomic collisions, Clarendon
      Press: Oxford, U.K., 1965.

[120] K. Sigurdson, S. R. Furlanetto, Physical Review Letters 97 (9) (2006) 091301–
      +.

[121] J. M. Kovac, E. M. Leitch, C. Pryke, J. E. Carlstrom, N. W. Halverson, W. L.
      Holzapfel, Nature 420 (2002) 772–787.

[122] A. C. S. Readhead, et al., Science 306 (2004) 836–844.

[123] H. S. W. Massey, B. L. Moiseiwitch, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 205 (1951) 483–496.

[124] C. Schwartz, Physical Review 124 (1961) 1468–1471.

[125] H. Liszt, Astron. Astrophys. 371 (2001) 698–707.

[126] S. R. Furlanetto, M. R. Furlanetto, submitted to Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.
      (astro-ph/0608067).

[127] X. Chen, J. Miralda-Escude, submitted to Astrophys. J. (astro-ph/0605439).

[128] L. Chuzhoy, M. A. Alvarez, P. R. Shapiro, Astrophys. J. 648 (2006) L1–L4.

[129] J. R. Pritchard, S. R. Furlanetto, submitted to Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.
      (astro-ph/0607234).

[130] J. R. Pritchard, S. R. Furlanetto, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 367 (2006) 1057–
      1066.

[131] A. Meiksin, Detecting the Epoch of First Light in 21-CM Radiation, in:
      Perspectives on Radio Astronomy: Science with Large Antenna Arrays,e. M.
      P. van Haarlem, 2000, p. 37.


                                       190
[132] H. A. Bethe, E. E. Salpeter, Quantum Mechanics of One- and Two-Electron
      Atoms, (New York: Academic Press), 1957.

[133] C. M. Hirata, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 367 (2006) 259–274.

[134] G. B. Rybicki, submitted to Astrophys. J. (astro-ph/0603047).

[135] X. Chen, J. Miralda-Escudé, Astrophys. J. 602 (2004) 1–11.

[136] A. Meiksin, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 370 (2006) 2025–2037.

[137] J. E. Gunn, B. A. Peterson, Astrophys. J. 142 (1965) 1633–1636.

[138] G. B. Field, Astrophys. J. 129 (1959) 551.

[139] L. Chuzhoy, P. R. Shapiro, submitted to Astrophys. J. (astro-ph/0512206).

[140] S. Furlanetto, J. R. Pritchard, in press at Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. (astro-
      ph/0605680).

[141] G. B. Rybicki, I. P. dell’Antonio, Astrophys. J. 427 (1994) 603–617.

[142] D. G. Hummer, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 125 (1962) 21–37.

[143] M. M. Basko, Astrophysics 17 (1981) 69.

[144] S. Deguchi, W. D. Watson, Astrophys. J. 290 (1985) 578–586.

[145] L. G. Henyey, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 26 (1941) 50.

[146] D. G. Hummer, G. B. Rybicki, Astrophys. J. 387 (1992) 248–257.

[147] S. I. Grachev, Astrofizika 30 (1989) 347.

[148] D. Babich, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 635 (2005) 1–10.

[149] J. E. Nafe, E. B. Nelson, Physical Review 73 (1948) 718–728.

[150] J. G. Bolton, J. P. Wild, Astrophys. J. 125 (1957) 296.

[151] C. Heiles, Astrophys. & Space Sci. 292 (2004) 77–88.

[152] B. M. Gaensler, R. Beck, L. Feretti, New Astronomy Review 48 (2004) 1003–
      1012.

[153] A. Cooray, S. R. Furlanetto, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 359 (2005) L47–L52.

[154] A. E. E. Rogers, K. A. Dudevoir, J. C. Carter, B. J. Fanous, E. Kratzenberg,
      T. M. Bania, Astrophys. J. 630 (2005) L41–L44.

[155] J. P. Kneller, G. Steigman, New Journal of Physics 6 (2004) 117.

[156] R. V. Wagoner, W. A. Fowler, F. Hoyle, Astrophys. J. 148 (1967) 3.

[157] S. R. Heap, G. M. Williger, A. Smette, I. Hubeny, M. S. Sahu, E. B. Jenkins,
      T. M. Tripp, J. N. Winkler, Astrophys. J. 534 (2000) 69–89.


                                        191
[158] M. Zaldarriaga, S. R. Furlanetto, L. Hernquist, Astrophys. J. 608 (2004) 622–
      635.

[159] P. J. E. Peebles, Principles of Physical Cosmology, Princeton: Princeton
      University Press, 1993.

[160] S. Seager, D. D. Sasselov, D. Scott, Astrophys. J. 523 (1999) L1–L5.

[161] S. Seager, D. D. Sasselov, D. Scott, Astrophys. J. Supp. 128 (2000) 407–430.

[162] S. Furlanetto, S. P. Oh, E. Pierpaoli, submitted to Phys. Rev. D       (astro-
      ph/0608385).

[163] S. P. Oh, Astrophys. J. 553 (2001) 499–512.

[164] H.-J. Grimm, M. Gilfanov, R. Sunyaev, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 339 (2003)
      793–809.

[165] P. Ranalli, A. Comastri, G. Setti, Astron. Astrophys. 399 (2003) 39–50.

[166] M. Gilfanov, H.-J. Grimm, R. Sunyaev, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 347 (2004)
      L57–L60.

[167] S. C. O. Glover, P. W. J. L. Brand, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 340 (2003)
      210–226.

[168] S. K. Sethi, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 363 (2005) 818–830.

[169] K. Koyama, R. Petre, E. V. Gotthelf, U. Hwang, M. Matsuura, M. Ozaki, S. S.
      Holt, Nature 378 (1995) 255.

[170] J. M. Shull, M. E. van Steenberg, Astrophys. J. 298 (1985) 268–274.

[171] X. Chen, M. Kamionkowski, Phys. Rev. D 70 (4) (2004) 043502.

[172] A. Venkatesan, M. L. Giroux, J. M. Shull, Astrophys. J. 563 (2001) 1–8.

[173] P. Madau, M. J. Rees, M. Volonteri, F. Haardt, S. P. Oh, Astrophys. J. 604
      (2004) 484–494.

[174] M. Kuhlen, P. Madau, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 363 (2005) 1069–1082.

[175] J. Magorrian, et al., Astron. J. 115 (1998) 2285–2305.

[176] L. Ferrarese, D. Merritt, Astrophys. J. 539 (2000) L9–L12.

[177] K. Gebhardt, et al., Astrophys. J. 539 (2000) L13–L16.

[178] L. Chuzhoy, P. R. Shapiro, submitted to Astrophys. J. (astro-ph/0604483).

[179] F. Miniati, D. Ryu, H. Kang, T. W. Jones, R. Cen, J. P. Ostriker, Astrophys.
      J. 542 (2000) 608–621.

[180] H. Kang, D. Ryu, R. Cen, D. Song, Astrophys. J. 620 (2005) 21–30.

[181] R. Cen, J. P. Ostriker, Astrophys. J. 514 (1999) 1–6.


                                       192
[182] R. Davé, et al., Astrophys. J. 552 (2001) 473–483.

[183] S. R. Furlanetto, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 611 (2004) 642–654.

[184] N. Y. Gnedin, P. A. Shaver, Astrophys. J. 608 (2004) 611–621.

[185] P. R. Shapiro, K. Ahn, M. A. Alvarez, I. T. Iliev, H. Martel, D. Ryu, Astrophys.
      J. 646 (2006) 681–690.

[186] M. Kuhlen, P. Madau, R. Montgomery, Astrophys. J. 637 (2006) L1–L4.

[187] B. B. Nath, J. Silk, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 327 (2001) L5–L9.

[188] P. Valageas, R. Schaeffer, J. Silk, Astron. Astrophys. 388 (2002) 741–757.

[189] J. R. Bond, S. Cole, G. Efstathiou, N. Kaiser, Astrophys. J. 379 (1991) 440–
      460.

[190] C. Leitherer, et al., Astrophys. J. Supp. 123 (1999) 3–40.

[191] V. Bromm, R. P. Kudritzki, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 552 (2001) 464–472.

[192] R. Barkana, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 626 (2005) 1–11.

[193] J. S. B. Wyithe, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 586 (2003) 693–708.

[194] R. Cen, Astrophys. J. 591 (2003) 12–37.

[195] D. E. Osterbrock, Astrophysics of gaseous nebulae and active galactic nuclei,
      University Science Books, 1989.

[196] J. Miralda-Escudé, Astrophys. J. 597 (2003) 66–73.

[197] T. Abel, M. G. Haehnelt, Astrophys. J. 520 (1999) L13–L16.

[198] A. Sokasian, T. Abel, L. Hernquist, V. Springel, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.
      344 (2003) 607–624.

[199] B. Ciardi, E. Scannapieco, F. Stoehr, A. Ferrara, I. T. Iliev, P. R. Shapiro,
      Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 366 (2006) 689–696.

[200] K. Kohler, N. Y. Gnedin, A. J. S. Hamilton, submitted to Astrophys. J. (astro-
      ph/0511627).

[201] Z. Haiman, T. Abel, P. Madau, Astrophys. J. 551 (2001) 599–607.

[202] P. R. Shapiro, I. T. Iliev, A. C. Raga, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 348 (2004)
      753–782.

[203] I. T. Iliev, E. Scannapieco, P. R. Shapiro, Astrophys. J. 624 (2005) 491–504.

[204] N. Y. Gnedin, J. P. Ostriker, Astrophys. J. 486 (1997) 581.

[205] G. Mellema, I. T. Iliev, U.-L. Pen, P. R. Shapiro, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.
      (2006) 1014.

[206] Z. Haiman, M. J. Rees, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 467 (1996) 522.


                                        193
[207] M. Tegmark, J. Silk, M. J. Rees, A. Blanchard, T. Abel, F. Palla, Astrophys.
      J. 474 (1997) 1.

[208] M. Hurwitz, P. Jelinsky, W. V. D. Dixon, Astrophys. J. 481 (1997) L31.

[209] T. M. Heckman, K. R. Sembach, G. R. Meurer, C. Leitherer, D. Calzetti, C. L.
      Martin, Astrophys. J. 558 (2001) 56–62.

[210] J.-M. Deharveng, V. Buat, V. Le Brun, B. Milliard, D. Kunth, J. M. Shull,
      C. Gry, Astron. Astrophys. 375 (2001) 805–813.

[211] J. Bland-Hawthorn, P. R. Maloney, Astrophys. J. 510 (1999) L33–L36.

[212] J. Bland-Hawthorn, P. R. Maloney, Astrophys. J. 550 (2001) L231–L231.

[213] C. C. Steidel, M. Pettini, K. L. Adelberger, Astrophys. J. 546 (2001) 665–671.

[214] E. Giallongo, S. Cristiani, S. D’Odorico, A. Fontana, Astrophys. J. 568 (2002)
      L9–L12.

[215] M. Malkan, W. Webb, Q. Konopacky, Astrophys. J. 598 (2003) 878–885.

[216] A. Fernández-Soto, K. M. Lanzetta, H.-W. Chen, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.
      342 (2003) 1215–1221.

[217] A. K. Inoue, I. Iwata, J.-M. Deharveng, V. Buat, D. Burgarella, Astron.
      Astrophys. 435 (2005) 471–482.

[218] A. E. Shapley, C. C. Steidel, M. Pettini, K. L. Adelberger, D. K. Erb, in press
      at Astrophys. J. (astro-ph/0606635).

[219] J. B. Dove, J. M. Shull, A. Ferrara, Astrophys. J. 531 (2000) 846–860.

[220] B. Ciardi, S. Bianchi, A. Ferrara, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 331 (2002) 463–
      473.

[221] A. Fujita, C. L. Martin, M.-M. Mac Low, T. Abel, Astrophys. J. 599 (2003)
      50–69.

[222] K. Wood, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 545 (2000) 86–99.

[223] D. Whalen, T. Abel, M. L. Norman, Astrophys. J. 610 (2004) 14–22.

[224] M. Kamionkowski, D. N. Spergel, N. Sugiyama, Astrophys. J. 426 (1994) L57.

[225] J. Scalo, The IMF Revisited: A Case for Variations, in: ASP Conf. Ser. 142:
      The Stellar Initial Mass Function (38th Herstmonceux Conference), 1998, p.
      201.

[226] J. Tumlinson, J. M. Shull, A. Venkatesan, Astrophys. J. 584 (2003) 608–620.

[227] G. Bruzual, S. Charlot, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 344 (2003) 1000–1028.

[228] D. Schaerer, Astron. Astrophys. 382 (2002) 28–42.


                                        194
[229] T. M. Heckman, Galactic Superwinds Circa 2001, in: ASP Conf. Ser. 254:
      Extragalactic Gas at Low Redshift, 2002, p. 292.

[230] A. E. Shapley, C. C. Steidel, M. Pettini, K. L. Adelberger, Astrophys. J. 588
      (2003) 65–89.

[231] H. J. Mo, S. Mao, S. D. M. White, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 295 (1998)
      319–336.

[232] G. Kauffmann, et al., Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 341 (2003) 54–69.

[233] A. Dekel, J. Woo, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 344 (2003) 1131–1144.

[234] V. Bromm, A. Ferrara, P. S. Coppi, R. B. Larson, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.
      328 (2001) 969–976.

[235] V. Bromm, A. Loeb, Nature 425 (2003) 812–814.

[236] R. Schneider, A. Ferrara, R. Salvaterra, K. Omukai, V. Bromm, Nature 422
      (2003) 869–871.

[237] J. S. B. Wyithe, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 588 (2003) L69–L72.

[238] R. Cen, Astrophys. J. 591 (2003) L5–L8.

[239] S. Wyithe, R. Cen, submitted to Astrophys. J. (astro-ph0602503).

[240] Z. Haiman, G. P. Holder, Astrophys. J. 595 (2003) 1–12.

[241] S. R. Furlanetto, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 634 (2005) 1.

[242] A. Ferrara, M. Pettini, Y. Shchekinov, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 319 (2000)
      539–548.

[243] P. Madau, A. Ferrara, M. J. Rees, Astrophys. J. 555 (2001) 92–105.

[244] E. Scannapieco, A. Ferrara, P. Madau, Astrophys. J. 574 (2002) 590–598.

[245] M. Mori, A. Ferrara, P. Madau, Astrophys. J. 571 (2002) 40–55.

[246] S. R. Furlanetto, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 588 (2003) 18–34.

[247] E. Scannapieco, R. Schneider, A. Ferrara, Astrophys. J. 589 (2003) 35–52.

[248] M. J. Rees, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 222 (1986) 27–32.

[249] G. Efstathiou, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 256 (1992) 43–47.

[250] A. A. Thoul, D. H. Weinberg, Astrophys. J. 465 (1996) 608.

[251] T. Kitayama, S. Ikeuchi, Astrophys. J. 529 (2000) 615–634.

[252] M. Dijkstra, Z. Haiman, M. J. Rees, D. H. Weinberg, Astrophys. J. 601 (2004)
      666–675.

[253] Z. Haiman, M. J. Rees, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 476 (1997) 458.


                                       195
[254] Z. Haiman, M. J. Rees, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 484 (1997) 985.

[255] Z. Haiman, T. Abel, M. J. Rees, Astrophys. J. 534 (2000) 11–24.

[256] M. E. Machacek, G. L. Bryan, T. Abel, Astrophys. J. 548 (2001) 509–521.

[257] A. Mesinger, G. L. Bryan, Z. Haiman, Astrophys. J. 648 (2006) 835–851.

[258] M. Dijkstra, Z. Haiman, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 613 (2004) 646–654.

[259] R. Salvaterra, F. Haardt, A. Ferrara, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 362 (2005)
      L50–L54.

[260] S. H. Hansen, Z. Haiman, Astrophys. J. 600 (2004) 26–31.

[261] S. Kasuya, M. Kawasaki, Phys. Rev. D 70 (10) (2004) 103519.

[262] P. P. Avelino, D. Barbosa, Phys. Rev. D 70 (6) (2004) 067302.

[263] E. Pierpaoli, Physical Review Letters 92 (3) (2004) 031301.

[264] M. Mapelli, A. Ferrara, E. Pierpaoli, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 369 (2006)
      1719–1724.

[265] Y. A. Shchekinov, E. O. Vasiliev, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 368 (2006) 454–
      460.

[266] R. S. Somerville, M. Livio, Astrophys. J. 593 (2003) 611–615.

[267] M. Fukugita, M. Kawasaki, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 343 (2003) L25–L28.

[268] C. A. Onken, J. Miralda-Escudé, Astrophys. J. 610 (2004) 1–8.

[269] T. R. Choudhury, A. Ferrara, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 361 (2005) 577–594.

[270] S. R. Furlanetto, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 371 (2006) 867–878.

[271] B. Ciardi, P. Madau, Astrophys. J. 596 (2003) 1–8.

[272] P. A. Shaver, R. A. Windhorst, P. Madau, A. G. de Bruyn, Astron. Astrophys.
      345 (1999) 380–390.

[273] P. Tozzi, P. Madau, A. Meiksin, M. J. Rees, Astrophys. J. 528 (2000) 597–606.

[274] S. P. Oh, K. J. Mack, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 346 (2003) 871–877.

[275] J. C. Mather, D. J. Fixsen, R. A. Shafer, C. Mosier, D. T. Wilkinson,
      Astrophys. J. 512 (1999) 511–520.

[276] A. Cooray, Phys. Rev. D 73 (10) (2006) 103001.

[277] R. Barkana, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 624 (2005) L65–L68.

[278] M. McQuinn, O. Zahn, M. Zaldarriaga, L. Hernquist, S. R. Furlanetto,
      submitted to Astrophys. J. (astro-ph/0512263).

[279] M. Hansen, S. P. Oh, S. R. Furlanetto, in preparation.


                                       196
[280] S. Naoz, R. Barkana, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 362 (2005) 1047–1053.

[281] S. Bharadwaj, S. S. Ali, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 352 (2004) 142–146.

[282] A. Cooray, New Astronomy 9 (2004) 173–187.

[283] A. Cooray, Phys. Rev. D 70 (6) (2004) 063509.

[284] A. Cooray, Phys. Rev. D 70 (2) (2004) 023508.

[285] K. S. Mandel, M. Zaldarriaga, Astrophys. J. 647 (2006) 719–736.

[286] O. Zahn, M. Zaldarriaga, submitted to Astrophys. J. (astro-ph/0511547).

[287] M. A. Alvarez, E. Komatsu, O. Doré, P. R. Shapiro, Astrophys. J. 647 (2006)
      840–852.

[288] R. Barkana, A. Loeb, in press at Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.           (astro-
      ph/0512453).

[289] C. Alcock, B. Paczynski, Nature 281 (1979) 358.

[290] A. Nusser, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 364 (2005) 743–750.

[291] S. S. Ali, S. Bharadwaj, B. Pandey, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 363 (2005)
      251–258.

[292] R. Barkana, in press at Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. (astro-ph/0508341).

[293] N. Kaiser, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 227 (1987) 1–21.

[294] X. Wang, M. Tegmark, M. Santos, L. Knox, submitted to PRD (astro-
      ph/0501081).

[295] X. Wang, W. Hu, Astrophys. J. 643 (2006) 585–597.

[296] W. Hu, Z. Haiman, Phys. Rev. D 68 (6) (2003) 063004.

[297] T. Matsubara, A. S. Szalay, Astrophys. J. 574 (2002) 1–8.

[298] L. Hui, A. Stebbins, S. Burles, Astrophys. J. 511 (1999) L5–L8.

[299] K. A. Eriksen, A. R. Marble, C. D. Impey, L. Bai, C. E. Petry, The Alcock-
      Paczynski Test for the Lyα Forest: First Results from Magellan and the MMT,
      in: ASP Conf. Ser. 339: Observing Dark Energy, 2005, p. 172.

[300] G. Jungman, M. Kamionkowski, A. Kosowsky, D. N. Spergel, Phys. Rev. D
      54 (1996) 1332–1344.

[301] U.-L. Pen, New Astronomy 9 (2004) 417–424.

[302] K. Sigurdson, A. Cooray, Physical Review Letters 95 (21) (2005) 211303.

[303] U. Seljak, M. Zaldarriaga, Physical Review Letters 78 (1997) 2054–2057.

[304] M. Kamionkowski, A. Kosowsky, A. Stebbins, Physical Review Letters 78
      (1997) 2058–2061.


                                      197
[305] K. L. Ng, K.-W. Ng, Astrophys. J. 456 (1996) 413.

[306] M. Zaldarriaga, Phys. Rev. D 55 (1997) 1822–1829.

[307] R. A. Sunyaev, I. B. Zeldovich, Ann. Rev Astron. Astrophys. 18 (1980) 537–
      560.

[308] A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 555 (2001) L1–L5.

[309] M. Zaldarriaga, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 564 (2002) 52–59.

[310] E. R. Switzer, C. M. Hirata, Phys. Rev. D 72 (8) (2005) 083002.

[311] C.-P. Ma, E. Bertschinger, Astrophys. J. 455 (1995) 7.

[312] U. Seljak, M. Zaldarriaga, Astrophys. J. 469 (1996) 437.

[313] R. Barkana, A. Loeb, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 363 (2005) L36–L40.

[314] N. Y. Gnedin, L. Hui, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 296 (1998) 44–55.

[315] T. Abel, G. L. Bryan, M. L. Norman, Science 295 (2002) 93–98.

[316] V. Bromm, P. S. Coppi, R. B. Larson, Astrophys. J. 564 (2002) 23–51.

[317] V. Bromm, R. B. Larson, Ann. Rev Astron. Astrophys. 42 (2004) 79–118.

[318] I. T. Iliev, P. R. Shapiro, A. Ferrara, H. Martel, Astrophys. J. 572 (2002)
      L123–L126.

[319] I. T. Iliev, E. Scannapieco, H. Martel, P. R. Shapiro, Mon. Not. R. Astron.
      Soc. 341 (2003) 81–90.

[320] S. Furlanetto, S. P. Oh, in press at Astrophys. J. (astro-ph/0604080).

[321] S. P. Oh, Z. Haiman, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 346 (2003) 456–472.

[322] L. Zuo, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 258 (1992) 36–44.

[323] L. Zuo, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 258 (1992) 45–56.

[324] R. Cen, Astrophys. J. 648 (2006) 47–53.

[325] A. Nusser, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 359 (2005) 183–190.

[326] M. Ricotti, J. P. Ostriker, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 352 (2004) 547–562.

[327] M. Ricotti, J. P. Ostriker, N. Y. Gnedin, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 357 (2005)
      207–219.

[328] A. Moretti, S. Campana, D. Lazzati, G. Tagliaferri, Astrophys. J. 588 (2003)
      696–703.

[329] N. Y. Gnedin, Astrophys. J. 535 (2000) 530–554.

[330] A. O. Razoumov, M. L. Norman, T. Abel, D. Scott, Astrophys. J. 572 (2002)
      695–704.


                                       198
[331] B. Ciardi, F. Stoehr, S. D. M. White, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 343 (2003)
      1101–1109.

[332] B. Ciardi, A. Ferrara, S. D. M. White, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 344 (2003)
      L7–L11.

[333] A. Sokasian, N. Yoshida, T. Abel, L. Hernquist, V. Springel, Mon. Not. R.
      Astron. Soc. 350 (2004) 47–65.

[334] M. Schmidt, Astrophys. J. 129 (1959) 243.

[335] R. C. Kennicutt, Astrophys. J. 498 (1998) 541.

[336] M. Schmidt, Astrophys. J. 137 (1963) 758.

[337] V. Springel, L. Hernquist, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 339 (2003) 289–311.

[338] V. Springel, L. Hernquist, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 339 (2003) 312–334.

[339] K. Nagamine, R. Cen, L. Hernquist, J. P. Ostriker, V. Springel, Astrophys. J.
      610 (2004) 45–50.

[340] R. Davé, K. Finlator, B. D. Oppenheimer, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 370
      (2006) 273–288.

[341] S. R. Furlanetto, M. Zaldarriaga, L. Hernquist, Astrophys. J. 613 (2004) 1–15.

[342] S. R. Furlanetto, M. McQuinn, L. Hernquist, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 365
      (2006) 115–126.

[343] A. J. Benson, N. Sugiyama, A. Nusser, C. G. Lacey, Mon. Not. R. Astron.
      Soc. (2006) 567.

[344] N. Y. Gnedin, T. Abel, New Astronomy 6 (2001) 437–455.

[345] T. Abel, B. D. Wandelt, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 330 (2002) L53–L56.

[346] A. Maselli, A. Ferrara, B. Ciardi, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 345 (2003) 379–
      394.

[347] I. T. Iliev, et al., Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 371 (2006) 1057–1086.

[348] R. Barkana, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 609 (2004) 474–481.

[349] C. L. Carilli, N. Y. Gnedin, F. Owen, Astrophys. J. 577 (2002) 22–30.

[350] M. B. Isichenko, Reviews of Modern Physics 64 (1992) 961–1043.

[351] J. Arons, D. W. Wingert, Astrophys. J. 177 (1972) 1.

[352] P. R. Shapiro, M. L. Giroux, Astrophys. J. 321 (1987) L107–L112.

[353] C. Lacey, S. Cole, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 262 (1993) 627–649.

[354] J. Zhang, L. Hui, Astrophys. J. 641 (2006) 641–646.

[355] R. K. Sheth, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 300 (1998) 1057–1070.


                                       199
[356] M. McQuinn, S. R. Furlanetto, L. Hernquist, O. Zahn, M. Zaldarriaga,
      Astrophys. J. 630 (2005) 643–656.

[357] G. Efstathiou, C. S. Frenk, S. D. M. White, M. Davis, Mon. Not. R. Astron.
      Soc. 235 (1988) 715–748.

[358] S. Cole, N. Kaiser, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 237 (1989) 1127–1146.

[359] H. J. Mo, S. D. M. White, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 282 (1996) 347–361.

[360] J. D. Cohn, T.-C. Chang, submitted to Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.       (astro-
      ph/0603438).

[361] S. P. Oh, Astrophys. J. 527 (1999) 16–30.

[362] J. S. B. Wyithe, A. Loeb, Nature 432 (2004) 194–196.

[363] I. T. Iliev, P. R. Shapiro, A. C. Raga, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 361 (2005)
      405–414.

[364] O. Zahn, M. Zaldarriaga, L. Hernquist, M. McQuinn, Astrophys. J. 630 (2005)
      657–666.

[365] R. H. Kramer, Z. Haiman, S. P. Oh, in press at Astrophys. J.          (astro-
      ph/0604218).

[366] L. Knox, R. Scoccimarro, S. Dodelson, Physical Review Letters 81 (1998)
      2004–2007.

[367] A. Gruzinov, W. Hu, Astrophys. J. 508 (1998) 435–439.

[368] M. G. Santos, A. Cooray, Z. Haiman, L. Knox, C. Ma, Astrophys. J. 598
      (2003) 756–766.

[369] S. R. Furlanetto, A. Sokasian, L. Hernquist, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 347
      (2004) 187–195.

[370] S. R. Furlanetto, M. Zaldarriaga, L. Hernquist, Astrophys. J. 613 (2004) 16–
      22.

[371] A. Cooray, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 363 (2005) 1049–1056.

[372] L. Gleser, A. Nusser, B. Ciardi, V. Desjacques, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 370
      (2006) 1329–1338.

[373] J. S. B. Wyithe, A. Loeb, D. G. Barnes, Astrophys. J. 634 (2005) 715–727.

[374] K. Kohler, N. Y. Gnedin, J. Miralda-Escudé, P. A. Shaver, Astrophys. J. 633
      (2005) 552–559.

[375] J. S. B. Wyithe, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 610 (2004) 117–127.

[376] J. S. B. Wyithe, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 595 (2003) 614–623.

[377] S. Zaroubi, J. Silk, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 360 (2005) L64–L67.


                                       200
[378] U.-L. Pen, X.-P. Wu, J. Peterson, submitted to CJAA (astro-ph/0404083).

[379] J. D. Bowman, M. F. Morales, J. N. Hewitt, Astrophys. J. 638 (2006) 20–26.

[380] C. L. Carilli, S. Rawlings, New Astronomy Review 48 (2004) 979–984.

[381] A. R. Thompson, J. M. Moran, G. W. Swenson, Interferometry and Synthesis
      in Radio Astronomy, 2nd Edition, New York: Wiley, 2001.

[382] K. Rohlfs, T. L. Wilson, Tools of radio astronomy, Berlin: Springer, 2004.

[383] T. L. Landecker, R. Wielebinski, Proceedings of the Astronomical Society of
      Australia 1 (1969) 210.

[384] M. Valdés, B. Ciardi, A. Ferrara, M. Johnston-Hollitt, H. Röttgering, Mon.
      Not. R. Astron. Soc. 369 (2006) L66–L70.

[385] J. D. Bregman, Design Concepts for a Sky Noise Limited Low Frequency
      Array, in: Perspectives on Radio Astronomy - Technologies for Large Antenna
      Arrays, eds. A. B. Smolders and M. van Haarlem, 1999, pp. 23–32.

[386] J. P. Hamaker, J. D. Bregman, R. J. Sault, Astron. Astrophys. Supp. 117
      (1996) 137–147.

[387] R. J. Sault, J. P. Hamaker, J. D. Bregman, Astron. Astrophys. Supp. 117
      (1996) 149–159.

[388] J. P. Hamaker, Astron. Astrophys. Supp. 143 (2000) 515–534.

[389] R. Subrahmanyan, Cosmic Microwave Background at Low Frequencies, in:
      A. Pramesh Rao, G. Swarup, Gopal-Krishna (Eds.), IAU Symposium, 2002,
      p. 58.

[390] S. Bharadwaj, S. K. Pandey, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 358 (2005) 968–976.

[391] S. Saiyad Ali, S. Bharadwaj, S. K. Pandey, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 366
      (2006) 213–218.

[392] M. White, J. E. Carlstrom, M. Dragovan, W. L. Holzapfel, Astrophys. J. 514
      (1999) 12–24.

[393] S. Bharadwaj, S. K. Sethi, Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy 22 (2001)
      293–307.

[394] S. Bharadwaj, S. K. Pandey, Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy 24 (2003)
      23.

[395] S. Bharadwaj, P. S. Srikant, Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy 25 (2004)
      67.

[396] S. Bharadwaj, S. S. Ali, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 356 (2005) 1519–1528.

[397] M. F. Morales, J. Hewitt, Astrophys. J. 615 (2004) 7–18.

[398] M. F. Morales, Astrophys. J. 619 (2005) 678–683.


                                       201
[399] J. D. Bowman, M. F. Morales, J. N. Hewitt, submitted to Astrophys. J. (astro-
      ph/0512262).

[400] S. Dodelson, Modern Cosmology, Academic Press: Amsterdam, 2003.

[401] M. G. Santos, A. Cooray, submitted to Phys. Rev. D (astro-ph/0605677).

[402] G. Giardino, A. J. Banday, P. Fosalba, K. M. Górski, J. L. Jonas,
      W. O’Mullane, J. Tauber, Astron. Astrophys. 371 (2001) 708–717.

[403] G. Giardino, A. J. Banday, K. M. Górski, K. Bennett, J. L. Jonas, J. Tauber,
      Astron. Astrophys. 387 (2002) 82–97.

[404] T. Di Matteo, R. Perna, T. Abel, M. J. Rees, Astrophys. J. 564 (2002) 576–
      580.

[405] A. Cooray, S. R. Furlanetto, Astrophys. J. 606 (2004) L5–L8.

[406] T. Di Matteo, B. Ciardi, F. Miniati, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 355 (2004)
      1053–1065.

[407] M. G. Santos, A. Cooray, L. Knox, Astrophys. J. 625 (2005) 575–587.

[408] M. H. Wieringa, A. G. de Bruyn, D. Jansen, W. N. Brouw, P. Katgert, Astron.
      Astrophys. 268 (1993) 215–229.

[409] M. Haverkorn, P. Katgert, A. G. de Bruyn, Astron. Astrophys. 403 (2003)
      1045–1057.

[410] M. Haverkorn, P. Katgert, A. G. de Bruyn, Astron. Astrophys. 427 (2004)
      549–559.

[411] T.-C. Chang, S. P. Oh, in preparation.

[412] M. Tegmark, Astrophys. J. 502 (1998) 1.

[413] M. Tegmark, D. J. Eisenstein, W. Hu, A. de Oliveira-Costa, Astrophys. J. 530
      (2000) 133–165.

[414] A. S. Cohen, H. J. A. Röttgering, M. J. Jarvis, N. E. Kassim, T. J. W. Lazio,
      Astrophys. J. Supp. 150 (2004) 417–430.

[415] S. R. Furlanetto, F. H. Briggs, New Astronomy Review 48 (2004) 1039–1052.

[416] M. F. Morales, J. D. Bowman, J. N. Hewitt, Astrophys. J. 648 (2006) 767–773.

[417] G. B. Rybicki, W. H. Press, Astrophys. J. 398 (1992) 169–176.

[418] L. Hui, S. Burles, U. Seljak, R. E. Rutledge, E. Magnier, D. Tytler, Astrophys.
      J. 552 (2001) 15–35.

[419] M. A. Gordon, R. L. Sorochenko, Radio Recombination Lines. Their Physics
      and Astronomical Applications, Astrophysics and Space Science Library,
      Vol. 282. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 2002.

[420] S. P. Oh, S. R. Furlanetto, in preparation.


                                        202
[421] R. J. Reynolds, Faint optical line emission from the diffuse interstellar medium
      - Observations and implications, in: S. Bowyer, C. Leinert (Eds.), IAU Symp.
      139: The Galactic and Extragalactic Background Radiation, 1990, pp. 157–
      169.

[422] H. E. Payne, K. R. Anantharamaiah, W. C. Erickson, Astrophys. J. 341 (1989)
      890–900.

[423] D. A. Roshi, N. G. Kantharia, K. R. Anantharamaiah, Astron. Astrophys. 391
      (2002) 1097–1113.

[424] P. A. Shaver, Astron. Astrophys. 68 (1978) 97–105.

[425] K. R. Anantharamaiah, F. Viallefond, N. R. Mohan, W. M. Goss, J. H. Zhao,
      Astrophys. J. 537 (2000) 613–630.

[426] K. R. Anantharamaiah, J.-H. Zhao, W. M. Goss, F. Viallefond, Astrophys. J.
      419 (1993) 585.

[427] S. R. Furlanetto, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 579 (2002) 1–9.

[428] D. G. Barnes, et al., submitted to PASP.

[429] A. J. Boonstra, Ph.D. Thesis.

[430] S. W. Ellingson, Radio Science 40 (2005) 5.

[431] P. A. Fridman, W. A. Baan, Astron. Astrophys. 378 (2001) 327–344.

[432] W. D. Cotton, J. J. Condon, R. A. Perley, N. Kassim, J. Lazio, A. Cohen,
      W. Lane, W. C. Erickson, Beyond the isoplanatic patch in the VLA Low-
      frequency Sky Survey, in: J. M. Oschmann, Jr. (Ed.), Proceedings of the SPIE,
      Volume 5489, 2004, pp. 180–189.

[433] A. S. Cohen, W. M. Lane, N. E. Kassim, T. J. W. Lazio, W. D. Cotton, J. J.
      Condon, R. A. Perley, W. C. Erickson, The VLA Low Frequency Sky Survey,
      in: N. Kassim, M. Perez, W. Junor, P. Henning (Eds.), Astronomical Society
      of the Pacific Conference Series, 2006, p. 299.

[434] S. R. Furlanetto, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 370 (2006) 1867–1875.

[435] J. Schaye, Astrophys. J. 559 (2001) 507–515.

[436] G. L. Bryan, M. L. Norman, Astrophys. J. 495 (1998) 80.

[437] F. H. Briggs, 21 cm Absorption Lines at High Redshift from Intervening
      Galaxies, in: The Universe at Low Radio Frequencies, Proceedings of IAU
      Symposium 199, eds. A. Pramesh Rao, G. Swarup, and Gopal-Krishna, 2002,
      p. 83.

[438] R. H. Becker, R. L. White, D. J. Helfand, Astrophys. J. 450 (1995) 559.

[439] M. J. Jarvis, S. Rawlings, C. J. Willott, K. M. Blundell, S. Eales, M. Lacy,
      Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 327 (2001) 907–917.


                                        203
[440] Z. Haiman, E. Quataert, G. C. Bower, Astrophys. J. 612 (2004) 698–705.

[441] Ž. Ivezić, et al., Astron. J. 124 (2002) 2364–2400.

[442] A. O. Petric, C. L. Carilli, F. Bertoldi, X. Fan, P. Cox, M. A. Strauss,
      A. Omont, D. P. Schneider, Astron. J. 126 (2003) 15–23.

[443] K. Ioka, P. Mészáros, Astrophys. J. 619 (2005) 684–696.

[444] E. R. Stanway, A. J. Bunker, R. G. McMahon, R. S. Ellis, T. Treu, P. J.
      McCarthy, Astrophys. J. 607 (2004) 704–720.

[445] A. J. Bunker, E. R. Stanway, R. S. Ellis, R. G. McMahon, Mon. Not. R.
      Astron. Soc. 355 (2004) 374–384.

[446] R. J. Bouwens, G. D. Illingworth, J. P. Blakeslee, M. Franx, in press at
      Astrophys. J. (astro-ph/0509641).

[447] R. J. Bouwens, et al., Astrophys. J. 616 (2004) L79–L82.

[448] R. J. Bouwens, G. D. Illingworth, R. I. Thompson, M. Franx, Astrophys. J.
      624 (2005) L5–L8.

[449] B. Mobasher, et al., Astrophys. J. 635 (2005) 832–844.

[450] K. Shimasaku, M. Ouchi, H. Furusawa, M. Yoshida, N. Kashikawa,
      S. Okamura, Proc. Astron. Soc. Japan 57 (2005) 447–458.

[451] Y. Shioya, et al., Proc. Astron. Soc. Japan 57 (2005) 569–573.

[452] E. M. Hu, et al., Astrophys. J. 568 (2002) L75–L79.

[453] K. Kodaira, et al., Proc. Astron. Soc. Japan 55 (2003) L17–L21.

[454] J. E. Rhoads, et al., Astrophys. J. 611 (2004) 59–67.

[455] D. Stern, S. A. Yost, M. E. Eckart, F. A. Harrison, D. J. Helfand, S. G.
      Djorgovski, S. Malhotra, J. E. Rhoads, Astrophys. J. 619 (2005) 12–18.

[456] Y. Taniguchi, et al., Proc. Astron. Soc. Japan 57 (2005) 165–182.

[457] E. J. Barton, R. Davé, J.-D. T. Smith, C. Papovich, L. Hernquist, V. Springel,
      Astrophys. J. 604 (2004) L1–L4.

[458] J. P. Willis, F. Courbin, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 357 (2005) 1348–1356.

[459] A. Horton, I. Parry, J. Bland-Hawthorn, S. Cianci, D. King, R. McMahon,
      S. Medlen, DAzLE: the dark ages z (redshift) Lyman-α Explorer, in:
      Proceedings of the SPIE, vol. 5492, ed. A. F. M. Moorwood & I. Masanori,
      2004, pp. 1022–1032.

[460] D. P. Stark, R. S. Ellis, New Astronomy Review 50 (2006) 46–52.

[461] M. R. Santos, et al., Astrophys. J. 606 (2004) 683–701.


                                         204
[462] J.-P. Kneib, R. S. Ellis, M. R. Santos, J. Richard, Astrophys. J. 607 (2004)
      697–703.

[463] M. Stiavelli, S. M. Fall, N. Panagia, Astrophys. J. 600 (2004) 508–519.

[464] M. Stiavelli, S. M. Fall, N. Panagia, Astrophys. J. 610 (2004) L1–L4.

[465] N. Y. Gnedin, F. Prada, Astrophys. J. 608 (2004) L77–L80.

[466] S. R. Furlanetto, L. Hernquist, M. Zaldarriaga, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 354
      (2004) 695–707.

[467] J. S. B. Wyithe, A. Loeb, Astrophys. J. 625 (2005) 1–5.

[468] A. Kashlinsky, Phys. Rep. 409 (2005) 361–438.

[469] M. R. Santos, V. Bromm, M. Kamionkowski, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 336
      (2002) 1082–1092.

[470] R. Salvaterra, A. Ferrara, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 339 (2003) 973–982.

[471] M. Magliocchetti, R. Salvaterra, A. Ferrara, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 342
      (2003) L25–L29.

[472] A. Kashlinsky, R. Arendt, J. P. Gardner, J. C. Mather, S. H. Moseley,
      Astrophys. J. 608 (2004) 1–9.

[473] A. Cooray, J. J. Bock, B. Keating, A. E. Lange, T. Matsumoto, Astrophys. J.
      606 (2004) 611–624.

[474] A. Kashlinsky, R. G. Arendt, J. Mather, S. H. Moseley, Nature 438 (2005)
      45–50.

[475] J. M. Rozas, J. Miralda-Escude, E. Salvador-Sole, submitted to Astrophys. J.
      (astro-ph/0511489).

[476] R. Salvaterra, M. Magliocchetti, A. Ferrara, R. Schneider, Mon. Not. R.
      Astron. Soc. 368 (2006) L6–L9.

[477] R. Cen, P. McDonald, Astrophys. J. 570 (2002) 457–462.

[478] A. Lidz, L. Hui, M. Zaldarriaga, R. Scoccimarro, Astrophys. J. 579 (2002)
      491–499.

[479] G. D. Becker, W. L. W. Sargent, M. Rauch, R. A. Simcoe, Astrophys. J. 640
      (2006) 69–80.

[480] R. L. White, R. H. Becker, X. Fan, M. A. Strauss, Astron. J. 126 (2003) 1–14.

[481] R. L. White, R. H. Becker, X. Fan, M. A. Strauss, Astron. J. 129 (2005)
      2102–2107.

[482] R. A. C. Croft, Characterization of Lyman Alpha Spectra and Predictions
      of Structure Formation Models: A Flux Statistics Approach, in: Eighteenth
      Texas Symposium on Relativistic Astrophysics, 1998, p. 664.


                                       205
[483] R. Barkana, New Astronomy 7 (2002) 85–100.

[484] A. Nusser, A. J. Benson, N. Sugiyama, C. Lacey, Astrophys. J. 580 (2002)
      L93–L96.

[485] P. Paschos, M. L. Norman, Astrophys. J. 631 (2005) 59–84.

[486] S. Gallerani, T. R. Choudhury, A. Ferrara, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 370
      (2006) 1401–1421.

[487] S. P. Oh, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 336 (2002) 1021–1029.

[488] W. Hu, M. White, Astrophys. J. 479 (1997) 568.

[489] U. Seljak, Astrophys. J. 482 (1997) 6.

[490] M. Zaldarriaga, U. Seljak, Phys. Rev. D 55 (1997) 1830–1840.

[491] M. Kamionkowski, A. Kosowsky, A. Stebbins, Phys. Rev. D 55 (1997) 7368–
      7388.

[492] M. Kaplinghat, M. Chu, Z. Haiman, G. P. Holder, L. Knox, C. Skordis,
      Astrophys. J. 583 (2003) 24–32.

[493] G. P. Holder, Z. Haiman, M. Kaplinghat, L. Knox, Astrophys. J. 595 (2003)
      13–18.

[494] B. G. Keating, P. A. R. Ade, J. J. Bock, E. Hivon, W. L. Holzapfel, A. E. Lange,
      H. Nguyen, K. W. Yoon, BICEP: a large angular scale CMB polarimeter, in:
      Proceedings of the SPIE, vol. 4843, 2003, pp. 284–295.

[495] N. Kaiser, Astrophys. J. 282 (1984) 374–381.

[496] C.-P. Ma, J. N. Fry, Physical Review Letters 88 (21) (2002) 211301.

[497] J. P. Ostriker, E. T. Vishniac, Astrophys. J. 306 (1986) L51–L54.

[498] W. Hu, Astrophys. J. 529 (2000) 12–25.

[499] D. Baumann, A. Cooray, M. Kamionkowski, New Astronomy 8 (2003) 565–
      573.

[500] A. H. Jaffe, M. Kamionkowski, Phys. Rev. D 58 (4) (1998) 043001.

[501] N. Aghanim, F. X. Desert, J. L. Puget, R. Gispert, Astron. Astrophys. 311
      (1996) 1–11.

[502] M. Bruscoli, A. Ferrara, R. Fabbri, B. Ciardi, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 318
      (2000) 1068–1072.

[503] A. J. Benson, A. Nusser, N. Sugiyama, C. G. Lacey, Mon. Not. R. Astron.
      Soc. 320 (2001) 153–176.

[504] R. Salvaterra, B. Ciardi, A. Ferrara, C. Baccigalupi, Mon. Not. R. Astron.
      Soc. 360 (2005) 1063–1068.


                                        206
[505] A. Kosowsky, New Astronomy Review 47 (2003) 939–943.

[506] K. M. Huffenberger, U. Seljak, New Astronomy 10 (2005) 491–515.

[507] S. P. Oh, A. Cooray, M. Kamionkowski, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 342 (2003)
      L20–L24.

[508] B. S. Mason, et al., Astrophys. J. 591 (2003) 540–555.

[509] K. S. Dawson, W. L. Holzapfel, J. E. Carlstrom, M. Joy, S. J. LaRoque, A. D.
      Miller, D. Nagai, Astrophys. J. 581 (2002) 86–95.

[510] K. S. Dawson, W. L. Holzapfel, J. E. Carlstrom, M. Joy, S. J. LaRoque,
      Astrophys. J. 647 (2006) 13–24.

[511] C. L. Kuo, P. A. R. Ade, J. J. Bock, C. Cantalupo, M. D. Daub, J. Goldstein,
      W. L. Holzapfel, A. E. Lange, M. Lueker, M. Newcomb, J. B. Peterson, J. Ruhl,
      M. C. Runyan, E. Torbet, Astrophys. J. 600 (2004) 32–51.

[512] J. R. Bond, et al., Astrophys. J. 626 (2005) 12–30.

[513] E. Komatsu, U. Seljak, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 336 (2002) 1256–1270.

[514] A. Cooray, S. P. Oh, in preparation.




                                       207
