21-cm cosmology in the 21st Century

arXiv:1109.6012v2 [astro-ph.CO] 5 Jan 2012

Jonathan R. Pritchard and Abraham Loeb
Institute for Theory & Computation, Harvard University, 60 Garden St.,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
E-mail: jpritchard@cfa.harvard.edu; aloeb@cfa.harvard.edu
Abstract.
Imaging the Universe during the first hundreds of millions of years remains
one of the exciting challenges facing modern cosmology. Observations of the
redshifted 21 cm line of atomic hydrogen offer the potential of opening a new
window into this epoch. This will transform our understanding of the formation
of the first stars and galaxies and of the thermal history of the Universe. A new
generation of radio telescopes is being constructed for this purpose with the first
results starting to trickle in. In this review, we detail the physics that governs the
21 cm signal and describe what might be learnt from upcoming observations. We
also generalize our discussion to intensity mapping of other atomic and molecular
lines.

Contents
1 Introduction

3

2 Physics of the 21 cm line of atomic hydrogen
2.1 Basic 21 cm physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 Collisional coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Wouthuysen-Field effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6
6
8
9

3 Global 21 cm signature
3.1 Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Evolution of global signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Growth of HII regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 Heating and ionization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.5 Coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.6 Astrophysical sources and histories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.7 Exotic heating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.8 Detectability of the global signal with small numbers of dipoles . . . .

12
12
14
15
16
20
21
23
24

4 21 cm tomography
4.1 Redshift space distortions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 Ionization fluctuations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 Fluctuations in the coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4 Formalism for temperature and ionization fluctuations from X-rays . .
4.5 Evolution of the full power spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.6 Other sources of fluctuations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

27
28
29
30
31
35
36

CONTENTS

2

4.7 Simulation techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.8 Detectability of the 21 cm signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.9 Statistics beyond the power spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.10 Prospects for cosmology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

37
38
39
40

5 Intensity mapping in atomic and molecular lines
5.1 21 cm intensity mapping and dark energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Intensity mapping in other lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.3 Cross-correlation of molecular and 21 cm intensity maps . . . . . . . .

41
41
44
50

6 21 cm forest

52

7 Conclusions and outlook

55

CONTENTS

3

1. Introduction
Our understanding of cosmology has matured significantly over the last twenty years.
In that time, observations of the Universe from its infancy, 400,000 years after the
Big Bang, through to the present day, some 13.7 billion years later, have given us
a basic picture of how the Universe came to be the way it is today. Despite this
progress much of the first billion years of the Universe, a period when the first stars
and galaxies formed, is still an unobserved mystery.
Astronomers have an advantage over archaeologists in that the finite speed of
light gives them a way of looking into the past. The further away an object is located
the longer the light that it emits takes to reach an observer today. The image recorded
at a telescope is therefore a picture of the object long ago when the light was first
emitted. The construction of telescopes both on the Earth, such as Keck, Subaru and
VLT, and in space, such as the Hubble Space Telescope, has enabled astronomers to
directly observe galaxies out to distances corresponding to a time when the Universe
was a billion years old.
Added to this, observations at microwave frequencies reveal the cooling afterglow
of the big bang. This cosmic microwave background (CMB) decoupled from the cosmic
gas 400,000 years after the Big Bang when the Universe cooled sufficiently for protons
and electrons to combine to form neutral hydrogen. Radiation from this time is able
to reach us directly, providing a snapshot of the primordial Universe.
Despite current progress, connecting these two periods represents a considerable
challenge. Our understanding of structure is based upon the observation of small
perturbations in the temperature maps of the CMB. These indicate that the early
Universe was inhomogeneous at the level of 1 part in 100,000. Over time the action of
gravity causes the growth of these small perturbations into larger non-linear structures,
which collapse to form sheets, filaments, and halos. These non-linear structures
provide the framework within which galaxies form via the collapse and cooling of
gas until the density required for star formation is reached.
The theoretical picture is well established, but the middle phase is largely untested
by observations. To improve on this astronomers are pursuing two main avenues of
attack. The first is to extend existing techniques by building larger, more sensitive,
telescopes at a variety of wavelengths. On the ground, there are plans for optical
telescopes with an aperture diameter of 24–39 meters - the Giant Magellan Telescope
(GMT), the Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT), and the European Extremely Large
Telescope (E-ELT) - that would be able to detect an individual galaxy out to redshifts
z > 10. In space, the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) will operate at infrared
wavelengths and potentially image some of the first galaxies at z ∼ 10–15. Other
efforts involve the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA), which
will observe the molecular gas that fuels star formation in galaxies during reionization
(z = 8 − 10). These efforts target individual galaxies although the objects of interest
are far enough away that only the brightest sources may be seen.
This review focuses on an alternative approach based upon making observations
of the red-shifted 21 cm line of neutral hydrogen. This 21 cm line is produced by the
hyperfine splitting caused by the interaction between electron and proton magnetic
moments. Hydrogen is ubiquitous in the Universe, amounting to ∼75% of the gas
mass present in the intergalactic medium (IGM). As such, it provides a convenient
tracer of the properties of that gas and of major milestones in the first billion years
of the Universe’s history.

CONTENTS

4

The 21 cm line from gas during the first billion years after the Big Bang redshifts
to radio frequencies 30-200 MHz making it a prime target for a new generation of radio
interferometers currently being built. These instruments, such as Murchison Widefield
Array (MWA), the LOw Frequency ARray (LOFAR), the Precision Array to Probe the
Epoch of Reionization (PAPER), the 21 cm Array (21CMA), and the Giant Meterwave Radio Telescope (GMRT), seek to detect the radio fluctuations in the redshifted
21 cm background arising from variations in the amount of neutral hydrogen. Next
generation instruments (e.g. SKA) will be able to go further and might make detailed
maps of the ionized regions during reionization and measure properties of hydrogen
out to z = 30. These observations constrain the properties of the intergalactic medium
and by extension the cumulative impact of light from all galaxies, not just the brightest
ones. In combination with direct observations of the sources they provide a powerful
tool for learning about the first stars and galaxies. They will also provide information
about active galactic nuclei (AGN), such as quasars, by observing the ionized bubbles
surrounding individual AGN.
In addition to learning about galaxies and reionization, 21 cm observations have
the potential to inform us about fundamental physics too. Part of the signal traces the
density field giving information about neutrino masses and the initial conditions from
the early epoch of cosmic inflation in the form of the power spectrum. However spin
temperature fluctuations driven by astrophysics also contribute to the signal. Getting
at this cosmology is a challenge, since the astrophysical effects must be understood
before cosmology can be disentangled. One possibility is to exploit the effect of
redshift space distortions, which also produce 21 cm fluctuations but directly trace the
density field. In the long term, 21 cm cosmology may allow precision measurements of
cosmological parameters by opening up large volumes of the Universe to observation.
The goal of this review is to summarise the physics that determines the 21 cm
signal, along with a comprehensive overview of related astrophysics. Figure 1 provides
a summary of the 21 cm signal showing the key features of the signal with the relevant
cosmic time, frequency, and redshift scales indicated. The earliest period of the signal
arises in the period after thermal decoupling of the ordinary matter (baryons) from the
CMB, so that the gas is able to cool adiabatically with the expansion of the Universe.
In these cosmic “Dark Ages”, before the first stars have formed, the first structures
begin to grow from the seed inhomogeneties thought to be produced by quantum
fluctuations during inflation. The cold gas can be seen in a 21 cm absorption signal,
which has both a mean value (shown in the bottom panel) and fluctuations arising
from variation in density (shown in the top panel). Once the first stars and galaxies
form, their light radically alters the properties of the gas. Scattering of Lyα photons
leads to a strong coupling between the excitation of the 21 cm line spin states and
the gas temperature. Initially, this leads to a strong absorption signal that is spatially
varying due to the strong clustering of the rare first generation of galaxies. Next, the
X-ray emission from these galaxies heats the gas leading to a 21 cm emission signal.
Finally, ultraviolet photons ionize the gas producing dark holes in the 21 cm signal
within regions of ionized bubbles surrounding groups of galaxies. Eventually all of the
hydrogen gas, except for that in a few dense pockets, is ionized.
Throughout this review, we will make reference to parameters describing the
standard ΛCDM cosmology. These describe the mass densities in non-relativistic
matter Ωm = 0.26, dark energy ΩΛ = 0.74, and baryons Ωb = 0.044 as a fraction
of the critical mass density. We further parametrise the Hubble parameter H0 =
100h km s−1 Mpc−1 with h = 0.74. Finally, the spectrum of fluctuations is described

CONTENTS

5

Figure 1. The 21-centimeter cosmic hydrogen signal. (a) Time evolution of
fluctuations in the 21-cm brightness from just before the first stars formed through
to the end of the reionization epoch. This evolution is pieced together from
redshift slices through a simulated cosmic volume [1]. Coloration indicates the
strength of the 21-cm brightness as it evolves through two absorption phases
(purple and blue), separated by a period (black) where the excitation temperature
of the 21-cm hydrogen transition decouples from the temperature of the hydrogen
gas, before it transitions to emission (red) and finally disappears (black) owing to
the ionization of the hydrogen gas. (b) Expected evolution of the sky-averaged
21-cm brightness from the “dark ages” at redshift 200 to the end of reionization,
sometime before redshift 6 (solid curve indicates the signal; dashed curve indicates
Tb = 0). The frequency structure within this redshift range is driven by several
physical processes, including the formation of the first galaxies and the heating
and ionization of the hydrogen gas. There is considerable uncertainty in the exact
form of this signal, arising from the unknown properties of the first galaxies.

by a logarithmic slope or “tilt” nS = 0.95, and the variance of matter fluctuations
today smoothed on a scale of 8h−1 Mpc is σ8 = 0.8. The values quoted are indicative
of those found by the latest measurements [2].
The layout of this review is as follows. We first discuss the basic atomic physics
of the 21 cm line in §2. In §3, we turn to the evolution of the sky averaged 21 cm
signal and the feasibility of observing it. In §4 we describe three-dimensional 21 cm
fluctuations, including predictions from analytical and numerical calculations. After
reionization, most of the 21 cm signal originates from cold gas in galaxies (which
is self-shielded from the background of ionizing radiation). In §5 we describe the
prospects for intensity mapping of this signal as well as using the same technique
to map the cumulative emission of other atomic and molecular lines from galaxies
without resolving the galaxies individually. The 21 cm forest that is expected against
radio bright sources is described in §6. Finally, we conclude with an outlook for the
future in §7.
We direct interested readers to a number of other worthy reviews on the subject.
Ref. [3] provides a comprehensive overview of the entire field, and Ref. [4] takes a
more observationally orientated approach focussing on the near term observations of
reionization.

CONTENTS

6

2. Physics of the 21 cm line of atomic hydrogen
2.1. Basic 21 cm physics
As the most common atomic species present in the Universe, hydrogen is a useful tracer
of local properties of the gas. The simplicity of its structure - a proton and electron
- belies the richness of the associated physics. In this review, we will be focusing on
the 21 cm line of hydrogen, which arises from the hyperfine splitting of the 1S ground
state due to the interaction of the magnetic moments of the proton and the electron.
This splitting leads to two distinct energy levels separated by ∆E = 5.9 × 10−6 eV,
corresponding to a wavelength of 21.1 cm and a frequency of 1420 MHz. This frequency
is one of the most precisely known quantities in astrophysics having been measured
to great accuracy from studies of hydrogen masers [5].
The 21 cm line was theoretically predicted by van de Hulst in 1942 [6] and has
been used as a probe of astrophysics since it was first detected by Ewen & Purcell in
1951 [7]. Radio telescopes look for emission by warm hydrogen gas within galaxies.
Since the line is narrow with a well measured rest frame frequency it can be used
in the local Universe as a probe of the velocity distribution of gas within our galaxy
and other nearby galaxies. 21 cm rotation curves are often used to trace galactic
dynamics. Traditional techniques for observing 21 cm emission have only detected the
line in relatively local galaxies, although the 21 cm line has been seen in absorption
against radio loud background sources from individual systems at redshifts z . 3 [8, 9].
A new generation of radio telescopes offers the exciting prospect of using the 21 cm
line as a probe of cosmology.
In passing, we note that other atomic species show hyperfine transitions that
may be useful in probing cosmology. Of particular interest are the 8.7 GHz hyperfine
transition of 3 He+ [10, 11], which could provide a probe of Helium reionization, and
the 92 cm deuterium analogue of the 21 cm line [12]. The much lower abundance
of deuterium and 3 He compared to neutral hydrogen makes it more difficult to take
advantage of these transitions.
In cosmological contexts the 21 cm line has been used as a probe of gas along the
line of sight to some background radio source. The detailed signal depends upon the
radiative transfer through gas along the line of sight. We recall the basic equation of
radiative transfer for the specific intensity Iν (per unit frequency ν) in the absence of
scattering along a path described by coordinate s [13]
dIν
= −αν Iν + jν
(1)
ds
where absorption and emission by gas along the path are described by the coefficients
αν and jν , respectively.
To simplify the discussion, we will work in the Rayleigh-Jeans limit, appropriate
here since the relevant photon frequencies ν are much smaller than the peak frequency
of the CMB blackbody. This allows us to relate the intensity Iν to a brightness
temperature T by the relation Iν = 2kB T ν 2 /c2 , where c is the speed of light and kB is
Boltzmann’s
R constant. We will also make use of the standard definition of the optical
depth τ = ds αν (s). With this we may rewrite (1) to give the radiative transfer for
light from a background radio source of brightness temperature TR along the line of
sight through a cloud of optical depth τν and uniform excitation temperature Tex so
that the observed temperature Tbobs at a frequency ν is given by
Tbobs = Tex (1 − e−τν ) + TR (ν)e−τν .

(2)

CONTENTS

7

The excitation temperature of the 21 cm line is known as the spin temperature
TS . It is defined through the ratio between the number densities ni of hydrogen atoms
in the two hyperfine levels (which we label with a subscript 0 and 1 for the 1S singlet
and 1S triplet levels, respectively)
n1 /n0 = (g1 /g0 ) exp(−T? /TS ),

(3)

where (g1 /g0 ) = 3 is the ratio of the statistical degeneracy factors of the two levels,
and T? ≡ hc/kλ21cm = 0.068 K.
With this definition, the optical depth of a cloud of hydrogen is then
Z
τν = ds [1 − exp(−E10 /kB TS )]σ0 φ(ν)n0 ,
(4)
where n0 = nH /4 with nH being the hydrogen density, and we have denoted the 21 cm
cross-section as σ(ν) = σ0 φ(ν), with σ0 ≡ 3c2 A10 /8πν 2 , where A10 = 2.85 × 10−15 s−1
is the spontaneous Rdecay rate of the spin-flip transition, and the line profile is
normalised so that φ(ν)dν = 1. To evaluate this expression we need to find the
column length as a function of frequency s(ν) to determine the range of frequencies
dν over the path ds that correspond to a fixed observed frequency νobs . This can be
done in one of two ways: by relating the path length to the cosmological expansion
ds = −c dz/(1 + z)H(z) and the redshifting of light to relate the observed and
emitted frequencies νobs = νem /(1 + z) or assuming a linear velocity profile locally
v = (dv/ds)s (the well known Sobolev approximation [14]) and using the Doppler
law νobs = νem (1 − v/c) self-consistently to O(v/c). Since the latter case describes
the well known Hubble law in the absence of peculiar velocities these two approaches
give identical results for the optical depth. The latter picture brings out the effect of
peculiar velocities that modify the local velocity-frequency conversion.
The optical depth of this transition is small at all relevant redshifts, yielding a
differential brightness temperature
TS − TR
(1 − e−τν )
(5)
δTb =
1+z
TS − TR
τ
(6)
≈
1+z




1/2
Ωb h2
0.15 1 + z
≈ 27xHI (1 + δb )
0.023
Ωm h2 10



TS − TR
∂r vr
×
mK,
(7)
TS
(1 + z)H(z)
Here xHI is the neutral fraction of hydrogen, δb is the fractional overdensity in baryons,
and the final term arises from the velocity gradient along the line of sight ∂r vr .
The key to the detectability of the 21 cm signal hinges on the spin temperature.
Only if this temperature deviates from the background temperature, will a signal be
observable. Much of this review will focus on the physics that determines the spin
temperature and how spatial variation in the spin temperature conveys information
about astrophysical sources.
Three processes determine the spin temperature: (i) absorption/emission of 21 cm
photons from/to the radio background, primarily the CMB; (ii) collisions with other
hydrogen atoms and with electrons; and (iii) resonant scattering of Lyα photons that
cause a spin flip via an intermediate excited state. The rate of these processes is fast
compared to the de-excitation time of the line, so that to a very good approximation

CONTENTS

8

the spin temperature is given by the equilibrium balance of these effects. In this limit,
the spin temperature is given by [15]
−1
Tγ−1 + xα Tα−1 + xc TK
,
(8)
1 + xα + xc
where Tγ is the temperature of the surrounding bath of radio photons, typically set
by the CMB so that Tγ = TCMB ; Tα is the color temperature of the Lyα radiation
field at the Lyα frequency and is closely coupled to the gas kinetic temperature TK
by recoil during repeated scattering, and xc , xα are the coupling coefficients due to
atomic collisions and scattering of Lyα photons, respectively. The spin temperature
becomes strongly coupled to the gas temperature when xtot ≡ xc + xα & 1 and relaxes
to Tγ when xtot  1.
Two types of background radio sources are important for the 21 cm line as a
probe of astrophysics. Firstly, we may use the CMB as a radio background source.
In this case, TR = TCMB and the 21 cm feature is seen as a spectral distortion to
the CMB blackbody at appropriate radio frequencies (since fluctuations in the CMB
temperature are small δTCMB ∼ 10−5 the CMB is effectively a source of uniform
brightness). The distortion forms a diffuse background that can be studied across the
whole sky in a similar way to CMB anisotropies. Observations at different frequencies
probe different spherical shells of the observable Universe, so that a 3D map can be
constructed. This is the main subject of §4.
The second situation uses a radio loud point source, for example a radio loud
quasar, as the background. In this case, the source will always be much brighter
than the weak emission from diffuse hydrogen gas, TR  TS , so that the gas is seen
in absorption against the source. The appearance of lines from regions of neutral
gas at different distances to the source leads to a “forest” of lines known as the “21
cm forest” in analogy to the Lyα forest. The high brightness of the background
source allows the 21 cm forest to be studied with high frequency resolution so probing
small scale structures (∼ kpc) in the IGM. For useful statistics, many lines of sight
to different radio sources are required, making the discovery of high redshift radio
sources a priority. We leave discussion of the 21 cm forest to §6.
Note that we have a number of different quantities with units of temperature,
many of which are not true thermodynamic temperatures. TR and δTb are measures
of a radio intensity. TS measures the relative occupation numbers of the two hyperfine
levels. Tα is a colour temperature describing the photon distribution in the vicinity of
the Lyα transition. Only the CMB blackbody temperature TCMB and TK are genuine
thermodynamic temperatures.

TS−1 =

2.2. Collisional coupling
Collisions between different particles may induce spin-flips in a hydrogen atom and
dominate the coupling in the early Universe where the gas density is high. Three main
channels are available: collisions between two hydrogen atoms and collisions between
a hydrogen atom and an electron or a proton. The collisional coupling for a species i
is [15, 3]
xic ≡

ni κi10 T?
C10 T?
=
,
A10 Tγ
A10 Tγ

(9)

where C10 is the collisional excitation rate, κi10 is the specific rate coefficient for spin
deexcitation by collisions with species i (in units of cm3 s−1 ).

CONTENTS

9

The total collisional coupling coefficient can be written as
pH
xc = xHH
+ xeH
c
c + xc
h
i
T?
pH
eH
=
κHH
1−0 (Tk )nH + κ1−0 (Tk )ne + κ1−0 (Tk )np ,
A10 Tγ

(10)

eH
where κHH
1−0 is the scattering rate between hydrogen atoms, κ1−0 is the scattering
rate between electrons and hydrogen atoms, and κpH
1−0 is the scattering rate between
protons and hydrogen atoms.
The collisional rates require a quantum mechanical calculation. Values for κHH
1−0
have been tabulated as a function of Tk [16, 17], the scattering rate between electrons
and hydrogen atoms κeH
[18], and the scattering rate
1−0 was considered in Ref.
was
considered
in Ref. [19]. Useful fitting
between protons and hydrogen atoms κpH
1−0
functions exist for these scattering rates: the HH scattering rate is well fit in the
−11 0.357
range 10K < TK < 103 K by κHH
TK
exp(−32/TK ) cm3 s−1 [20];
1−0 (TK ) ≈ 3.1 × 10
eH
3 −1
and the e-H scattering rate is well fit by log(κ1−0 /cm s ) = −9.607 + 0.5 log TK ×
4
eH
4
exp[−(log TK )4.5 /1800] for T ≤ 104 K and κeH
1−0 (TK > 10 K) = κ1−0 (10 K) [21].
During the cosmic dark ages, where the coupling is dominated by collisional
coupling the details of the process become important. For example, the above
calculations make use of the assumption that the collisional cross-sections are
independent of velocity; the actual velocity dependance leads to a non-thermal
distribution for the hyperfine occupation [22]. This effect can lead to a suppression of
the 21 cm signal at the level of 5%, which although small is still important from the
perspective of using the 21 cm signal from the dark ages for precision cosmology.

2.3. Wouthuysen-Field effect
For most of the redshifts that are likely to be observationally probed in the near future
collisional coupling of the 21 cm line is inefficient. However, once star formation begins,
resonant scattering of Lyα photons provides a second channel for coupling. This
process is generally known as the Wouthuysen-Field effect [23, 15] and is illustrated
in Figure 2, which shows the hyperfine structure of the hydrogen 1S and 2P levels.
Suppose that hydrogen is initially in the hyperfine singlet state. Absorption of a Lyα
photon will excite the atom into either of the central 2P hyperfine states (the dipole
selection rules ∆F = 0, 1 and no F = 0 → 0 transitions make the other two hyperfine
levels inaccessible). From here emission of a Lyα photon can relax the atom to either
of the two ground state hyperfine levels. If relaxation takes the atom to the ground
level triplet state then a spin-flip has occurred. Hence, resonant scattering of Lyα
photons can produce a spin-flip.
The physics of the Wouthuysen-Field effect is considerably more subtle than this
simple description would suggest. We may write the coupling as
4Pα T?
xα =
,
(11)
27A10 Tγ
where Pα is the scattering rate of Lyα photons. Here we have related the scattering
rate between the two hyperfine levels to Pα using the relation P01 = 4Pα /27, which
results from the atomic physics of the hyperfine lines and assumes that the radiation
field is constant across them [25].
The rate at which Lyα photons scatter from a hydrogen atom is given by
Z
Pα = 4πχα dν Jν (ν)φα (ν),
(12)

CONTENTS

10

Figure 2. Left panel: Hyperfine structure of the hydrogen atom and the
transitions relevant for the Wouthuysen-Field effect [24]. Solid line transitions
allow spin flips, while dashed transitions are allowed but do not contribute to
spin flips.Right panel: Illustration of how atomic cascades convert Lyn photons
into Lyα photons.

where σν ≡ χα φα (ν) is the local absorption cross section, χα ≡ (πe2 /me c)fα is the
oscillation strength of the Lyα transition, φα (ν) is the Lyα absorption profile, and
Jν (ν) is the angle-averaged specific intensity of the background radiation field (by
number).
Making use of this expression, we can express the coupling as
xα =

16π 2 T? e2 fα
Sα Jα ,
27A10 Tγ me c

(13)

whereRJα is the specific flux evaluated at the Lyα frequency. Here we have introduced
Sα ≡ dxφα (x)Jν (x)/J∞ , with J∞ being the flux away from the absorption feature,
as a correction factor of order unity to describe the detailed structure of the photon
distribution in the neighborhood of the Lyα resonance.
Equation (13) can be used to calculate the critical flux required to produce
xα = Sα . We rewrite (13) as xα = Sα Jα /JαC where JαC ≡ 1.165 × 1010 [(1 +
z)/20] cm−2 s−1 Hz−1 sr−1 . The critical flux can also be expressed in terms of the
number of Lyα photons per hydrogen atom JαC /nH = 0.0767[(1+z)/20]−2 . In practice,
this condition is easy to satisfy once star formation begins.
The above physics couples the spin temperature to the colour temperature of the
radiation field, which is a measure of the shape of the radiation field as a function of
frequency in the neighbourhood of the Lyα line defined by [26]
h
d log nν
=−
,
kB Tc
dν

(14)

where nν = c2 Jν /2ν 2 is the photon occupation number. Some care must to taken
with this definition; other definitions that do not obey detailed balance can be found
in the literature.
Typically, TC ≈ TK , because in most cases of interest the optical depth to Lyα
scattering is very large leading to a large number of scatterings of Lyα photons that

CONTENTS

11

bring the radiation field and the gas into local equilibrium for frequencies near the
line center [27]. At the level of microphysics this relation occurs through the process
of scattering Lyα photons in the neighbourhood of the Lyα resonance, which leads
to a distinct feature in the frequency distribution of photons. Without going into
the details, one can understand the formation of this feature in terms of the “flow” of
photons in frequency. Redshifting with the cosmic expansion leads to a flow of photons
from high to low frequency at a fixed rate. As photons flow into the Lyα resonance
they may scatter to larger or smaller frequencies. Since the cross-section is symmetric,
one would expect the net flow rate to be preserved. However, each time a Lyα photon
scatters from a hydrogen atom it will lose a fraction of its energy hν/mp c2 due to the
recoil of the atom. This loss of energy increases the flow to lower energy and leads to a
deficit of photons close to line center. As this feature develops scattering redistributes
photons leading to an asymmetry about the line. This asymmetry is exactly that
required to bring the distribution into local thermal equilibrium with TC ≈ TK .
The shape of this feature determines Sα and, since recoils source an absorption
feature, ensures Sα ≤ 1. At low temperatures, recoils have more of an effect and the
suppression of the Wouthuysen-Field effect is most pronounced. If the IGM is warm
then this suppression becomes negligible [28, 29, 30, 31]. The above discussion has
neglected processes whereby the distribution of photons is changed by spin-exchanges.
Including this complicates the determination of TS and TC considerably since they
must then be iterated to find a self-consistent solution for the level- and photonpopulations [29]. However, the effect of spin-flips on the photon distribution is small
. 10%.
A useful approximation for Sα is outlined in Ref. [30]: Sα ≈ exp(−1.79α), where
α ≡ η(3a/2πγ)1/3 , a = Γ/(4π∆νD ), Γ the inverse lifetime of the upper 21 cm level,
∆νD /ν0 = (2kB TK /mc2 )1/2 is the Doppler parameter, ν0 the line center frequency,
−1
γ = τGP
, and η = (hν02 )/(mc2 ∆νD ) is the mean frequency drift per scattering due
to recoil. which is accurate at the 5% level provided that TK & 1 K and the GunnPeterson optical depth τGP is large.
In the astrophysical context, we will primarily be interested in photons redshifting
into the Lyα resonance from frequencies below the Lyβ resonance. In addition, Lyα
photons can be produced by atomic cascades from photons redshifting into higher
Lyman series resonances. These atomic cascades are illustrated in Figure 2, where
the probability of converting a Lyn photon into a Lyα photon is set by the atomic
rate coefficients and can be found in tabular form in Refs. [29, 24]. For large n,
approximately 30% conversion is typical. These photons are injected into the Lyα line
rather than being redshifted from outside of the line. This changes their contribution
to the Wouthuysen-Field coupling since the photon distribution is now one-sided.
Similar processes to those described above apply to the redistribution of these photons,
and they can lead to an important amplification of the Lyα flux.
This discussion gives a sense of some of the subtleties that go into to determining
the strength of the Lyα coupling. These effects can modify the 21 cm signal at the
∼10% level, which will be important as observations begin to detect 21 cm fluctuations.
At this stage, it appears that the underlying atomic physics is understood, although
the details of Lyα radiative transfer still requires some work.

CONTENTS

12

3. Global 21 cm signature
3.1. Outline
Next we examine the cosmological context of the 21 cm signal. We may express the
21 cm brightness temperature as a function of four variables Tb = Tb (TK , xi , Jα , nH ),
where xi is the volume-averaged ionized fraction of hydrogen. In calculating the 21
cm signal, we require a model for the global evolution of and fluctuations in these
quantities. Before looking at the evolution of the signal quantitatively, we will first
outlineSTScI
the basic picture to delineate the most important phases.
6
STScI
MAR
6
An2009
important feature Brightness
of Tb is that its
dependence on each of these
quantities
MAR
Fluctuations
2009
saturates
at some point, for example once the Lyα flux is high enough the spin and
W-Fvariation
Velocity
Baryon
Neutral
Gas
kinetic gas
temperatures
tightly coupled
further
in Jα becomes
Brightness
peculiar
brightness
neutral
Lyman
alphaVelocity
Baryon become
Neutral
Gas gas and W-F
Brightness
Coupling
gradient
density
Density
fraction
Temperature
temperature
Coupling
gradient
velocities
temperature
temperature
fraction
flux
Density of the
irrelevant to
the details
signal. This
leads to
conceptually separate regimes
fraction
Temperature
emperature
where variation in only one of the variables dominating fluctuations in the signal.
These different regimesb bcan be seen in Figure 1 and are shown in schematic form in
cosmology
reionization
X-ray
heating
Lyainsources
cosmology
Figure 3 for clarity.
We nowReionization
discuss
each of
these
turn. Cosmology
Cosmology
Reionization
X-ray phases
Ly! Ly! Cosmology
Cosmology
X-ray

21cm
cmfluctuations
fluctuations
21

sources
sources

Dark
DarkAges
Ages

sources
sources

EoR
CosmicTwilight
Dawn
Twilight

DLA
Aspen 2010

Jonathan Pritchard

Figure 3. Cartoon of the different phases of the 21 cm signal. The signal
transitions from an early phase of collisional coupling to a later phase of Lyα
coupling through a short period where there is little signal. Fluctuations after
this phase are dominated successively by spatial variation in the Lyα , X-ray,
and ionizing UV radiation backgrounds. After reionization is complete there is a
residual signal from neutral hydrogen in galaxies.

• 200 . z . 1100: The residual free electron fraction left after recombination
allows Compton scattering to maintain thermal coupling of the gas to the CMB,
setting TK = Tγ . The high gas density leads to effective collisional coupling so
that TS = Tγ and we expect T̄b = 0 and no detectable 21 cm signal.
• 40 . z . 200: In this regime, the gas cools adiabatically so that TK ∝ (1 + z)2
leading to TK < Tγ and collisional coupling sets TS < Tγ , leading to T̄b < 0 and
an early absorption signal. At this time, Tb fluctuations are sourced by density
fluctuations, potentially allowing the initial conditions to be probed [32, 22].
• z? . z . 40: As the expansion continues, decreasing the gas density, collisional
coupling becomes ineffective and radiative coupling to the CMB sets TS = Tγ ,
and there is no detectable 21 cm signal.
• zα . z . z? : Once the first sources switch on at z? , they emit both Lyα photons
and X-rays. In general, the emissivity required for Lyα coupling is significantly

CONTENTS

13

less than that for heating TK above Tγ . We therefore expect a regime where
the spin temperature is coupled to cold gas so that TS ∼ TK < Tγ and there
is an absorption signal. Fluctuations are dominated by density fluctuations and
variation in the Lyα flux [33, 24, 34]. As further star formation occurs the Lyα
coupling will eventually saturate (xα  1), so that by a redshift zα the gas will
everywhere be strongly coupled.
• zh . z . zα : After Lyα coupling saturates, fluctuations in the Lyα flux no longer
affect the 21 cm signal. By this point, heating becomes significant and gas
temperature fluctuations source Tb fluctuations. While TK remains below Tγ
we see a 21 cm signal in absorption, but as TK approaches Tγ hotter regions may
begin to be seen in emission. Eventually by a redshift zh the gas will be heated
everywhere so that T̄K = Tγ .
• zT . z . zh : After the heating transition, TK > Tγ and we expect to see a 21
cm signal in emission. The 21 cm brightness temperature is not yet saturated,
which occurs at zT , when TS ∼ TK  Tγ . By this time, the ionization fraction
has likely risen above the percent level. Brightness temperature fluctuations are
sourced by a mixture of fluctuations in ionization, density and gas temperature.
• zr . z . zT : Continued heating drives TK  Tγ at zT and temperature
fluctuations become unimportant. TS ∼ TK  Tγ and the dependence on TS
may be neglected in equation (7), which greatly simplifies analysis of the 21 cm
power spectrum [35]. By this point, the filling fraction of HII regions probably
becomes significant and ionization fluctuations begin to dominate the 21 cm signal
[36].
• z . zr : After reionization, any remaining 21 cm signal originates primarily from
collapsed islands of neutral hydrogen (damped Lyα systems).
Most of these epochs are not sharply defined, and so there could be considerable
overlap between them. In fact, our ignorance of early sources is such that we can not
definitively be sure of the sequence of events. The above sequence of events seems
most likely and can be justified on the basis of the relative energetics of the different
processes and the probable properties of the sources. We will discuss this in more
detail as we quantify the evolution of the sources.
Perhaps the largest uncertainty lies in the ordering of zα and zh . Ref. [37] explores
the possibility that zh > zα , so that X-ray preheating allows collisional coupling to be
important before the Lyα flux becomes significant. Simulations of the very first miniquasar [38, 20] also probe this regime and show that the first luminous X-ray sources
can have a great impact on their surrounding environment. We note that these studies
ignored Lyα coupling, and that an X-ray background may generate significant Lyα
photons [34], as we discuss in §3.5. Additionally, while these authors looked at the case
where the production of Lyα photons was inefficient, one can consider the case where
heating is much more efficient. This can be the case where weak shocks raise the IGM
temperature very early on [39] or if exotic particle physics mechanisms such as dark
matter annihilation are important. Clearly, there is still considerable uncertainty in
the exact evolution of the signal making the potential implications of measuring the
21 cm signal very exciting.

CONTENTS

14

3.2. Evolution of global signal
Having outlined the evolution of the signal qualitatively, we will turn to the details
of making quantitative predictions. In calculating the 21 cm signal it will help us to
treat the IGM as a two phase medium. Initially, the IGM is composed of a single
mostly neutral phase left over after recombination. This phase is characterised by a
gas temperature TK and a small fraction of free electrons xe . This is the phase that
generates the 21 cm signal.
Once galaxy formation begins, energetic UV photons ionize HII regions
surrounding, first individual galaxies and then clusters of galaxies. These UV photons
have a very short mean free path in a neutral medium leading to the ionized HII regions
having a very sharp boundary (although the boundary can be softened if the ionizing
photons are particularly hard [40]). We may therefore treat the ionized HII bubbles as
a second phase in the IGM characterised by a volume filling fraction xi (provided that
the free electron fraction is small xi is approximately the mean ionization fraction).
We will assume that these bubbles are fully ionized and that the temperature inside the
bubbles is fixed at THII = 104 K determining the collisional recombination rate inside
these bubbles. Since the photons that redshift into the Lyα resonance initially have
long mean free paths, we may treat the Lyα flux, Jα as being the same in both phases
(although in practice, since there is no 21 cm signal from the fully ionized bubbles, it
is only the Lyα flux in the mostly neutral phase that matters). To determine the 21
cm signal at a given redshift, we must calculate the four quantities xi , xe , TK , and
Jα . We begin by describing the evolution of the gas temperature TK ,
2TK dn
2 X j
dTK
=
+
.
(15)
dt
3n dt
3kB j n
Here, the first term accounts for adiabatic cooling of the gas due to the cosmic
expansion while the second term accounts for other sources of heating/cooling j with
j the heating rate per unit volume for the process j.
Next, we consider the volume filling fraction xi and the ionization of the neutral
IGM xe
dxi
= (1 − xe )Λi − αA Cx2i nH ,
(16)
dt
dxe
= (1 − xe )Λe − αB (T )x2e nH .
(17)
dt
In these expressions, we define Λi to be the rate of production of ionizing photons
per unit time per baryon applied to HII regions, Λe is the equivalent quantity in the
bulk of the IGM, αA = 4.2 × 10−13 cm3 s−1 is the case-A recombination coefficient at
T = 104 K, αB (T ) is the case-B recombination rate (whose temperature dependence
can be obtained from [41]), and C ≡ hn2e i/hne i2 is the clumping factor.
Superficially these look the same, since in each case the ionization rate is a balance
between ionizations and recombinations. The main distinction lies in the manner
in which we treat the recombinations. In the fully ionized bubbles, recombinations
occur in those dense clumps of material capable of self-shielding against ionizing
radiation. These overdense regions will have a locally enhanced recombination
rate, making it important to account for the inhomogeneous distribution of matter
through the clumping factor C. Since recombinations will occur on the edge of these
neutral clumps, secondary photons produced by the recombinations will likely be

CONTENTS

15

absorbed inside the clumps rather than in the mean IGM, justifying the use of caseA recombination [42]. In contrast, recombinations in the bulk of the neutral IGM
will occur at close to mean density in gas with temperature TK . Here recombination
radiation will be absorbed in the IGM, so we must use case-B recombination. By
keeping track of this carefully our evolution matches onto that of RECFAST [41].
This two phase approximation will eventually break down should xe become close
to unity, indicating that most of the IGM has been ionized and that there is no clear
distinction between ionized bubbles and a neutral bulk IGM. In most of our models,
xe remains small until the end of reionization making this a reasonable approximation.
3.3. Growth of HII regions
The growth of ionized HII regions is governed by the interplay between ionization and
recombination, both of which contain considerable uncertainties. We may write the
ionization rate per hydrogen atom as
Λi = AHe fesc Nion ρ̇? (z),

(18)

with Nion being the number of ionizing photons per baryon produced in stars, fesc the
fraction of ionizing photons that escape the host halo, and AHe a correction factor for
the presence of Helium. Here ρ̇? (z) is the star formation rate density as a function
of redshift, which is still poorly known observationally. For a present-day initial mass
function of stars, Nion ∼ 4 × 103 , whereas for very massive (> 102 M ) stars of
primordial composition, Nion ∼ 105 [43, 44].
We model the star formation rate as tracking the collapse of matter, so that we
may write the star formation rate per (comoving) unit volume
d
fcoll (z).
(19)
dt
where ρ̄0b is the cosmic mean baryon density today and f? is the fraction of baryons
converted into stars. This formalism is appropriate for z & 10, as at later times star
formation as a result of mergers becomes important.
With these assumptions, we may rewrite the ionization rate per hydrogen atom
as
dfcoll
Λi = ζ(z)
,
(20)
dt
where fcoll (z) is the fraction of gas inside collapsed objects at z and the ionization
efficiency parameter ζ is given by
ρ̇? (z) = ρ̄0b f?

ζ = AHe f? fesc Nion .

(21)

This model for xi is motivated by a picture of HII regions expanding into neutral
hydrogen [45]. In calculating fcoll , we use the Sheth-Tormen [46] mass function
dn/dm and determine a minimum mass mmin for collapse by requiring the virial
temperature Tvir ≥ 104 K, appropriate for cooling by atomic hydrogen. Decreasing
this minimum galaxy mass, say to the virial temperature corresponding to molecular
hydrogen cooling (∼ 300 K), will allow star formation to occur at earlier times, shifting
the features that we describe in redshift.
The sources of ionizing photons in the early Universe are believed to have been
primarily galaxies. However, the properties of these galaxies are currently only poorly
constrained. Recent observations with the Hubble Space Telescope provide some
of the best constraints on early galaxy formation. Faint galaxies are identified as

CONTENTS

16

being at high redshift using a “Lyα dropout technique” where a naturally occurring
break in the galaxy spectrum at the Lyα wavelength 1216Å is seen in different colour
filters as a galaxy is redshifted. So far, galaxies at redshifts up to z ∼ 10 have been
found providing information on the sources of reionization. There are unfortunately
considerable limitations on the existing surveys owing to their small sky coverage,
which makes it unclear whether those galaxies seen are properly representative, and the
limited frequency coverage. Even more problematic for our purposes is that the optical
frequencies at which the galaxies are seen do not correspond to the UV photons that
ionize the IGM. Our limited understanding of the mass distribution of the emitting
stars introduces an uncertainty in the number of ionizing photons per baryon Nion is
emitted by galaxies. There is also considerable uncertainty in the fraction of ionizing
photons fesc that escape the host galaxy to ionize the IGM.
The recombination rate is primarily important at late times once a significant
fraction of the volume has already been ionized. At this stage, dense clumps within
an ionized bubble can act as sinks of ionizing photons slowing or even stalling further
expansion of the bubble. The degree to which gas resides in these dense clumps is
an important uncertainty in modelling reionization. Important hydrodynamic effects,
such as the evaporation of gas from a halo as a result of photoionization heating [47],
can significantly modify the clumping factor.
A simple model for the clumping factor [42] assumes that the Universe will be
fully ionized up to some critical overdensity ∆c . If the probability distribution for the
gas density PV (∆) is specified, we may then write the clumping factor as
Z ∆c
C≡
d∆ ∆2 PV (∆).
(22)
The quantity PV (∆) can be modeled analytically starting from a consideration of
behaviour of low density voids and accounting for Gaussian initial conditions. The
analytic form resembles that of a Gaussian with a power law tail [42] and can be
measured from simulations [48]. To accurately capture the clumping one should selfconsistently perform a full hydrodynamical simulation of reionization, since thermal
feedback can modify the gas density distribution [47].
To set the critical density ∆c , we account for the patchy nature of reionization,
which proceeds via the expansion and overlap of ionized bubbles [49]. The size of a
bubbles will become limited if the mean free path of ionized photons becomes shorter
than the size of the bubble, for example if the bubble contains many small self-shielded
absorbers. The mean free path of ionizing photons can be related to the underlying
density field as
−2/3

λi = λ0 [1 − FV (∆i )]

.

(23)

Here λ0 is an unknown normalisation constant that was found by Ref. [42] in the
context of simulations at z = 2 − 4 to be well fit by λ0 H(z) = 60 km s−1 . This scaling
relationship is likely to be very approximate, but we make use of it for convenience.
With this we can fix ∆i within an ionized bubble by setting the relevant Rb = λi (∆c ).
We then average the clumping factor over the distribution of bubble sizes (discussed
in more details later) to get the mean clumping factor.
3.4. Heating and ionization
To determine the heating rate, we must integrate equation (15) and therefore we must
specify which heating mechanisms are important. At high redshifts, the dominant

CONTENTS

17

mechanism is Compton heating of the gas arising from the scattering of CMB photons
from the small residual free electron fraction. Since these free electrons scatter readily
from the surrounding baryons this transfers energy from the CMB to the gas. Compton
heating serves to couple TK to Tγ at redshifts z & 150, but becomes ineffective below
that redshift. In our context, it serves to set the initial conditions before star formation
begins. The heating rate per particle for Compton heating is given by [50]
xe
Tγ − TK uγ
2 compton
=
(1 + z)4 ,
(24)
3 kB n
1 + fHe + xe
tγ
ūγ
where fHe is the helium fraction (by number), uγ is the energy density of the CMB,
σT = 6.65 × 10−25 cm2 is the Thomson cross-section, and we define
8ūγ σT
t−1
= 8.55 × 10−13 yr−1 .
(25)
γ =
3me c
At lower redshifts, the growth of non-linear structures leads to other possible
sources of heat. Shocks associated with large scale structure occur as gas separates
from the Hubble flow and undergoes turnaround before collapsing onto a central
overdensity. After turnaround different fluid elements may cross and shock due to the
differential accelerations. Such turnaround shocks could provide considerable heating
of the gas at late times [39].
Another source of heating is the scattering of Lyα photons off hydrogen atoms,
which leads to a slight recoil of the nucleus that saps energy from the photon. It
was initially believed that this would provide a strong source of heating sufficient to
prevent the possibility of seeing the 21 cm signal in absorption. Early calculations
showed that by the time the scattering rate required for Lyα photons to couple the
spin and gas temperatures was reached, the gas would have been heated well above
the CMB temperature [51]. These early estimates, however, did not account for the
way the distribution of Lyα photon energies was changed by scattering. This spectral
distortion is a part of the photons coming into equilibrium with the gas and serves to
greatly reduce the heating rate [51, 28, 30, 31]. While Lyα heating can be important
it typically requires very large Lyα fluxes and so is most relevant at late times and
may be insufficient to heat the gas to the CMB temperature alone.
The most important source of energy injection into the IGM is likely via X-ray
heating of the gas [52, 28, 53, 54] . While shock heating dominates the thermal balance
in the present day Universe, during the epoch we are considering they heat the gas
only slightly before X-ray heating dominates. For sensible source populations, Lyα
heating is mostly negligible compared to X-ray heating [31, 55].
Since X-ray photons have a long mean free path, they are able to heat the gas
far from the source, and can be produced in large quantities once compact objects are
formed. The comoving mean free path of an X-ray with energy E is [3]

−2 
3
1+z
E
−1/3
λX ≈ 4.9x̄HI
Mpc.
(26)
15
300eV
Thus, the Universe will be optically thick over a Hubble length to all photons with
1/3
energy below E ∼ 2[(1 + z)/15]1/2 x̄HI keV. The E −3 dependence of the cross-section
means that heating is dominated by soft X-rays, which fluctuate on small scales. In
addition, though, there will be a uniform component to the heating from harder Xrays.
X-rays heat the gas primarily through photo-ionization of HI and HeI: this
generates energetic photo-electrons, which dissipate their energy into heating,

CONTENTS

18

secondary ionizations, and atomic excitation. With this in mind, we calculate the
total rate of energy deposition per unit volume as
X Z
X = 4π
ni dν σν,i Jν (hν − hνth,i ),
(27)
i

where we sum over the species i =HI, HeI, and HeII, ni is the number density of
species i, hνth = Eth is the threshold energy for ionization, σν,i is the cross-section for
photoionization, and Jν is the number flux of photons of frequency ν.
We may divide this energy into heating, ionization, and excitation by inserting
the factor fi (ν, xe ), defined as the fraction of energy converted into form i at a specific
frequency. This allows us to calculate the contribution of X-rays to both the heating
and the partial ionization of the bulk IGM. The relevant division of the X-ray energy
depends on both the X-ray energy E and the free electron fraction xe and can be
calculated by Monte-Carlo methods. This partitioning of X-ray energy in this way
was first calculated by Ref. [56] and subsequently updated [57, 58]. In the following
calculations, we make use of fitting formula for the fi (ν) calculated by Ref. [56],
which are approximately independent of ν for hν & 100eV, so that the ionization rate
is related to the heating rate by a factor fion /(fheat Eth ).
The X-ray number flux is found from
Z ∞
JX (z) =
dν JX (ν, z),
(28)
νth

Z ∞
=

Z z?
dν

νth

z

dz 0

(1 + z)2 c
ˆX (ν 0 , z 0 )e−τ ,
4π H(z 0 )

where ˆX (ν, z) is the comoving photon emissivity for X-ray sources, and ν 0 is the
emission frequency at z 0 corresponding to an X-ray frequency ν at z
ν0 = ν

(1 + z 0 )
.
(1 + z)

(29)

The optical depth is given by
Z z0
dl
0
τ (ν, z, z ) =
dz 00 [nHI σHI (ν 00 )+nHeI σHeI (ν 00 )+nHeII σHeII (ν 00 )], (30)
00
dz
z
where we calculate the cross-sections using the fits of [59]. Care must be taken here, as
the cross-sections have a strong frequency dependence and the X-ray photon frequency
can redshift considerably between emission and absorption. In practice, the abundance
of HeII may be neglected [52].
X-rays may be produced by a variety of different sources with three main
candidates at high redshifts being identified as starburst galaxies, supernova remnants
(SNR), and miniquasars [60, 61, 62]. Galaxies with high rates of star formation
produce copious numbers of X-ray binaries, whose total X-ray luminosity can be
considerable. Two populations of X-ray binaries may be identified in the local Universe
distinguished by the mass of the donor star which feeds its black hole companion low-mass X-ray binaries (LMXB) and high-mass X-ray binaries (HMXB). The short
life time of HMXBs (tHMXB ∼ 107 yr) leads the X-ray luminosity LHMXB
to track the
X
star formation rate. At the same time, the longer lived LMXB (tLMXB ∼ 1010 yr)
tracks the total mass of stars formed. Since we will focus on the early Universe and
on the first billion years of evolution, when few LMXB are expected to have formed,
the dominant contribution to LX in galaxies is likely to be from HMXB [63]. This has

CONTENTS

19

conventionally been defined in terms of a parameter fX such that the emissivity per
unit (comoving) volume per unit frequency


ρ̇? (z)
,
(31)
ˆX (z, ν) = ˆX (ν)
M yr−1 Mpc−3
where ρ̇? is the star formation rate density, and the spectral distribution function is a
power law with index αS
 −αS −1
L0
ν
,
(32)
ˆX (ν) =
hν0 ν0
and the pivot energy hν0 = 1 keV. We assume emission within the band 0.2 – 30 keV,
and set L0 = 3.4 × 1040 fX erg s−1 Mpc−3 , where fX is a highly uncertain constant
factor [62]. For a spectral index αS = 1.5, roughly corresponding to that for starburst
galaxies, fX = 1 corresponds to the emission of approximately 560eV for every baryon
converted into stars.
This normalisation was chosen so that, with fX = 1, the total X-ray luminosity
per unit star formation rate (SFR) is consistent with that observed in starburst
galaxies at the present epoch [63, 64]. Since then improved observations have revised
this figure owing to better separation of the contribution from LMXB and HMXB.
While the data is still as of yet fairly patchy and shows considerable scatter fX ≈ 0.2
seems a better fit to the most recent data in the local universe [65, 66]. Extrapolating
observations from the present day to high redshift is fraught with uncertainty, and we
note that this normalisation is very uncertain and probably evolves with redshift [67].
In particular, the metallicity evolution of galaxies with redshift is likely to impact
the ratio of black holes to neutron stars that form the compact object in the HMXB
and with it the efficiency of X-ray production. Additionally, the fraction of stars in
binaries may evolve with redshift and is only poorly constrained at high redshifts [68].
Other sources of X-rays are inverse Compton scattering of CMB photons from the
energetic electrons in supernova remnants. Estimates of the luminosity of such sources
is again highly uncertain, but of a similar order of magnitude as from HMXB [60]. Like
HMXB, the X-ray luminosity from supernovae remnants is expected to track the star
formation rate. Finally, miniquasars - accretion onto black holes with intermediate
masses in the range 101−5 M - can produce significant levels of X-rays. Since the early
formation of black holes depends sensitively on the source of seed black holes and their
subsequent merger history there is again considerable uncertainty. For simplicity, we
will assume that miniquasars similarly track the star formation rate (SFR). In reality,
of course, their evolution could be considerably more complex [69, 70].
The total X-ray luminosity at high redshift is constrained by observations of the
present day unresolved soft X-ray background (SXRB). An early population of X-ray
sources would produce hard X-rays that would redshift to lower energies contributing
to this background. Since there will be faint X-ray sources at lower redshift that also
contribute to this background, the SXRB can be used to place a conservative upper
limit on the amount of X-ray production at early times. This rules out complete
reionization by X-rays but allows considerable latitude for heating [71].
Since heating requires considerably less energy than ionization, fX is still
relatively unconstrained with values as high as fX . 103 possible without violating
constraints from the CMB polarisation anisotropies on the optical depth for electron
scattering. Constraining this parameter will mark a step forward in our understanding
of the thermal history of the IGM and the population of X-ray sources at high redshifts.

CONTENTS

20

3.5. Coupling
Finally, we need to specify the evolution of the Lyα flux. This is produced by stellar
emission (Jα,? ) and by X-ray excitation of HI (Jα,X ). Photons emitted by stars,
between Lyα and the Lyman limit, will redshift until they enter a Lyman series
resonance. Subsequently, they may generate Lyα photons via atomic cascades [24, 29].
The Lyα flux from stars Jα,? arises from a sum over the Lyn levels, with the maximum
n that contributes nmax ≈ 23 determined by the size of the HII region of a typical
(isolated) galaxy (see [33] for details). The average Lyα background is then
Jα,? (z) =
=

nX
max
n=2
nX
max
n=2

Jα(n) (z),

(33)
Z zmax (n)

frecycle (n)
z

dz 0

(1 + z)2 c
ˆ? (νn0 , z 0 ),
4π H(z 0 )

where zmax (n) is the maximum redshift from which emitted photons will redshift into
the level n Lyman resonance, νn0 is the emission frequency at z 0 corresponding to
absorption by the level n at z, frecycle (n) is the probability of producing a Lyα photon
by cascade from level n, and ˆ? (ν, z) is the comoving photon number emissivity for
stellar sources. We connect ˆ? (ν, z) to the star formation rate in the same way as for
X-rays in equation (32), and define ˆ? (ν) to be the spectral distribution function of
the stellar sources.
Stellar sources typically have a spectrum that falls rapidly above the Lyβ
transition. We consider models with present-day (Pop. I & II) and very massive
(Pop. III) stars. In each case, we take ˆ? (ν) to be a broken power law with one index
describing emission between Lyα and Lyβ, and a second describing emission between
Lyβ and the Lyman limit (see [24] for details). The details of the signal depend
primarily on the total Lyα emissivity and not on the shape of the spectrum (but see
[72, 53] for details of how precision measurements of the 21 cm fluctuations might say
something about the source spectrum).
For convenience, we define a parameter controlling the normalisation of the Lyα
emissivity fα by setting the total number of Lyα photons emitted per baryon converted
into stars as Nα = fα Nα,ref where we take the reference values appropriate for normal
(so-called, Population I & II) stars Nα,ref = 6590 [73, 33]. For comparison, in this
notation, the very massive (Population III) stars have [43], Nα = 3030 (fα = 0.46),
when the contribution from higher Lyman series photons is included. We expect the
value of fα to be close to unity, since stellar properties are relatively well understood.
Photoionization of HI or HeI by X-rays may also lead to the production of
Lyα photons. In this case, some of the primary photo-electron’s energy ends up in
excitations of HI [56], which on relaxation may generate Lyα photons [51, 34, 72]. The
rate at which Lyα photons are produced X,α can be calculated in the same way as
the contribution to heating by X-rays, but with the appropriate change in the fraction
of the total X-ray energy that goes into excitations rather than heating.
Calculating the fraction of energy that goes into producing Lyα photons is a
problem that has been considered by a number of authors. Early work,[74, 56] focused
on the amount of energy that went into atomic excitations as a whole, but we require
only the fraction that leads to Lyα production. Although excitations to the 2P level
will always generate Lyα photons, only some fraction of excitations to other levels
will lead to Lyα generating cascades. The rest will end with two photon decay

CONTENTS

21

from the 2S level. This has been addressed by Monte-Carlo simulation of the Xray scattering process using up to date cross-sections in [57, 58]. These simulations
find that around pα ≈ 0.7 of the total energy that goes into excitation ends up as Lyα
photons, consistent with simple estimates based on the atomic cross-sections [53].
This Lyα flux Jα,X produced by X-ray excitation may be found by balancing the
rate at which Lyα photons are produced via cascades with the rate at which photons
redshift out of the Lyα resonance [34], giving
c X,α 1
.
(34)
Jα,X =
4π hνα Hνα
The relative importance of Lyα photons from X-rays or directly produced by
stars is highly dependent upon the nature of the sources that existed at high redshifts.
Furthermore, it can vary significantly from place to place. In general, X-rays with
their long mean free path seem likely to dominate the Lyα flux far from sources while
the contribution from stellar sources dominates closer in [34].
3.6. Astrophysical sources and histories
In the above sections, we have outlined the mathematical formalism for describing the
21 cm signal and have omitted a detailed discussion of the sources. This was deliberate;
although we have a reasonable understanding of the physical processes involved, our
knowledge of the properties of early sources of radiation is highly uncertain.
Many models of galaxy formation assume that the first stars to form from the
collapse of primordial gas are very massive (∼ 10 − 100 M ) population III stars [43].
This is predicated on the inference that the absence of coolants more efficient than
molecular hydrogen leads to monolithic collapse into a single massive star rather than
fragmentation into many lower mass stars. This assumption has recently begun to be
challenged by new numerical simulations that use “sink particles” to better follow the
collapsing gas for many dynamical times. Such simulations show that fragmentation
into many ∼ 0.1 − 1 M stars may be the preferred channel of star formation [75].
This would naturally explain tentative observations of low mass metal-free stars [76]
and could lead to a much higher fraction of early X-ray binaries [68]. Once earlier
generations of star formation has enriched the IGM with metals low mass population
II stars will begin to form due to more efficient gas cooling [77]. Different predictions
for the mode of star formation will lead to quite different IGM histories.
We have three radiation backgrounds to account for - ionizing UV, X-ray, and
Lyman series photons (identified as those photons with energy 10.2 eV ≤ E < 13.6 eV).
For each of these radiation fields we must specify a single parameter: the ionization
efficiency ζ, the X-ray emissivity fX , and the Lyα emissivity fα . These parameters
enter our model as a factor multiplying the star formation rate and are therefore
individually degenerate with the star formation efficiency f? . This split provides a
natural separation between the physics of the sources and the star formation rate
and, in practice, one might imagine using observations of the star formation rate by
other means as a way of breaking the degeneracy between them. In addition to these
parameters, we must specify the minimum mass halo in which galaxies form Mmin and
make use of the Sheth-Tormen mass function of dark matter halos.
We now show results for the 21 cm global signal that explore this parameter space
to give a sense of how the signal depends on these astrophysical parameters. Model A
uses (Nion,IGM , fα , fX , f∗ ) = (200,1,1,0.1) giving zreion = 6.47 and τ = 0.063. Model
B uses (Nion,IGM , fα , fX , f∗ ) = (600,1,0.1,0.2) giving zreion = 9.76 and τ = 0.094.

CONTENTS

22

Model C uses (Nion,IGM , fα , fX , f∗ ) = (3000,0.46,1,0.15) giving zreion = 11.76 and
τ = 0.115.

Figure 4. Top panel: Evolution of the CMB temperature TCMB (dotted
curve),the gas kinetic temperature TK (dashed curve), and the spin temperature
TS (solid curve). Middle panel: Evolution of the gas fraction in ionized regions
xi (solid curve) and the ionized fraction outside these regions (due to diffuse Xrays) xe (dotted curve). Bottom panel: Evolution of mean 21 cm brightness
temperature Tb . In each panel we plot curves for model A (thin curves), model B
(medium curves), and model C (thick curves). [78]

Figure 4 shows several examples of the global 21 cm signal and the associated
evolution in the neutral fraction and gas temperatures. While the details of the
models may vary considerably, all show similar basic properties. At high redshift,
10  z . 200, the gas temperature cools adiabatically faster than the CMB (since the
residual fraction of free electrons is insufficient to couple the two temperatures). At
the same time, collisional coupling is effective at coupling spin and gas temperatures
leading to the absorption trough seen at the right of the lower panel. The details of
this trough are fixed by cosmology and therefore may be predicted relatively robustly.
The minima of this trough corresponds to the point at which collisional coupling starts
to become relatively ineffective.
Once star formation begins, the spin and gas temperatures again become tightly
coupled leading to a second, potentially deeper, absorption trough. The minimum of
this trough corresponds to the point when X-ray heating switches on heating the gas
above the CMB temperature leading to an emission signal. The signal then reaches
the curve for a saturated signal (TS  TCMB ) briefly before the ionization of neutral
hydrogen diminishes it.
The ordering of these events is determined primarily by the energetics of the
processes involved and by the basic properties of the reasonable source spectra. For
example, ionization requires at least one ionizing photon with energy E ≥ 13.6 eV per

CONTENTS

23

baryon while depositing only ∼ 10% of that energy per baryon would heat the gas
to TK & 104 K. However, the details of the shape of the curve after star formation
begins are highly uncertain - in our model we have neglected any possible redshift
evolution in the various photon emissivity parameters - but the basic structure of one
emission feature and two absorption troughs are likely to be robust. By determining
the positions of the various turning points in the signal one could hope to constrain
the underlying astrophysics and learn about the first stars and galaxies.
3.7. Exotic heating
One of the key points to take away from this discussion is that the 21 cm global signal
plays the role of a very sensitive calorimeter of the IGM gas temperature. Provided
that the coupling is saturated and that the IGM is close to neutral there is a direct
connection between the 21 cm brightness temperature and the IGM temperature.
Many models of physics beyond the standard model make concrete predictions for
exotic heating of the IGM. For example, dark matter annihilation in the early Universe
can act as a source of X-rays leading to heating. In this subsection, we consider some
of the possibilities that have been advanced for exotic heating mechanisms and discuss
the possibility of constraining them.
Perhaps the most commonly considered source of heating in the dark ages is that
of dark matter annihilation [79, 80, 81, 82, 83]. Dark matter is widely assumed to
explain the observed galaxy rotation curves as well as the detailed features of the
CMB acoustic peaks. Simple models of dark matter production and freeze out in the
early Universe lead to a prediction for the annihilation cross-section required to leave a
freeze out abundance corresponding to the measured value of the dark matter density
parameter, ΩDM .
Depending on the dark matter mass, which for fixed ΩDM determines the dark
matter number density nDM , annihilation of dark matter in the later Universe may be
an important source of heating. It is important to note that there are two regimes in
which dark matter annihilation may be important. Since the annihilation rate scales
as n2DM the rate may be large at early times where nDM has yet to be diluted by the
cosmic expansion. Alternatively, dark matter annihilation can become important once
significant numbers of collapsed dark matter halos form, leadin to a local enhancement
in the dark matter density [84].
Alternatives to dark matter annihilation include dark matter decaying into
standard model particles or photons leading to the deposition of energy in the IGM
[80, 81]. The different density dependence of dark matter decay and annihilation might
lead to distinguishable redshift evolution of the heating. Further, models where dark
matter contains an internal excited state that relaxes to the ground state releasing
energy have been proposed [85].
Many other scenarios for exotic heating of the IGM have been put forward,
emphasising the interest in a new technique for distinguishing models of new
physics. Primordial black holes produced in the early Universe may evaporate after
recombination if their masses lie in the range of 1014 − 1017 g [86] and the Hawking
radiation given off could provide a strong heating source [87]. Moving cosmic strings
produce wakes that stir the IGM imparting heat into the gas. These were originally
put forward as a source of density fluctuations for seeding the growth of structure.
While ruled out for this purpose, cosmic strings might be further constrained via their
heating effect on the IGM [88].

CONTENTS

24

Incorporating the heating effect arising from exotic sources requires a knowledge of
the energy spectrum of photons produced by the source, which must then be carefully
processed to determine how much of the radiative energy is ultimately deposited into
the IGM. The cross-section for photon absorption has a number of minima, which
reflect windows at which the IGM is transparent to photons so that rather than
being absorbed they may propagate to the present as a diffuse background. For
most scenarios, this consideration greatly constrains the amount of energy deposited
as heat in the IGM. Figure 5 illustrates the various processes that dominate the loss
of energy from an energetic photon at z = 300.
Photon absorption at z=300
optical depth per Hubble time (1/H)(dτ/dt)

10
photoionization

Compton

γ to e+e(ions)

1

0.1

γγCMB to γγ
γγCMB to e+e-

γ to e+e(atoms)

104

106
108
1010
proper photon energy (eV)

1012

Figure 5. Optical depths per time for various photon-IGM processes, in units of
the Hubble time, at z = 300, assuming a neutral IGM. These include processes
which deposit energy directly into the IGM (pair production and photoionization),
processes which redistribute photons (2γ → 2γ) and ones that do both (Compton).
At very low energies, photoionization is the dominant process; at very high
energies, e± pair production dominates [86].

3.8. Detectability of the global signal with small numbers of dipoles
The global 21 cm signal could potentially be measured by absolute temperature
measurements as a function of frequency, averaged over the sky. Since the global signal
is constant over different large patches of the sky, experimental efforts to measure it
do not need high angular resolution and can be carried out with just a single dipole.
The attempted measurement is complicated however by the need to remove galactic
foregrounds, which are much larger than the desired signal. Foreground removal is
predicated on the assumption of spectral smoothness of the foregrounds in contrast
to the frequency structure of the signal. This should allow removal of the foregrounds
by, for example, fitting a low order polynomial to the foregrounds leaving the 21
cm signal in the residuals. This methodology requires very precise calibration of the
instrumental frequency response, which could otherwise become confused with the
foregrounds.

CONTENTS

25

The first experimental efforts to detect the 21 cm global signal have been carried
out by the COsmological Reionization Experiment (CORE) [89] and the Experiment
to Detect the Reionization Step (EDGES) [90]. These have been analysed using a
tanh model of reionization that depends upon the redshift of reionization zr and
its duration ∆z. EDGES is presently able to rule out the most rapid models of
reionization that occur over a redshift interval as short as ∆z < 0.06 [91]. These
first experimental efforts should be seen as the first steps along a road that may lead
to considerably better constraints. Other experiments using different experimental
approaches are underway. Some of these use individual dipoles, such as the
Shaped Antenna measurement of the RAdio Spectrum (SARAS) (R. Subrahmanyan,
private communications) and the Broadband Instrument for the Global HydrOgen
ReionizatioN Signal (BIGHORNS) (S. Tingay, private communications), while others
are exploring ways of using many dipoles as with the Large-aperture Experiment to
Detect the Dark Ages (LEDA) (L. Greenhill, private communications).
Theoretical estimates for the ability of a single dipole experiment to constrain
models of the 21 cm signal can be made via the Fisher matrix formalism [92]. For a
single dipole experiment, the Fisher matrix may be written as [93]
Fij =

NX
channel
n=1

(2 + Btint )

d log Tsky (νn ) d log Tsky (νn )
,
dpi
dpj

(35)

where tint is the total integration time (before systematics limit the performance),
and we divide the total bandwidth B into Nchannel frequency bins {νn } running
between [νmin , νmax ]. For the 21 cm global signature, our observable is the antennae
temperature Tsky (ν) = Tfg (ν) + Tb (ν), where we assume the dipole sees the full sky so
that spatial variations can be ignored. Best case errors on the parameters {pi },qwhich
include both foreground and signal model parameters, are then given by σi ≤ Fii−1 .
Such estimates show that global 21 cm experiments should be able to constrain
realistic reionization models with ∆z . 2 [93, 94]. The results of integrating for 500
hours between 100-200 MHz with a single dipole are shown in Figure 6, where the
reionization history has been parametrized with a tanh function.
In addition to constraining reionization, global 21 cm experiments might be used
to probe the thermal evolution of the IGM at redshifts z > 12. Such high redshifts are
very difficult to probe via the 21 cm fluctuations (discussed later) since they require
very large collecting areas. Global experiments bypass this requirement, but still
suffer from the larger foregrounds at lower frequencies. By going to high redshifts
such experiments could place constraints on X-ray heating and Lyα coupling giving
information about when the first black holes and galaxies form, respectively. The
absorption feature resulting from this physics can potentially be larger (∼ 100 mK)
making it a good target for observations. Figure 7 shows how the global 21 cm signal
can vary with different values of fX and fα . Measuring the global signal would offer
a useful avenue for distinguishing these models although there is some degeneracy
between the two parameters.
EDGES type experiments at frequencies ν < 100 MHz are underway from the
ground and a lunar orbiting dipole experiment - the Dark Ages Radio Experiment
(DARE) [95] - has also been proposed. Lunar orbit offers a number of advantages
including being shielded from terrestrial radio frequency interference (RFI) while on
the far side of the moon and the ability to use the moon to chop the beam aiding
instrumental calibration [96]. DARE would be targeted at the 40-120 MHz range

CONTENTS

26

Figure 6. 95% constraint region on a “tanh” reionization model Tb (z) =
T21 tanh[(z − zr )/∆z] of the end of reionization for an EDGES-like experiment
assuming Npoly = 3 (solid curve), 6 (dashed curve), 9 (dotted curve), and 12 (dotdashed curve). Also plotted are the 68 and 95% contours for the WMAP5 electron
scattering optical depth constraint combined with a prior that xi (z = 6.5) > 0.95
(green and red coloured regions). [93]

Figure 7. Dependence of 21 cm signal on the X-ray (top panel) and Lyα (bottom
panel) emissivity. In each case, we consider examples with the emissivity reduced
or increased by a factor of up to 100. Note that in our model fX and f α are
really the product of the emissivity and the star formation efficiency.

CONTENTS

27

ideal for measuring the deep absorption feature and determining fX and fα .
4. 21 cm tomography
The 21 cm global signal can be viewed as a zeroth order approximation to the full
21 cm signal, as it is averaged over large angular scales. The full 3D signal will be
highly inhomogeneous as a result of the spatial variation in the different radiation
fields and properties of the IGM. In this section, we consider the physics underlying
21 cm brightness fluctuations in 3D and detail the existing techniques for calculating
the statistical properties of the signal.
Ultimately, one might wish to make use of fully numerical simulations of the
relevant physics and so produce detailed maps of the 21 cm signal along thelight cone.
At present, the large dynamic range required and the computational cost make this
a dream for the future. For the moment, it is important to make use of a variety
of analytic, semi-numerical, and numerical techniques to calculate the expected 21
cm signal. These different methods complement one another in speed, accuracy, and
detail as we describe below.
Fluctuations in the 21 cm signal may be expanded to linear order [3]
δTb = βb δb + βx δx + βα δα + βT δT − δ∂v ,

(36)

where each δi describes the fractional variation in the quantity i and we include
fluctuations in the baryon density (b), neutral fraction (x), Lyα coupling coefficient
(α), gas temperature (T), and line-of-sight peculiar velocity gradient (∂v). The
expansion coefficients are given by
xc
,
(37)
βb = 1 +
xtot (1 + xtot )
xHH − xeH
c
βx = 1 + c
,
xtot (1 + xtot )
xα
βα =
,
xtot (1 + xtot )


HH
Tγ
1
d log κeH
10
HH d log κ10
βT =
xeH
+
+
x
.
c
c
TK − Tγ
xtot (1 + xtot )
d log TK
d log TK
In this expression, we have treated all the terms as being of a similar size, but it
is important to realise that fluctuations in xH can be of order unity. This means
that terms in higher order of δx , which one might naively think to be small, can still
contribute at a significant level to the power spectrum.
In general, homogeneity and isotropy of the Universe suggest that the power
spectrum of brightness temperature fluctuations should be spherically symmetric in
Fourier space i.e. it should only depend on k = |k| for a wavevector k of a given
Fourier mode. However, redshift space distortions induced by peculiar velocities break
this symmetry since the direction to the observer becomes important and so only a
cylindrical symmetry is preserved. This symmetry may be useful in separating signal
from foregrounds, which typically do not share this symmetry (see e.g. Ref [97]). In
Fourier space and at linear order, we may write the peculiar velocity term δ∂v = −µ2 δ
[98], where µ is cosine of the angle between the line of sight and the wavevector k of
the Fourier mode. With this, we may use (36) to form the power spectrum
PTb (k, µ) = Pbb + Pxx + Pαα + PT T + 2Pbx

CONTENTS

28
+ 2Pbα + 2PbT + 2Pxα + 2PxT + 2PαT
+ Pxδxδ + other quartic terms
+ 2µ2 (Pbδ + Pxδ + Pαδ + PT δ )
+ µ4 Pδδ
+ 2Pxδδ∂v x + Pxδ∂v δ∂v x
+ other quartic terms with δ∂v .

(38)

Here we note that all quartic terms must be quadratic in xH and separate them
depending upon whether they contain powers of δ∂v or not. Those that contain powers
of δ∂v will not be isotropic and will lead to the angular dependence of PTb (see Ref.
[99] for further discussion).
We may rewrite Eq. (38) in more compact form
PTb (k, µ) = Pµ0 (k) + µ2 Pµ2 (k) + µ4 Pµ4 (k) + Pf (k,µ) (k, µ),

(39)

where we have grouped those quartic terms with anomalous µ dependence into
the term Pf (k,µ) (k, µ). In principle, high precision measurements of the 3D power
spectrum will allow the separation of PTb (k, µ) into these four terms by their angular
dependence on powers of µ2 [100]. The contribution of the Pf (k,µ) (k, µ) term, with its
more complicated angular dependence, threatens this decomposition [99]. Since this
term is only important during the final stages of reionization, we will not discuss it in
detail in this paper noting only that the angular decomposition by powers of µ2 may
not be possible when ionization fluctuations are important.
It is unclear whether the first generation of 21 cm experiments will be able to
achieve the high signal-to-noise required for this separation [99]. Instead, they might
measure the angle averaged quantity
P̄Tb (k) = Pµ0 (k) + Pµ2 (k)/3 + Pµ4 (k)/5,
(where we neglect the Pf (k,µ) (k, µ) term).
logarithmic interval ∆ = [k 3 P (k)/2π 2 ]1/2 .

(40)

One typically plots the power per

4.1. Redshift space distortions
Peculiar velocity effects can have a significant effect on the 21 cm signal. At linear
order, the effects of peculiar velocities are well understood [98, 100, 101] since the
δ∂v term is simply related to the total density field. However, as the density field
evolves and non-linear corrections to the velocity field become important the picture
can change in ways that are not yet well understood.
Redshift space effects become important because our observations are made in
frequency space, while theory makes predictions most directly in coordinate space.
The conversion between the two is affected by the local bulk velocity of the gas. We
may write the comoving distance to an object as
Z z
c dz 0
,
(41)
χz =
0
0
0 (1 + z )H(z )
where we introduce H as the comoving Hubble parameter. Using H makes the notion
compact and comes from introducing the conformal time coordinate η related to the
proper time t via dη = dt/a(t), where a(t) is the usual scale factor, so that the
comoving Hubble parameter H = (1/a)da(η)/dη.

CONTENTS

29

Including the effects of peculiar velocity, the true coordinate distance to an object
with measured redshift z is
χ = χz − v(x) · n̂/H|z .

(42)

Writing our coordinates as x = χn̂ in real space and s = χz n̂ in redshift space gives
the mapping between the two as
s = x + [v(x) · n̂/H]n̂

(43)

Accounting for this difference in the coordinate systems leads to the redshift space
distortions. In linear theory, we have
∇ · v(x) = −Hδ(x),

(44)

where we are assuming the Universe to be matter dominated so that the growth
factor f ≡ d log D+ /d log a = 1. The Fourier transform of this result introduces
the factor of µ2 . More generally, large peculiar velocities can lead to the so-called
“finger of god” effects from virialised structures and greatly complicate efforts to
separate components via the angular structure of the power spectrum [102, 103, 104].
Mistakenly attempting to use the form (40) would lead to significantly biased results
[103], and so new estimators calibrated by simulations are needed.
4.2. Ionization fluctuations
Reionization is a complicated process involving the balancing of ionizing photons
originating in highly clustered collections of galaxies and recombinations in dense
clumps of matter. It is perhaps surprising then that one can produce remarkably
robust models of the topology of reionization by simply counting the number of ionizing
photons. This basic insight lies at the center of the analytic calculation of ionization
fluctuations [36, 105].
Imagine a spherical region of gas containing a total mass of ionized gas mion .
As an ansatz for determining whether this region of gas will be ionized, we can ask
whether the region contains a quantity of galaxies sufficient to ionize it. Connecting
to the language we set up earlier when discussing the 21 cm global signal, we ask
whether the following condition is satisfied
mion ≥ ζmgal ,

(45)

where ζ is the ionizing efficiency and mgal is the total mass in galaxies. Note this is
essentially the condition that the galaxies produce enough ionizing photons to have
ionized all the gas within the region.
This condition equates to asking if the collapse fraction exceeds a critical value
fcoll ≥ fx ≡ ζ −1 . From the definition of the collapse fraction (making use of the
Press-Schechter [106] mass fraction for analytic simplicity), these can be translated
into a condition on the mass overdensity if a region is to self ionize
√
 2
1/2
− σ 2 (m)
,
(46)
δm ≥ δx (m, z) ≡ δc (z) − 2K(ζ) σmin
where K(ζ) = erf −1 (1−ζ −1 ). This condition to self-ionization can be used to calculate
the probability distribution of ionized regions or bubble sizes nbub (m) by reference to
the excursion set formalism [107]. Smoothing a Gaussian density field on decreasing
mass scales corresponds to a random walk in overdensity. Once the overdensity for
a region crosses the ionization threshold, the mass enclosed will be ionized. This is
similar to the mass function calculations of Press-Schechter or Sheth-Tormen, except

CONTENTS

30

with a mass dependent rather than constant barrier. The distribution of bubbles sizes
found from this analytic calculation has been shown to be a good match to numerical
reionization simulations at the same neutral fraction [108, 109].
To connect the bubble distribution (a one-point statistic) to the power spectrum
(a two-point statistic) requires extra thought. It is possible to generalise the basic
excursion set formalism to keep track of two correlated random walks corresponding
to two spatially separated locations. This very directly gives the two-point correlation
function for the ionization (or density) field [110, 111]. Unfortunately the resulting
expressions are somewhat complicated to deal with and simpler more approximate
calculations can be more useful. We follow Ref. [36], which incorporates some simple
ansatzes for the form of Pxx and Pxδ based upon the expected clustering properties
of the bubbles.
4.3. Fluctuations in the coupling
Next we consider fluctuations in the Lyα coupling [33, 24]. Provided that we neglect
the mild temperature dependence of Sα [31], the fluctuations in the coupling are simply
sourced by fluctuations in the flux and we may write δα = δJα .
Density perturbations at redshift z 0 source fluctuations in Jα seen by a gas element
at redshift z via three effects. First, the number of galaxies traces, but is biased with
respect to, the underlying density field. As a result an overdense region will contain a
factor [1 + b(z 0 )δ] more sources, where b(z 0 ) is the (mass-averaged) bias, and will emit
more strongly. Next, photon trajectories near an overdense region are modified by
gravitational lensing, increasing the effective area by a factor (1 + 2δ/3). Finally,
peculiar velocities associated with gas flowing into overdense regions establish an
anisotropic redshift distortion, which modifies the width of the region contributing to a
given observed frequency. Given these three effects, we can write δα = δJα = Wα (k)δ,
where we compute the window function Wα,? (k) for a gas element at z by adding the
coupling due to Lyα flux from each of the Lyn resonances and integrating over radial
shells [33],

Wα,? (k) =

1

nX
max Z zmax (n)

Jα,? n=2
0

D(z )
×
D(z)

(n)

dz 0

z



dJα
dz 0


2
[1 + b(z )]j0 (kr) − j2 (kr) ,
3
0

(47)

where D(z) is the linear growth function, r = r(z, z 0 ) is the distance to the source, and
the jl (x) are spherical Bessel functions of order l. The first term in brackets accounts
for galaxy bias while the second describes velocity effects. The ratio D(z 0 )/D(z)
accounts for the growth of perturbations between z 0 and z. Each resonance contributes
(n)
a differential comoving Lyα flux dJα /dz 0 , calculated from equation (33). This
analytic prescription has been bound to match later simulations fairly well [112]. At
present, simulations generally do not account for the full Lyα radiative transfer so this
agreement is not unexpected and comparisons to future, more detailed simulations will
be needed.
On large scales, Wα,? (k) approaches the average bias of sources, while on small
scales it dies away rapidly encoding the property that the Lyα flux becomes more
uniform. In addition to the fluctuations in Jα,? , there will be fluctuations in Jα,X . We

CONTENTS

31

discuss these below,
P but note in passing that the effective value of Wα is the weighted
average Wα = i Wα,i (Jα,i /Jα ) of the contribution from stars and X-rays.
This description of the coupling fluctuations neglects one important piece of
physics. Namely, it assumes that UV photons redshift until they reach the line center
of a Lyman series resonance and only then they scatter. At redshifts before reionization
the Universe is filled with neutral hydrogen leading to an optical depth for scattering
of Lyα photons that is very large τα & 105 . While this is reduced for higher series
transitions, the Universe is optically thick for all but the highest n transitions. This
has the consequence that photons will preferentially scatter in the wings of the line
and only a few will make it to line center.
The related implications have been investigated in the literature [113, 114, 115].
Since UV photons scatter in the wings of the line they will travel a significantly reduced
distance from the source before scattering. This reduces the size of the coupled region
around a source and acts to steepen the flux profile surrounding a source. These effects
increase the variance in the Lyα flux on small scales. This can be incorporated into our
(n)
analytic formalism as a modification to the dJα /dz 0 term in (47) to account for the
modified flux profile around individual sources. For our purposes, we will neglect this
since it adds considerable numerical complication without modifying the qualitative
features of the power spectrum.
Once the effect of the optical depth is taken into account, another limitation of this
approach becomes apparent. We have assumed that the photons propagate through a
uniform IGM with mean properties. Density inhomogeneities and especially velocity
flows may modify the propagation and scattering of UV photons leading to extra
fluctuations that have not been accounted for here.
This becomes especially apparent when one recalls that the sources are placed
in ionized bubbles. This means that on small scales there are regions where there is
no coupling because there is no neutral hydrogen. A simple way to account for this
is by changing the lower limit of (47) to zHII , the typical size of an ionized region
[115]. Clearly, if the patch of gas being considered is closer to a source than the HII
region that surrounds that source then the patch will be ionized and there will be no
signal. This leads to a reduction in power on small scales. For the sharp cutoff of
[115] one numerically sees oscillation in the power spectrum, but in reality averaging
over a distribution of ionized bubble sizes would remove these oscillations yielding a
smooth reduction in power.
4.4. Formalism for temperature and ionization fluctuations from X-rays
We next turn to fluctuations in the gas temperature and the free electron fraction
in the IGM. Following on from our discussion of the global history, we will assume
that the evolution of TK and xe is driven by the effect of X-rays and will consider the
fluctuations δT , and δe that arise from clustering of the X-ray sources. In doing so,
we will follow the approach of Ref. [53].
Before plunging into the calculation, it is worth detailing some of the issues that
face radiative transfer of X-ray photons. The cross-section for X-ray photoionization
depends sensitively on photon energy E, σ ∼ E −3 , so that we must keep track of
separate energies. Most importantly, this energy dependence means that the IGM
is optically thick for soft X-rays (E ∼ 20eV), but optically thin for hard X-rays
(E & 1keV). Moreover, heating is a continuous process and the temperature of a gas
element depends on its past history. This is different from UV coupling where only

CONTENTS

32

the Lyα flux at a given redshift is important. We must therefore be careful to track
the change in fluctuations in the heating and integrate these to get the temperature
fluctuations at a later time. Insight can be gained by looking at the results of 1D
numerical simulations of X-ray radiative transfer [52, 54].
The prescription we adopt here describes X-ray fluctuations produced by the
clustering of X-ray sources. We neglect the possibility of Poisson fluctuations in the
distribution of X-ray sources, since it is not clear how to calculate this. Poisson
fluctuations in the Lyα flux were considered in [33], but the formalism is not readily
applicable to heating. As a result, this formalism is most appropriate in scenarios
where X-ray sources are relatively common and would not be appropriate for describing
heating by extremely rare quasars [116].
We begin by forming equations for the evolution of δT and δe (the fractional
fluctuation in xe ) by perturbing equations (15) and (17) (see also [117, 50]). This
gives
2 dδ X 2Λ̄heat,i
dδT
−
=
[δΛheat,i − δT ],
(48)
dt
3 dt
3kB T̄K
i
(1 − x̄e )
dδe
=
Λ̄e [δΛe − δe ] − αA C x̄e n̄H [δe + δ],
dt
x̄e

(49)

where an overbar denotes the mean value of that quantity, and Λ = /n is the
ionization or heating rate per baryon. We note that the fluctuation in the neutral
fraction δx is simply related to the fluctuation in the free electron fraction by
δx = −xe /(1 − xe )δe .
Our challenge then is to fill in the right hand side of these equations by calculating
the fluctuations in the heating and ionizing rates. We will focus here on Compton and
X-ray heating processes. Perturbing equation (24) we find that the contribution of
Compton scattering to the right hand side of equation (48) becomes [50]
2Λ̄heat,C
a−4
x̄e
[δΛheat,C − δT ] =
1 + fHe + x̄e tγ
3kB T̄K
 


T̄γ
T̄γ
× 4
− 1 δ Tγ +
(δTγ − δT ) ,(50)
T̄K
T̄K
where δTγ is the fractional fluctuation in the CMB temperature, and we have ignored
the effect of ionization variations in the neutral fraction outside of the ionized bubbles,
which are small. Before recombination, tight coupling sets TK = Tγ and δT = δTγ .
This coupling leaves a scale dependent imprint in the temperature fluctuations, which
slowly decreases in time. We will ignore this effect, as it is small (∼ 10%) below z = 20
and once X-ray heating becomes effective any memory of these early temperature
fluctuations is erased. At low z, the amplitude of fluctuations in the CMB δTγ becomes
negligible, and equation (50) simplifies. Our main challenge then is to calculate the
fluctuations in the X-ray heating. We shall achieve this by paralleling the approach we
took to calculating fluctuations in the Lyα flux from a population of stellar sources.
First, note that for X-rays δΛion = δΛheat = δΛα = δΛX , as the rate of heating,
ionization, and production of Lyα photons differ only by constant multiplicative
factors (provided that we may neglect fluctuations in xe , which are small, and focus
on X-ray energies E & 100eV). In each case, fluctuations arise from variation in the
X-ray flux. We then write δΛX = WX (k)δ and obtain,

CONTENTS

33

Z z?
Z ∞
dΛX (E)
1
dz 0
dE
WX (k) =
dz 0
Λ̄X Eth
z


0
D(z )
2
0
×
[1 + b(z )]j0 (kr) − j2 (kr) ,
D(z)
3

(51)

where the contribution to the energy deposition rate by X-rays of energy E emitted
with energy E 0 from between redshifts z 0 and z 0 + dz 0 is given by
4π
dΛX (E)
dJX (E, z)
=
(E − Eth ),
(52)
σν (E)
dz 0
h
dz 0
where σν (E) is the cross-section for photo-ionization, Eth is the minimum energy
threshold required for photo-ionization, and Λ̄X is obtained by performing the energy
and redshift integrals. Note that rather than having a sum over discrete levels, as
in the Lyα case, we must integrate over the X-ray energies. The differential X-ray
number flux is found from equation (28).
The window function WX (k) gives us a “mask” to relate fluctuations to the
density field; its scale dependence means that it is more than a simple bias. The
typical sphere of influence of the sources extends out to several Mpc. On scales
smaller than this, the shape of WX (k) will be determined by the details of the X-ray
source spectrum and the heating cross-section. On larger scales, the details of the
heated regions remain unresolved so that WX (k) will trace the density fluctuations.
An X-ray is emitted with energy E 0 at a redshift z 0 and redshifts to an energy
E at redshift z, where it is absorbed. To calculate WX we perform two integrals in
order to capture the contribution of all X-rays produced by sources at redshifts z 0 > z.
The integral over z 0 counts X-rays emitted at all redshifts z 0 > z which redshift to
an energy E at z; the integral over E then accounts for all the X-rays of different
energies arriving at the gas element. Together, these integrals account for the full
X-ray emission history and source distribution. Many of these X-rays have travelled
considerable distances before being absorbed. The effect of the intervening gas is
accounted for by the optical depth term in JX . Soft X-rays have a short mean free
path and are absorbed close to the source; hard X-rays will travel further, redshifting
as they go, before being absorbed. Correctly accounting for this redshifting when
calculating the optical depth is crucial as the absorption cross-section shows strong
frequency dependence. In our model, heating is dominated by soft X-rays, from nearby
sources, although the contribution of harder X-rays from more distant sources can not
be neglected.
Returning now to the calculation of temperature fluctuations, to obtain solutions
for equations (48) and (49), we let δT = gT (k, z)δ, δe = ge (k, z)δ, δα = Wα (k, z)δ, and
δΛX = WX (k, z)δ [98]. Since we do not assume these quantities to be independent
of scale we must solve the resulting equations for each value of k. Note that we do
not include the scale dependence induced by coupling to the CMB [50]. In the matter
dominated limit, we have δ ∝ (1 + z)−1 and so obtain


dgT
gT − 2/3
=
− QX (z)[WX (k) − gT ] − QC (z)gT ,
(53)
dz
1+z


dge
ge
=
− QI (z)[WX (k) − ge ] + QR (z)[1 + ge ],
(54)
dz
1+z

CONTENTS

34

where we define
QI (z) ≡

(1 − x̄e ) Λ̄ion,X
,
x̄e
(1 + z)H(z)

(55)

QR (z) ≡

αA C x̄e n̄H
,
(1 + z)H(z)

(56)

QC (z) ≡

(1 + z)3 Tγ
,
1 + fHe + x̄e tγ H(z) T̄K

(57)

QX (z) ≡

2Λ̄heat,X
.
3kB T̄K (1 + z)H(z)

(58)

x̄e

and

These are defined so that QR and QI give the fractional change in xe per Hubble
time as a result of recombination and ionization respectively. Similarly, QC and QX
give the fractional change in T̄K per Hubble time as a result of Compton and X-ray
heating. Immediately after recombination QC is large, but it becomes negligible once
Compton heating becomes ineffective at z ∼ 150. The QR term becomes important
only towards the end of reionization, when recombinations in clumpy regions slows the
expansion of HII regions. Only the QX and QI terms are relevant immediately after
sources switch on. We must integrate these equations to calculate the temperature
and ionization fluctuations at a given redshift and for a given value of k.
These equations illuminate the effect of heating. First, consider gT , which is
related to the adiabatic index of the gas γa by gT = γa − 1, giving it a simple
physical interpretation. Adiabatic expansion and cooling tends to drive gT → 2/3
(corresponding to γa = 5/3, appropriate for a monoatomic ideal gas), but when
Compton heating is effective at high z, it deposits an equal amount of heat per
particle, driving the gas towards isothermality (gT → 0). At low z, when X-ray
heating of the gas becomes significant, the temperature fluctuations are dominated
by spatial variation in the heating rate (gT → WX ). This embodies the higher
temperatures closer to clustered sources of X-ray emission. If the heating rate is
uniform WX (k) ≈ 0, then the spatially constant input of energy drives the gas towards
isothermality gT → 0.
The behaviour of ge is similarly straightforward to interpret. At high redshift,
when the IGM is dense and largely neutral, the ionization fraction is dominated by the
recombination rate, driving gx → −1, because denser regions recombine more quickly.
As the density decreases and recombination becomes ineffective, the first term of
equation (54) gradually drives gx → 0. Again, once ionization becomes important,
the ionization fraction is driven towards tracking spatial variation in the ionization
rate (gx → WX ). Note that, because the ionization fraction in the bulk remains less
than a few percent, fluctuations in the neutral fraction remain negligibly small at all
times.
Fluctuations in the temperature gT attempt to track the heating fluctuations
WX (k), but two factors prevent this. First, until heating is significant, the effect of
adiabatic expansion tends to smooth out variations in gT . Second, gT responds to the
integrated history of the heating fluctuations, so that it tends to lag WX somewhat.
When the bulk of star formation has occurred recently, as when the star formation
rate is increasing with time, then there is little lag between gT and WX . In contrast,
when the star formation rate has reached a plateau or is decreasing the bulk of the

CONTENTS

35

X-ray flux originates from noticeably higher z and so gT tends to track the value of
WX at this higher redshift. On small scales, the heating fluctuations are negligible
and gT returns to the value of the (scale independent) uniform heating case.
4.5. Evolution of the full power spectrum
Having described the different components of the 21 cm power spectrum, we now
need to put them together. The 21 cm power spectrum is a 3D quantity observed as
a function of scale and redshift, much like a movie evolving with time on a 2D screen.
Displaying this information on a static 2D paper is therefore challenging.
Figure 8 shows the evolution of the power spectrum as a function of redshift
for several fixed k-values. Four key epochs can be picked out. At early times
z & 30 before star formation, the power spectrum rises towards a peak at z ≈ 50
and falls thereafter as the 21 cm power spectrum tracks the density field modulated
by the mean brightness temperature. Once stars switch on, there is a period of
complicated evolution as coupling and temperature fluctuations become important.
Next, ionization fluctuations become important culminating in the loss of signal at
the end of reionization. Thereafter, a weaker signal arises from the remaining neutral
hydrogen in dense clumps that grows as structures continue to collapse.

Figure 8. Evolution of power spectrum fluctuations. The different curves show
P (k, z) as a function of z at fixed k for k = 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10 Mpc−1 . Diagonal
lines show Tfg (ν), the foreground temperature reduced by a factor  ranging from
10−3 − 10−9 to indicate the level of foreground removal required to detect the
signal [78].

Diagonal lines in Figure 8 show the amplitude of the mean foreground reduced by
a factor ranging from 10−3 −10−9 (note that it is really fluctuations in the foregrounds
that set the upper limit, but this is less well known than the mean level). This gives
a measure of the difficulty of removing the foregrounds and the sensitivity of the

CONTENTS

36

instrument required for a detection. This diagonal lines serve to identify the most
readily accessible epochs. The 10−5 line identifies the level required to: (i) access
density fluctuations at z . 4; (ii) access ionization fluctuations at z ≈ 6 − 12; and (iii)
detect fluctuations from heating and coupling at z ≈ 20. It is perhaps surprising that
a similar sensitivity is needed for all three of these regimes, since the foregrounds grow
monotonically with decreasing frequency. This is explained by the strong evolution
in the amplitude of the signal. The fourth epoch at z ≈ 30 − 50 of the dark ages is
considerably more difficult to detect, requiring the 10−7 level of foreground removal.
4.6. Other sources of fluctuations
We have focussed on fluctuations in the 21 cm signal that arise from spatial variation
in three main radiation fields - UV, Lyα , and X-rays. Other sources of fluctuations
from the non-linear growth of structure are possible.
Since the 21 cm signal arises from neutral hydrogen it is interesting to examine
the densest regions of neutral hydrogen. These occur in those dense clumps that have
achieved the critical density for collapse, but that lack the mass for efficient cooling
of the gas that would lead to star formation. This requirement is satisfied for halos of
with virial temperature below 104 K provided that only atomic hydrogen is available
for cooling or for halos with Tvir . 300K if molecular hydrogen is present. These
minihalos should be abundant in the early Universe, although at later times external
ionizing radiation may cause them to evaporate. Furthermore, their formation may
be prevented with moderate gas heating that raises the Jean’s mass suppressing the
collapse of these low mass objects. The high density in these regions implies that
collisions can provide the main coupling mechanism and due to the high temperature
of the virialised gas these minihalos are bright in 21 cm emission [118, 119, 120, 121].
When baryons and photons decouple at z ≈ 1, 100 there is a sudden drop in
the pressure supporting the baryons against gravitational collapse and they begin to
fall into dark matter overdensities. It was recently realised that the relative velocity
between the baryons and dark matter exceeds
local sound speed (which drops
√ the p
dramatically from the relativistic value of c/ 3 to ∼ kB T /mp ) leading to supersonic
flows [122]. These flows have the potential to suppress the formation of the first
gas clouds by preventing the baryons from collapsing into dark matter halos with
low escape velocities [123]. This suppression of galaxy formation in minihalos may
have important consequences for the 21 cm signal during its earliest phases - for
example, delaying the onset of Lyα coupling. It has even been suggested that the
increased modulation of the earliest galaxies might boost the Lyα coupling fluctuations
significantly [124]. Ultimately, it appears that as the higher mass halos required for
atomic cooling begin to collapse, the memory of this effect is greatly reduced [125, 126].
It is possible that by suppressing the building blocks of larger galaxies mild echos
of this effect might be detectable in late galaxies in a similar way to the effects of
inhomogeneous reionization [127, 128, 129].
In the local Universe, shocks are known to be an important mechanism for IGM
heating. Shocks heat the gas directly converting bulk motion into thermal energy.
If magnetic fields are present in the shock, strong shocks can also accelerate charged
particles. This can lead to radiative emission of photons at energies from radio to
X-ray energies due to inverse Compton scattering of CMB photons from the charged
particle. The resulting X-rays can further heat the IGM. At high redshift, shocks can
be broadly divided into two categories: strong shocks around large scale structure and

CONTENTS

37

weak shocks in the diffuse IGM due to the low sound speed of the gas.
Large scale structure shocks occur as gas surrounding an overdense region
decouples from the Hubble flow and undergoes turnaround. As the gas begins to
collapse inwards derivations from spherical symmetry will lead to shell crossing and
shocking of the gas. These shocks have been discussed both analytically [39] and
observed in simulations [20, 121]. The temperature distribution of shocked gas can be
estimated using a Press-Schecter formalism under the assumption that all gas that has
undergone turn around has shocked and estimating the shock temperature from the
characteristic peculiar velocity of the collapsing overdense region. These models show
that, in the absence of X-ray heating, the thermal energy of the IGM is dominated
by large scale shocks. Since these shocks trace the collapse of structure, they only
become significant at redshifts z . 20. These shocks cannot play an important role in
ionizing the IGM, since only a small fraction of the baryons participate in them and
they generate . 1eV per participating baryon at z & 10 [130].
Finally, we note that there is one final radiation background that could in principle
lead to fluctuations in the 21 cm signal: the diffuse radio background. In our
calculations, we have assumed that the ambient 21 cm radiation field is dominated by
the CMB, so that Tγ = TCMB . This is likely to be a good assumption, but one can
imagine a situation in which the 21 cm flux might be influenced by nearby radio bright
sources. Since 21 cm photons have a large mean free path a diffuse radio background
may build up in the same way as the diffuse X-ray background grows. Fluctuations in
this radio background would arise from clustering of the radio sources. We note that
the only period where these fluctuations would be important are in the regime where
Lyα and collisional coupling are unimportant, so that the spin temperature relaxes to
the ambient radiation temperature Tγ .
4.7. Simulation techniques
In the previous sections we have focused on analytical descriptions of calculating the 21
cm signal. These provide a framework for understanding the underlying physics that
governs the signal. They also provide a method for rapidly exploring the dependence
of the 21 cm power spectrum on a wide range of astrophysical parameters and
determining their relative importance. Ultimately, the interpretation of observations
requires comparison of data to theoretical predictions at a more detailed level. This
necessitates the production of maps from numerical techniques. In this section we
describe a hierarchy of different levels of numerical approximations that allow more
quantitative comparisons. A more detailed review can be found in Ref. [131].
Closest to the analytic techniques described in this review are semi-numerical
techniques. These are primarily techniques for simulating the reionization field based
upon an extension of the excursion set formalism [107, 39, 108]. It has been realised
that the spectrum of ionized fluctuations depends primarily on a single parameter the ionized fraction xi [132]. Once xi is fixed the ionization pattern can be calculated
by filtering the density field on progressively smaller scales and asking if a region is
capable of self-ionization. Only those regions capable of self-ionization are taken to be
ionized; this amounts to photon counting. This technique forms the basis of a number
of codes, 21cmFAST [133], SIMFAST21 [134], which can rapidly calculate the 21 cm
signal with reasonable accuracy. To add in fluctuations in the Lyα and temperature
these codes also evaluate the equivalent of the analytic calculations from §4.4. The
relevant expressions are convolutions of the density field with a kernel describing the

CONTENTS

38

astrophysics and so may be rapidly evaluated on a numerical grid via fast Fourier
transform (FFT) techniques. Other semi-numerical techniques exist such as BEARS
[135], which is based upon painting spherically symmetric ionization, heating, or
coupling profiles from a library of 1D radiative transfer calculations appropriately
scaled for a halos star-formation rate and formation time onto the density field.
Fully numerical simulations are the ultimate destination for these calculations,
but as of yet it is difficult to achieve the required simulation volume and dynamic
range required for the full calculation of the 21 cm signal. Numerical simulations
can be broadly split into two classes: those that fully account for gas hydrodynamics
and those that do not. The latter are essentially dark matter N-body calculations
with a prescription for painting baryons onto the simulation in a post-processing step.
Radiative transfer prescriptions are then applied in a further post-processing step to
calculate the evolution of the ionized regions. Such calculations [102, 132, 136, 137]
are of great utility in describing the large scale properties of the 21 cm signal. Full
hydrodynamic calculations [138] are typically restricted to smaller volumes making
them unrepresentative of the cosmic volume. They have the advantage of selfconsistently evolving the dark matter, baryons, and radiation field. This allows the
evolution of photon sinks, in the form of mini-halos and dense clumps, to be studied
in detail. As computers improve these simulations will grow in size.
Finally, most of the simulation work to date has focussed on reionization and
made the assumption that TS  TCMB ignoring the effect of spin-temperature
fluctuations. For predicting the 21 cm signal it is important that analytic calculations
of these TS variation be verified numerically. Work on incorporating Lyα and X-ray
propagation into reionization simulations exists, but is at an early stage of development
[114, 139, 140]. These calculations require keeping track of the radiative transfer of
photons in many frequency bins and so becomes numerically expensive.
4.8. Detectability of the 21 cm signal
Our focus in this review is on the physics underlying the 21 cm signal, but it is
appropriate to pause for a moment and consider the instrumental requirements for
detecting the signal. We direct the interested reader to the review in Ref. [4], which
covers the near term prospects for detecting the 21 cm signal from reionization in
some detail.
The 21 cm line from the epoch of reionization is redshifted to meter wavelengths
requiring radio frequency observations. While a typical radio telescope is made of a
single large dish, an interferometer composed of many dipole anntenae is the preferred
design for 21 cm observations. Cross-correlating the signals from individual dipoles
allows a beam to be synthesised on the sky. Using dipoles allows for arrays with very
large collecting areas and a large field of view suitable for surveys. This comes at the
cost of large computational demands and, driven by the long wavelengths, relatively
poor angular resolution (∼ 10 arcmin, which corresponds to the predicted bubble size
at the middle of reionization).
The sensitivity of these arrays is determined in part by the distribution of the
elements, with a concentrated core configuration giving the highest sensitivity to the
power spectrum [141]. The desire for longer baselines to boost the angular resolution in
order to remove radio point sources places constraints on the compactness achievable
in practice.
The variance of a 21 cm power spectrum measurement with a radio array for a

CONTENTS

39

single k-mode with line of sight component k|| = µk is given by [141]:
"
 2 # 2
1
1 D2 ∆D λ2
2
2
2
σP (k, µ) =
T̄b P21 (k, µ) + Tsys
. (59)
Nfield
Btint n(k⊥ ) Ae
We restrict our attention to modes in the upper-half plane of the wavevector k,
and include both sample variance and thermal detector noise assuming Gaussian
statistics. The first term on the right-hand-side of the above expression provides
the contribution from sample variance, while the second describes the thermal noise
of the radio telescope. The thermal noise depends upon the system temperature Tsys ,
the survey bandwidth B, the total observing time tint , the comoving distance D(z)
to the center of the survey at redshift z, the depth of the survey ∆D, the observed
wavelength λ, and the effective collecting area of each antennae tile Ae . The effect of
the configuration of the antennae is encoded in the number density of baselines n⊥ (k)
that observe a mode with transverse wavenumber k⊥ [142]. Observing a number of
fields Nfield further reduces the variance.
4.9. Statistics beyond the power spectrum
In our discussion of the 21 cm fluctuations, we have focussed on the power spectrum
as a statistical quantity that can be measured from maps of the sky. When
experiments lack the sensitivity to image the 21 cm fluctuations at high signal to
noise it is important to compress the information into statistical quantities that can
be accurately measured. If 21 cm fluctuations were Gaussian then the power spectrum
would contain all information about the signal. However, the 21 cm signal is highly
non-Gaussian since the presence of ionized bubbles or spheres that have been heated
imprints definite features in space. It is therefore important to think about nonGaussian statistics that can be used to extract information that is not contained in
the power spectrum from 21 cm observations.
The simplest form of non-Gaussianity that arises in the 21 cm signal is the
primordial non-Gaussianity induced in the density field during inflation. This is often
characterised by the fNL parameter defined by assuming a quadratic correction to
the inflaton potential so that schematically φ = φG + fNL φ2G , with φ the full inflaton
potential and φG the Gaussian potential. This form of non-Gaussianity shows up
clearly in the bispectrum, the Fourier transform of the 3pt correlation function [143].
Measuring fNL is an important goal of cosmology since it can effectively distinguish
between different classes of inflationary potential. Unfortunately, fNL is expected to be
small (∼ (1 − ns ) ∼ 0.05 for slow roll inflation models) and constraints from the CMB
and galaxy surveys are relatively weak [144]. One long term hope is that observations
of the pristine 21 cm signal at z > 30 could lead to very stringent non-Gaussianity
constraints, since such surveys can probe very large volumes of space [145, 146].
In the near term, studies of 21 cm non-Gaussianity will be most useful for learning
about astrophysics in more detail. Ionized bubbles during reionization will imprint
a particular form of non-Gaussianity on the 21 cm signal that should contain useful
information about the sizes and topology of ionized regions. The challenge is to
develop statistics matched to that form of non-Gaussianity, which is currently an
unsolved problem. Some examples of statistics that have been explored are the 1 pt
function (or probability distribution function) of the 21 cm brightness field, which
develops a skewness as reionization leads to many pixels with zero signal [39, 147];
the Euler characteristic [148], which determines the number of holes in a connected

CONTENTS

40

surface; and there are many other possibilities including the bispectrum, wavelets, and
threshold statistics [149] that have yet to be properly explored. In addition to new
statistics, it is possible for signatures of non-Gaussianity to show up as a modification
to the shape of the power spectrum [150].
4.10. Prospects for cosmology
In this review, we have mostly focused on the ability of the 21 cm signal to constrain
different aspects of astrophysics and the physics that needs to be understood in order to
do so. In the first instance the effects of the astrophysics of galaxy formation needs to
be understood before fundamental physics can be addressed. Once this is understood
there is considerable potential for addressing cosmology. 21 cm observations represent
one of the only ways of accessing the large volumes and linear modes present at
high redshifts. Studies show that 21 cm experiments have considerable potential to
improve on measurements of cosmological parameters [99, 151], on models of inflation
[152, 153], and on measurements of the neutrino mass [154].
We have touched upon the possibility of constraining exotic heating and structure
formation in the early Universe via the 21 cm global signal. These experiments are
primarily sensitive to key transitions such as the onset of Lyα coupling, the onset of
heating, and the reionization of the Universe. These key moments can be affected by
different heating mechanisms in similar ways and so most likely will provide upper
limits on the contribution of exotic physics. Such elements as heating by dark matter
decay or annihilation [80, 81, 82, 83], evaporating primordial blackholes [86], or other
such physics might all be constrained.
Ideally one would target the cosmic dark ages, where the 21 cm signal depends
on well-understood linear physics. In this regime, one would have the possibility of
making precision measurements similar to the CMB, but at many different redshifts.
This represents the long term goal of 21 cm observations as a tool of cosmology.
Unfortunately, many technical challenges need to be overcome before this is realistic.
Foregrounds become much larger relative to the signal at the low frequencies relevant
for the cosmic dark ages. This requires large experiments to achieve the required
sensitivity. Since the sensitivity of an interferometer to the 21 cm power spectrum
typically decreases on smaller angular scales as a result of fewer long baselines, large
angular scales are easier to access. It was shown in [155] that an experiment with 10
km2 collecting area could detect a constrained isocurvature mode via its signature on
large angular scales in the 21 cm power spectrum at z ≈ 30. In contrast, detecting
the running of the primordial power spectrum via the 21 cm power spectrum on scales
k & 1 Mpc−1 requires experiments with &10 km2 to achieve the necessary sensitivity
[153].
These low frequencies will probably require escaping the Earth’s ionosphere to
space or the lunar surface [156]. The payoff would be unprecedented precision on
cosmological parameters and a precise picture of the earliest stages of structure
formation. This could lend insight into fundamental physics of phenomena like
variations in the fine-structure constant [157] and the presence of cosmic superstrings
[158].
More accessible in the near future, is the EoR where the astrophysics of star
formation must be disentangled to get at cosmology. This will likely involve the use
of redshift space distortions and astrophysical modeling as a way of removing the
astrophysics leaving the cosmological signal behind. In the future, with sensitivity

CONTENTS

41

sufficient to image the 21 cm fluctuations one can imagine developing sophisticated
algorithms to exploit the full 3D information in the maps to separate astrophysics,
much as one currently removes foregrounds in the CMB. This has not been studied in
great detail, but preliminary work on modelling out the contribution of reionization
appears promising.
It has been shown in simulations that just one parameter - the ionized fraction xi
- does a good job of describing the ionization power spectrum at the few percent level.
This arises from well understood physics and amounts to a simple photon counting
argument. Thus, at first order we might hope to be able to predict the ionization
contribution to the 21 cm signal during reionization and marginalise over it in the
same manner as the bias of galaxies in galaxy surveys. At higher levels of precision,
accounting for the modifications from the clustering of the sources or sinks of ionizing
photons will become important. Modelling of the ionization power spectrum need only
degrade cosmological constraints by factors of a few [151].
5. Intensity mapping in atomic and molecular lines
5.1. 21 cm intensity mapping and dark energy
Reionization eliminated most of the neutral hydrogen in the Universe, but not all.
In overdense regions the column depth can be sufficient for self-shielding to preserve
neutral hydrogen. Examples of such pockets of neutral hydrogen are seen as damped
Lyα systems in quasar spectra. Whereas the pre-reionization 21 cm signal provides
information about the topology of ionized region, the post-reionization signal describes
the clustering of collapsed halos based on the underlying density field of matter.
The notion of intensity mapping of 21 cm bright galaxies was introduced in several
papers [159, 160, 161], and similar ideas were discussed by [162]. The starting point
was the many experimental efforts to detect the 21 cm signal from the epoch of
reionization when the IGM is close to fully neutral. After reionization approximately
1% of the baryons are contained in neutral hydrogen (ΩHI ≈ 0.01). Although this
reduces the signal significantly relative to a fully neutral IGM, the amplitude of
Galactic synchrotron emission (which provides the dominant foreground) is several
orders of magnitude less at the frequencies corresponding to 21 cm emission at redshifts
z = 1 − 3. Consequently, the signal to noise ratio for radio experiments targeted
at intensity mapping might be expected to be comparable to experiments targeted
at the epoch of reionization (EoR). In both cases, the new technologies driven by
developments in computing power makes possible previous unattempted observations.
Such observations would be extremely important for our understanding of the
Universe. It is perhaps humbling to realise that existing observations from the CMB
and galaxy surveys fill only a small fraction of the potentially observable Universe.
Figure 9a shows the available comoving volume out to a given redshift. At present,
the deepest sky survey over a considerable fraction of the sky is the first Sloan Digital
Sky Survey (SDSS), whose luminous red galaxies (LRG) sample has a mean redshift
of z ≈ 0.3. By measuring the 21 cm intensity fluctuations at z = 1 − 3 the comoving
volume probed by experiment would be increased by two orders of magnitude. This is
particularly important since our ability to constrain cosmological parameters depends
critically on the survey volume. In general, constraints scale with volume V as
−1/2
σ ∝ Veff
since a larger volume means that more independent Fourier modes can
be constrained. For example, one might improve constraints on quantities such as the

CONTENTS

42
100

V(<z)

10–1

10–2

10–3

10–4
0.1

1

10

100

z
Figure 9. The fraction of the total comoving volume of the observable Universe
that is available up to a redshift z [159].

neutrino mass and the running of the primordial power spectrum [163].
Perhaps the greatest utility for intensity mapping (IM) surveys is in constraining
dark energy via measurements of baryon acoustic oscillations (BAOs) in the galaxy
power spectrum. BAO arise from the same physics that produces the spectacular peak
structure in the CMB. These oscillations have a characteristic wavelength set by the
sound horizon at recombination and so provide a “standard ruler”. Measurements of
this distance scale can be used to probe the geometry of the Universe and to constrain
its matter content. Measurements of the oscillations in the CMB at z ≈ 1100 and
more locally in the BAO at z . 3 would provide exquisite tests of the flatness of
the Universe and of the equation of state of the dark energy. Redshifts in the range
z ≈ 1 − 3 are of great interest since they cover the regime in which dark energy begins
to dominate the energy budget of the Universe. While galaxy surveys will begin to
probe this range in the next decade, covering sufficiently large areas to the required
depth is very challenging for galaxy surveys. This has been considered in depth by
the Dark Energy Task Force [164].
To get a sense of the observational requirements of BAO observations with 21 cm
intensity mapping, let us consider some numbers. Beyond the third peak of the BAO
non-linear evolution begins to wash out the signal. The peak of the third BAO peak
has a comoving wavelength of 35h−1 Mpc, which for adequate samples requires pixels
perhaps half that size. At z = 1.5 the angular scale corresponding to 18h−1 Mpc is 20
arcmin, which sets the required angular resolution of the instrument. Estimating the
HI mass enclosed in such a volume is uncertain, but based on the observed value of
ΩHI ∼ 10−3 is ∼ 2 × 1012 M .
The mean brightness temperature Tb of the 21 cm line can be estimated using


−1/2 
1/2
ΩHI
Ωm + a3 ΩΛ
1+z
Tb = 0.3(1 + δ)
mK, (60)
10−3
0.29
2.5
where 1 + δ = ρg /ρ̄g is the normalised neutral gas density and a = (1 + z)−1 is the
scale factor. The amplitude of the signal is therefore considerably smaller than that
of the 21 cm signal during reionization. However, the foregrounds are reduced by a
factor of [(1 + 8)/(1 + 1.5)]−2.6 ∼ 30, redeeming the situation. Diffuse foregrounds

CONTENTS

43

Figure 10. The observable parameter space in redshift and in scale (k) for
BAO studies. The shaded regions are observationally inaccessible. The horizontal
lines indicate the scale of the first three BAO wiggles, and the dashed lines show
contours of constant spherical harmonic order ` [161].

may be removed in a similar fashion to the 21 cm signal at high redshift. Figure 10
shows the relevant region of the BAO that could be detected. The top excluded region
accounts for the non-linear growth of structures, which erases the baryon wiggles in
the power spectrum. The left exclusion region comes from the finite volume of the
Universe, which limits the largest wavelength mode that fits within the survey. The
right region is a rough estimate of the limit from foregrounds based upon a simple
differencing of neighbouring frequency channels to remove the correlated foreground
component. The white accessible region demonstrates that the first three BAO peaks
could be accessible with intensity mapping experiments.
Observations of the BAO can be used to constrain the dark energy equation of
state w, which may be parametrised as w = wp + (ap − a)w0 , where wp and ap are
the value of the equation of state at a pivot redshift where the errors in w and w0
are uncorrelated. Figure 11 shows the ability of an IM telescope covering a square
aperture of size 200 m by 200 m subdivided into 16 cylindrical sections each 12.5
m wide and 200 m long. After integrating for 100 days with bandwidth 3MHz, this
experiment is roughly comparable to the stage IV milestone set by the Dark Energy
Task Force (DETF) committee [164], and provides very good dark energy constraints.
The power of such an experiment makes it a potential alternative to more traditional
galaxy surveys [165, 163, 166].
Reaching the thermal noise required by a signal of ∼300 µK at frequencies of 600
MHz is within the range of existing telescopes. As a first step towards demonstrating
that such observations are possible, Ref. [167] made use of the Green Bank Telescope
(GBT) to observe radio spectra corresponding to 21 cm emission at 0.53 < z < 1.12
over 2 square degrees on the sky. This raw radio data was processed by removing
a smooth component, dominated by the foregrounds, to leave a map of intensity
fluctuations. Cross-correlating these intensity fluctuations with a catalog of DEEP2
galaxies in the same field showed a distinct correlation in agreement with theory. These
experiments are continuing with the next step to understand instrumental systematics

CONTENTS

44

Figure 11. Constraints on the equation of state parameter w = p/ρc2 (horizontal
axis) and its redshift variation for an equation of state w = wp +(ap −a)w0 (vertical
axis) at z = 0. The 1-σ contour for IM combined with Planck (inner thick solid
for baseline model, outer thin solid for worst case), the Dark Energy Task Force
stage I projects with Planck (outer dotted), the stage I and III projects with
Planck (intermediate dotted), the stage I, III, and IV projects with Planck (inner
dotted), and all above experiments combined (dashed, again thick for baseline,
thin for worst case; the two contours are nearly indistinguishable). [161]

at the level required to cleanly measure the 21 cm intensity auto-power spectrum.
They constitute an important step towards demonstrating the feasibility of intensity
mapping with the 21 cm line.
21 cm intensity mapping probes the neutral hydrogen contained within galaxies
and one might reasonably worry about how robust a tracer this is of the density field.
It is believed that damped Lyα absorbers (DLAs), which contain the bulk of neutral
hydrogen, are relatively low-mass systems and so should have relatively low bias (when
compared to the highly biased bright galaxies seen in high redshift galaxy surveys)
[160]. On top of this, however, one might worry that fluctuations in the ionizing
background could lead to spatial variation in the neutral hydrogen content. But
after reionization the mean free path for ionizing photons increases and the ionizing
background should become fairly uniform with modulation only at the percent level
[166].
5.2. Intensity mapping in other lines
So far, we have described the possibilities for 21 cm intensity mapping. The 21 cm line
has a number of nice qualities - it is typically optically thin, it is a line well separated
in frequency from other atomic lines, and hydrogen is ubiquitous in the Universe. It
is however only one line out of many that have been observed in local galaxies, which
begs the question “is 21 cm the best line to use and what additional information
might be gained by looking at intensity mapping in other lines?” The analysis of the
impact of intensity mapping using lines other than the 21 cm line has not yet been
fully explored. Because the physical conditions leading to emission by these species
are quite varied the cross-species joint analysis of intensity maps is a complex topic

CONTENTS

45

that the community has only begun to examine. Because of this variation, the crossanalysis is potentially a rich source of information on conditions at high redshift.
One area where intensity mapping in lines other than 21 cm would be particularly
interesting is during the epoch of reionization. One of the challenges for understanding
the first galaxies is the difficulty of placing the galaxies seen in the Hubble Ultradeep
Field (HUDF) into a proper context. By focusing on a small patch of sky, the HUDF
sees very faint galaxies, but it is unclear how representative this patch is of the whole
Universe at that time. For comparison, the full HUDF is approximately 3×3 arcmin
in size comparable with the size of an individual ionized bubble, expected to be ∼
ten arcminutes in diameter during the middle stages of reionization. Moreover, it is
apparent that the galaxies seen in the HUDF are the brightest galaxies and that fainter,
as yet unseen, galaxies contribute significantly to star formation and reionization. The
James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) will see even fainter galaxies and transform our
view of the galaxy population at z ∼ 10, but there will still be a substantial level of
star formation that it will not be able to resolve [168].
Combining these galaxy surveys with 21 cm observations and intensity mapping
would allow a powerful synergy between three independent types of observations
directed at understanding the first galaxies and the epoch of reionization (illustrated
in Figure 12). Deep galaxy surveys with HST and JWST would inform us of the
detailed properties of small numbers of galaxies during the EoR. 21 cm tomography
provides information about the neutral hydrogen gas surrounding groups of galaxies.
Intensity mapping fills in the gaps providing information about the total emission and
clustering of the full population of galaxies, even those below the sensitivity threshold
of the JWST. Together these three techniques would provide a highly complete view
of galaxies at high redshift and transform our understanding of the origins of galaxy
formation.

The need for different perspectives

IM
JWST
21cm

Galaxy
surveys
identify
individual
galaxies
Figure 12.
Cartoon of
the role intensity
mapping
would play in understanding
galaxy formation. Deep galaxy surveys with HST and JWST image the properties
21 cm of individual
determines
properties
gas
around
galaxies(red filled
galaxies in
small fields of
(blue
boxes).
21 cm tomography
region) provides a “negative space” view of the Universe by determining the
Intensityproperties
mapping
tracksgas surrounding
collectivegroups
galaxy
properties
of the neutral
of galaxies.
Intensity mapping
ITAMP 2011

(purple filled regions) fills in the gaps providing information about
the collective
Jonathan Pritchard
properties of groups of galaxies. Together the three would give a complete view
of the early generation of galaxies in the infant universe.

CONTENTS

46

The first steps towards understanding intensity mapping in molecular lines
were made by Righi, Hernández-Monteagudo & Sunyaev [169], who considered the
possibility that redshifted emission from CO rotational lines might contribute a
foreground to CMB experiments. They showed that cross-correlating CMB maps
of differing spectral resolution at frequencies of ν ≈ 30 GHz could be used to constrain
the CO emission of galaxies at z ≈ 3 − 8. This might be done, for example, by
correlating CMB maps from CBI with those of the Planck LFI. These ideas were
focussed on the notion of 2D maps, but contain the seed of later work.

Figure 13. Ratio between line luminosity, L, and star formation rate, Ṁ∗ , for
various lines observed in galaxies and taken from Table 1 of Ref. [170]. For the
first 7 lines this ratio is measured from a sample of low redshift galaxies. The
other lines have been calibrated based on the galaxy M82. Some weaker lines, for
example for HCN, have been omitted for clarity.

Ref. [171] explored for the first time the notion of looking at a variety of lines
in 3D intensity maps. Figure 13 shows the major lines that appear in the emission
spectrum of M82. By making a map at the appropriate frequency any of these lines
could be studied by intensity mapping. Two major challenges arise. The first is that
continuum foregrounds are typically larger than the signal from these lines by 2-3
orders of magnitude. This is an identical, although more tractable problem, as occurs
in the case of 21 cm studies of the EoR and has been studied in considerable detail.
Studies [142, 172, 173] show that, provided the continuum foreground is spectrally
smooth in individual sky pixels, it can be removed leaving very little residuals in the
cleaned signal.
Potentially more challenging is the issue of line confusion. If we look for the CO(10) line (rest frame frequency of 115 GHz) in a map made at 23 GHz (corresponding to
emission by CO at z = 4) then our map will additionally consider emission from other
lines in galaxies at other redshifts (e.g. CO(2-1) from galaxies at z = 9). However,
the contaminating emission arises from different galaxies which opens the possibility
of combining maps at different frequencies corresponding to different lines from the
same galaxies as a way of isolating a particular redshift. The emission from lines in the
same galaxies will correlate, while emission from lines in galaxies at different redshifts

CONTENTS

47

Figure 14. A slice from a simulated realization of line emission from galaxies
at an observed wavelength of 441µm (left) and 364µm (right) [170]. The slice
is in the plane of the sky and spans 250 × 250 comoving Mpc2 with a depth
of ∆ν/ν = 0.001. The colored squares indicate pixels which have line emission
greater than 200Jy/Sr for the left panel and 250Jy/Sr for the right panel. The
emission from OI(63µm) and OIII(52µm) is shown in red on the left and right
panels, respectively, originating from the same galaxies at z = 6. All of the lines
illustrated in Figure 13 are included and plotted in blue. Cross correlating data
at these two observed wavelengths would reveal the emission in OI and OIII from
z = 6 with the other emission lines being essentially uncorrelated.

will not‡.
Fortunately, it is possible to statistically isolate the fluctuations from a particular
redshift by cross correlating the emission in two different lines [171, 170]. If one
compares the fluctuations at two different wavelengths, which correspond to the same
redshift for two different emission lines, the fluctuations will be strongly correlated.
However, the signal from any other lines arises from galaxies at different redshifts which
are very far apart and thus will have much weaker correlation (see Figure 14). In this
way, one can measure either the two-point correlation function or power spectrum of
galaxies at some target redshift weighted by the total emission in the spectral lines
being cross correlated.
The cross power spectrum at a wavenumber k can be written as,
P1,2 (~k) = S̄1 S̄2 b̄2 P (~k) + Pshot ,
(61)
where S̄1 and S̄2 are the average fluxes in lines 1 and 2 respectively, b̄ is the average
bias factor of the galactic sources, P (~k) is the matter power spectrum, and Pshot is
the shot-noise power spectrum due to the discrete nature of galaxies. The root-meansquare error in measuring the cross power spectrum at a particular k-mode is given
by [171],
1 2
2
δP1,2
= (P1,2
+ P1total P2total ),
(62)
2
‡ This is similar to the suggestion of using the 21 cm map as a template to detect the deuterium
hyperfine line [12].

CONTENTS

48

4

3

10

3

2

2

k P(k)/(2π )[(Jy/Sr) ]

10

2

10

0.5

1

k[hMpc−1]
Figure 15.
The cross power spectrum of OI(63 µm) and OIII(52 µm) at
z = 6 measured from mock simulation data for a hypothetical infrared space
telescope similar to SPICA [170]. The solid line is the cross power spectrum
measured when only line emission from galaxies in the target lines is included.
The points are the recovered power spectrum when detector noise, contaminating
line emission, galaxy continuum emission, and dust in our galaxy and the CMB
are included. The error bars follow Eq. (62) with P1total and P2total calculated
from the simulated data, including detector noise, contaminating line emission
and sample variance.

where P1total and P2total are the total power spectra corresponding to the first line
and second line being cross correlated. Each of these includes a term for the power
spectrum of contaminating lines, the target line, and detector noise. Figure 15 shows
the expected errors in the determination of the cross power spectrum using the OI(63
µm) and OIII(52 µm) lines at a redshift z = 6 for an optimized spectrometer on a 3.5
meter space-borne infrared telescope similar to SPICA, providing background limited
sensitivity for 100 diffraction limited beams covering a square on the sky which is 1.7◦
across (corresponding to 250 comoving Mpc) and a redshift range of ∆z = 0.6 (280
Mpc) with a spectral resolution of (∆ν/ν) = 10−3 and a total integration time of
2 × 106 seconds.
We emphasize that one can measure the line cross power spectrum from galaxies
which are too faint to be seen individually over detector noise. Hence, a measurement
of the line cross power spectrum can provide information about the total line emission
from all of the galaxies which are too faint to be directly detected. One possible
application of this technique would be to measure the evolution of line emission over
cosmic time to better understand galaxy evolution and the sources that reionized the
Universe. Changes in the minimum mass of galaxies due to photoionization heating of
the intergalactic medium during reionization could also potentially be measured [171].

CONTENTS

49

Figure 16. The global mean CO brightness temperature as a function of
redshift [175]. The curves show the volume-averaged CO brightness temperature
for several different values of Mco,min , the minimum halo mass hosting a CO
luminous galaxy. In all cases, the minimum host halo mass of star forming
galaxies is the atomic cooling mass, Msf,min ≈ 108 M , and so the curves with
larger Mco,min describe models in which galaxies with low star formation rates
(SFRs) are not CO luminous. If we had instead varied Msf,min , while fixing both
Mco,min = Msf,min and the SFR density at a given redshift, the model variations
would be considerably smaller.

As a definite example of the sort of information that might be gathered in
molecular line intensity mapping, we will discuss CO, the only line other than the
21 cm line to have been somewhat investigated [174, 175, 176]. CO emission is widely
used as a tracer for the mass of cold molecular gas in a galaxy. This cold molecular
gas provides the fuel for star formation and so determining its abundance provides a
key constraint on models of star formation and galaxy evolution. Indeed one of the
key science goals for ALMA is to directly image CO emission in individual galaxies at
z ≈ 7. Figure 16 shows the redshift evolution of the mean brightness temperature (a
measure of the radio intensity) for the CO(2-1) line as a function of the minimum mass
required for a galaxy to be CO bright. These calculations identify a signal strength of
0.01−1 µK at z = 8 as the observational target. This represents an order of magnitude
increase in sensitivity over existing CMB experiments like CBI and might be enabled
by improved techniques with dishes exploiting focal plane arrays.
Figure 17 shows the evolution of the auto-power spectrum of the CO intensity
fluctuations. This signal evolves strongly with redshift due to its dependence on hTCO i
and has a shape that depends on the relative contribution of the clustering of CO bright
galaxies and a Poisson shot noise term, which is determined by the distribution of CO

CONTENTS

50

Figure 17. The auto power spectrum of CO brightness temperature fluctuations
[175]. The black solid, red dotted, red dashed, blue dashed, and cyan dot-dashed
curves show simulated CO power spectra at different redshifts for various values
of Mco,min and fixed duty cycle. The green solid line is the halo model prediction
for the signal for z = 7.3, Mco,min = 1010 M , and fduty = 0.1. The green
dashed line shows the Poisson term, while the green dot-dashed curve represents
the clustering term.

galaxy masses. Measurement of the shape and evolution of this power spectrum would
therefore give considerable information about the properties of early CO galaxies.
5.3. Cross-correlation of molecular and 21 cm intensity maps
Earlier, we described 21 cm tomography observations with instruments like MWA,
LOFAR, and PAPER that hope to map the 21 cm emission from neutral hydrogen
during the EoR. These maps trace out the ionization field, which is determined by
the distribution of galaxies. Regions with many galaxies will tend to have ionized
the surrounding IGM leading to a “hole” in the 21 cm signal. In contrast, since
those same galaxies will have undergone considerable star formation and so produced
metals, regions with galaxies will appear CO bright. This is clearly seen in the bottom
two panels of Figure 18 - blue CO bright regions correspond to black patches with
no signal in the 21 cm map. This anti-correlation can be detected statistically and
provides a very direct constraint on the size of the ionized regions. Maps made in
lines from different atoms or molecules might be used in a related way. Each atomic
species will reflect different properties of the host galaxies and combining maps may
enable a detailed understanding of the host metallicity and internal properties to be

CONTENTS

51

achieved.

Figure 18. Redshift slices at z ≈ 7 taken from the simulation of Ref. [175] and
illustrating the galaxy distribution (top right), ionization field (top left), 21 cm
fluctuations (bottom left), and CO intensity fluctuations (bottom right). These
last two fields have been smoothed to an angular resolution of 6 arcmin. The
CO bright galaxies seen in the CO intensity map are also responsible for ionizing
the neutral gas. This can be seen by the correlation between bright CO regions
and dark (ionized) patches in the 21 cm map. The associated signal provides a
quantitative version of the cartoon in Figure 12. [175]

The model used for these calculations was based upon an empirical calibration
of the CO luminosity function to observations of galaxies at z . 3 [175]. This was
then extrapolated to higher redshifts as a best guess at how CO galaxies might evolve.
More satisfying would be to connect the CO luminosity to the intrinsic properties
of the galaxy interstellar medium (ISM). Such modeling of the detailed properties of
CO emission from galaxies has been attempted [177]. CO emission in local galaxies
is known to originate in giant molecular clouds (GMCs) whose typical size is ∼10
pc. These clouds are observed to be optically thick to CO emission and so the
empirically determined scaline of the CO luminosity with molecular hydrogen mass,
LCO ∝ MH2 , is best explained by the non-overlap of these clouds in angle and velocity.
The relationship then results from the CO luminosity being proportinal to the number
of clouds. In addition, the detailed physics of the heating of these clouds by stars and
active galactic nuclei (AGN), which determines the excitation state of the different
CO rotational levels, must be accounted for. There is increased interest in numerical
simulation of the chemistry and properties of GMCs [178], which can inform semianalytic modelling. Connecting the global properties of CO emission to such ISM
details is challenging, but would be greatly rewarding in providing a new way of
learning about the ISM of galaxies at high redshift. Importantly the chemistry that
determines the CO abundance may change dramatically in the denser metal poor ISM

CONTENTS

52

of early galaxies [179].
Clearly, there is interesting information to be harvested from measurements of
intensity fluctuations in line emission from galaxies at high redshifts. In the above
discussion we have focussed on preliminary results from the study of CO, but similar
results apply to the array of other atomic and molecular lines. An important question
is how the signal might best be observed and which lines are most important. Some
lines, like CO, can be targeted from the ground but others, such as OI(63 µm), lie in
the infra-red and must be observed from space. The detailed design of the optimal
instrument and the requirements for sensitivity and angular resolution are not yet
well understood. Furthermore, the statistical tools for removing continuum and line
contamination efficiently need to be developed.
A future space borne infrared telescope such as SPICA could be ideal for intensity
mapping. As illustrated in Fig. 15 [170], an optimized instrument on SPICA could
measure the OI(63 µm) and OIII(52 µm) line signals very accurately out to high
redshifts. Such an instrument would require the capability to take many medium
resolution spectra at adjacent locations on the sky. However, it may be possible to
sacrifice angular resolution since the IM technique does not involve resolving individual
sources.
6. 21 cm forest
While most interest in the redshifted 21 cm line has focused on the case where the CMB
forms a backlight, an important alternative is the case where the 21 cm absorption
is imprinted on the light from radio loud quasars. Historically, the first attempts
to detect the extra-galactic 21 cm line were of this nature [180]. The resulting one
dimensional absorption spectra are expected to show a forest of lines originating from
absorption in clumps of neutral hydrogen along the line of sight and have been called
the 21 cm forest by analogy to the Lyα forest.
Whereas the Lyα forest is primarily visible at redshifts z . 6, when the Universe
is mostly ionized, the 21 cm forest is strongest at higher redshifts where there is
a considerable neutral fraction. Additionally, since the 21 cm line is optically thin
and does not saturate, the 21 cm forest can contain detailed information about
the properties of the IGM as well as collapsed gaseous halos. There is a clear
complementarity to the two forests for probing the evolution of the IGM over a wide
range of redshifts.
The 21 cm forest differs from the emission signal of the diffuse medium in a
number of important ways. First, because the brightness temperature of radio loud
quasars is typically ∼ 1011−12 K the 21 cm line is always seen in absorption against
the source. The strength of the absorption feature depends upon the 21 cm optical
depth
xHI nH (z)
3 hp c3 A10
,
(63)
32π kB ν02 TS (1 + z)(dvk /drk )
xHI
≈ 0.009(1 + δ)(1 + z)3/2
.
TS
We see from this expression that the decrement depends primarily upon the neutral
fraction and spin temperature. In contrast to the case where the CMB is the backlight,
there is no saturation regime at large values of TS . The decrement is maximised for
τν0 (z) =

CONTENTS

53

a fully neutral and cold IGM - heating or ionizing the gas will reduce the observable
signature.
This signature may show several distinct features: (i) A mean intensity decrement
blueward of the 21 cm restframe frequency whose depth depends on the mean IGM
optical depth at that redshift; (ii) small-scale variations in the intensity due to
fluctuations in the density, neutral fraction and temperature of the IGM at different
points along the line of sight; (iii) transmission windows due to photoionized bubbles
along the line of sight; and (iv) deep absorption features arising from the dense neutral
hydrogen clouds in dwarf galaxies and minihalos [181, 182]. Figure 19 shows an
example of a 21 cm forest spectrum in which a number of these features can be
seen.

Figure 19. Simulated spectrum from 128 to 131 MHz of a source with brightness
S(120 MHz) = 20 mJy at z = 10 using a model spectrum based on that of Cygnus
A and assuming HI 21 cm absorption by the IGM. Thermal noise has been added
using the specifications of the square kilometer array (SKA) and assuming 10
days integration with 1 kHz wide spectral channels. The solid line is the model
spectrum without noise or absorption [181].

Since the evolution of the optical depth depends on the mean neutral fraction
and the spin temperature, we can understand the evolution of the 21 cm forest based
on Figure 4. At early times, the IGM is fully neutral and the evolution is dictated by
the spin temperature. TS tracks the gas kinetic temperature and rises from tens of
K to thousands of K by the end of reionization, causing τν0 to fall by several orders
of magnitude due to heating alone. Then, as reionization takes place and the neutral
fraction drops from xH = 1 to the xH ∼ 10−4 seen in the Lyα forest, the optical depth
drops even further. Tracing the evolution of the mean optical depth would provide
a useful constraint on the thermal evolution of the IGM and give a clear indication
of the end of reionization. Figure 20 shows the evolution of τν0 in a model where
TS = TK showing the very significant evolution in the optical depth with redshift.
Detecting the mean decrement in the 21 cm forest may be challenging since it
is relatively weak and requires detailed fitting of the unabsorbed continuum level. A
potentially more robust method is to exploit the statistics of individual features. As
reionization occurs, the appearance of ionized bubbles will show up in the forest as

CONTENTS

54
Smin
1 mJy

1

10 mJy

mean 21cm optical depth

0.1

100 mJy

0.01
0.001
0.0001
fX=0 (no x-ray heating)
fX=0.01
fX=0.1
fX=1
fX=10
fX=100

1e-05
1e-06
1e-07
5

10

15
redshift

20

25

Figure 20. Mean 21cm optical depth as a function of redshift, for varying fX
values: from top to bottom, fX = 0 (no x-ray heating), 0.01, 0.1, 1 (thick black
line), 10, and 100. Also included are lines of Smin (dashed purple lines) as defined
in (65). These lines indicate, for each value of τ on the left-hand axis, the minimum
observed flux density of a source that would allow a detection at signal-to-noise
of 5 of the flux decrement due to absorption, assuming an array with effective
area Aeff = 106 m2 , frequency resolution ∆νch = 1 kHz, system temperature
Tsys = 100K(ν/200 MHz)−2.8 , and integration time tint = 1 week. When the
mean optical depth lines (solid) cross above the Smin lines (dashed), the flux
decrement is detectable at the corresponding redshift [183].

an increasing number of windows of near total transparency. If these lines could be
resolved, the distribution of equivalent widths would give a measure of the process of
reionization [181, 182, 184].
It is possible that the forest does not have to be fully resolved and could be
analysed statistically instead. For example, the appearance of ionized regions will
lead to a change in the variance of the signal in different frequency bins. This has
been shown to be an effective discriminant of the end of reionization [183] and has the
advantage of not requiring narrow features to be resolved in frequency.
The signal from the diffuse IGM leads to a relatively low optical depth, as seen in
(63). The signal from minihalos can be considerably stronger [182, 118, 185]. These
are structures that have collapsed and virialised, but because of their low mass to
not reach the temperature of 104 K required for atomic hydrogen cooling. Their high
density contrast and relatively low temperature can lead to optical depths as high as
τ ∼ 0.1 within a frequency width of ∆ν ∼ 2 kHz [186]. The mean overdensity required
to give an optical depth τ is given by
 τ 2  T 2  10 3
S
(1 + δ) ∼ 40
.
(64)
0.01
100 K
1+z
The number density of minihalos is sensitive to the thermal properties of the IGM,
which if heated may raise the Jeans mass sufficiently to prevent the collapse of the
least massive minihalos that dominate the signal in the forest. Detailed descriptions
of line profiles and their statistics have been considered based upon analytic models
of the density distribution around halos [182, 187, 185, 188] and in high resolution
simulations [121]. Even a single line of sight showing such structures could be used to
provide information on early halo formation.

CONTENTS

55

Unfortunately, the sensitivity required to detect the 21 cm forest is challenging.
We can consider the thermal noise required to directly detect the flux decrement
arising from the mean absorption. Using the relationship Sν = 2kB Ta /Ae to relate
the antennae temperature to the flux sensitivity for a single polarisation and the
radiometer equation gives the minimum source brightness for the decrement to be
visible
r

1 kHz 1 week
S/N 0.01 106 m2 Tsys
,
(65)
Smin = 16 mJy
5
τ
Aeff 400 K
∆ν
tint
where we have assumed that both polarisation states are measured. The value of
Aeff /Tsys used is appropriate for SKA giving a sense of the challenge in detecting
the forest. The system temperature is typically set by the sky temperature and is
determined by galactic foregrounds.
The major uncertainty in the utility of the 21 cm forest is the existence of radio
loud sources at high redshifts. The most promising set of sources are radio loud
quasars. We are currently ignorant of the number density of radio-loud quasars at
high redshifts. Quasars have currently been observed to redshifts as high as z = 7.1
[189], but their number density drops rapidly at redshifts z & 3 [190]. Furthermore,
the radio loud fraction of quasars is poorly understood and may evolve at higher
redshifts [191]. Models calibrated to the number of counts at low redshifts lead to
predictions of ∼ 2000 sources across the sky with S > 6 Jy at 8 < z < 12 [192]. Many
of these sources would show up in existing radio surveys, but it is currently impossible
to distinguish these high-z radio bright quasars from low-z radio galaxies. Future large
area surveys with NIR photometry, such as EUCLID or WFIRST could enable the
identification of these high-z quasars providing targets for the SKA [193]. Gamma ray
bursts (GRBs) and hypernovae may provide alternative high-z sources [194, 195, 196],
but are believed to have a lower maximum brightness at the low frequencies of interest
because of synchrotron self-absorption. GRBs do however have the virtue of already
having been observed in the desired redshift range.
This rapid decline in radio-bright quasars is unfortunate since the signal is most
strong early on before ionization and heating have begun significantly. In any case, it
seems likely that only a few sight lines to radio bright objects will become available
for 21 cm forest observations. Since these observations are affected by totally different
systematics than 21 cm tomography, they could be very important for identifying the
properties of the IGM in the early Universe.
7. Conclusions and outlook
Cosmology in the 21st century is engaged in the process of pushing the boundaries
of sensitivity and completeness of our understanding of the Universe. Observations
of the redshifted 21 cm line offer a new window into the properties of the Universe
at redshifts z = 1 − 150 filling in a crucial gap in observations of the period where
the first structures and stars had formed. The 21 cm signal depends upon physics on
different scales from the atomic physics of hydrogen, through the astrophysics of star
formation, to the physics of cosmological structures. Through this dependence the
21 cm signal has enormous potential to improve our understanding of the Universe.
Over the next decade, radio experiments will begin the process of exploiting 21 cm
observations and will reveal how much of this potential can be realised.

CONTENTS

56

In this review, we have explored four key ways in which 21 cm observations might
be exploited to learn about cosmology and astrophysics. Low angular resolution
observations with small numbers of radio dipoles can measure the sky averaged
“global” 21 cm signal providing information about key milestones in the history of
the Universe. Understanding these moments when the first radiation backgrounds
illuminated intergalactic space will place constraints on the properties of the first
galaxies and limit the contribution of more exotic physics. Experiments involving
just a handful of people, such as EDGES and CoRE, have taken the first steps along
this path. There is currently a growing effort to using different radio dipole designs
and attempting to combine the benefits of interferometers with individual absolutely
calibrated dipoles. There is a significant challenge in separating a relatively smooth 21
cm signal from smooth galactic foregrounds and much hard work ahead before these
experiments yield robust results.
More ambitiously, collections of thousands of dipoles, digitally combined into
radio interferometers will have the raw sensitivity to measure fluctuations in the 21
cm signal, providing detailed information about how the Universe was heated and
ionized. The first generation of such instruments - LOFAR, MWA, PAPER, and
21CMA - have or soon will be completed and data is starting to become available.
These first instruments will peer through a hazy window of low sensitivity, but should
determine when the epoch of reionization took place. Looking further ahead, the SKA
will see this period clearly mapping the ionized structures and providing information
about heating and coupling of the IGM during the formation of the first galaxies. The
combination of 21 cm observations with observations of the CMB and with surveys of
high redshift galaxies and information from the Lyman alpha forest should enable the
reionization history and details of reionization to be inferred [197, 198].
21 cm observations also have the potential to constrain fundamental cosmology
and represent a path to a new level of precision cosmology. Exploiting 21 cm
observations for fundamental cosmology will be a challenging task and it is unclear
how much can realistically be hoped for. During the EoR astrophysics mixes with
cosmology in the 21 cm fluctuations and until the performance of instruments is better
understood it is not clear whether these two can be separated. In the further future,
21 cm observations of the cosmic dark ages provide a long term hope that most of the
volume of the Universe could one day be mapped and used for cosmology.
Applying similar techniques at lower redshifts allows for intensity mapping of the
neutral hydrogen in galaxies, providing an alternative to traditional redshift surveys
of galaxies in the optical-infrared bands. In contrast to the traditional approach, only
the cumulative line emission from many galaxies over large volumes is being mapped,
and galaxies are not being resolved individually. This intensity mapping technique
could help shed light on the properties of dark energy through the use of baryon
acoustic oscillations as a standard ruler to measure the expansion of the Universe.
Further, intensity mapping in other molecular and atomic lines can complement 21
cm tomography allowing a complete picture of the formation of stars and metals to
be developed.
Finally, observations of individual radio bright sources, such as quasars, might
allow observations of the 21 cm forest. This provides another window into the
properties of the IGM at the end of reionization that depends on very different
systematics than 21 cm tomography. The 21 cm forest would allow the small scale
properties of the IGM to be studied in great detail and so constrain the properties of
dark matter. This is a powerful technique and the main uncertainty is the abundance

CONTENTS

57

of target sources. Large area NIR surveys should begin to answer this question soon,
as more high redshift quasars are found and followed up to determine the radio loud
fraction. Just a handful of sufficiently bright radio sources at z & 7 would make this
a very valuable probe of reionization and the IGM.
21 cm cosmology is a new field with much yet to be discovered, but it is one
with great potential for the future. Much of this potential stems from breakthroughs
in computing power which make “digital radio astronomy” feasible and allow for
extremely large radio interferometers. It is to be hoped that in the decades to come 21
cm observations will transform our understanding of the cosmic dawn and the epoch
of reionization pushing farther our detailed understanding of the cosmos.
Acknowledgments
AL acknowledges funding from NSF grant AST-0907890 and NASA grants
NNX08AL43G and NNA09DB30A.
References
[1] M. G. Santos, A. Amblard, J. Pritchard, H. Trac, R. Cen, and A. Cooray. Cosmic Reionization
and the 21 cm Signal: Comparison between an Analytical Model and a Simulation. ApJ,
689:1–16, December 2008.
[2] E. Komatsu et al. Seven-year Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) Observations:
Cosmological Interpretation. ApJS, 192:18, February 2011.
[3] S. R. Furlanetto, S. P. Oh, and F. H. Briggs. Cosmology at low frequencies: The 21 cm
transition and the high-redshift Universe. Phys. Rep., 433:181–301, October 2006.
[4] M. F. Morales and J. S. B. Wyithe. Reionization and Cosmology with 21-cm Fluctuations.
ARAA, 48:127–171, September 2010.
[5] H. M. Goldenberg, D. Kleppner, and N. F. Ramsey. Atomic hydrogen maser. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
5(8):361–362, Oct 1960.
[6] H.C. van de Hulst. Radiogolven uit het Wereldruim (Radio waves from space). Ned. Tijdschr.
Natuurk., 11:210–221, 1945.
[7] H. I. Ewen and E. M. Purcell. Observation of a Line in the Galactic Radio Spectrum: Radiation
from Galactic Hydrogen at 1,420 Mc./sec. Nat., 168:356, September 1951.
[8] N. Kanekar, J. N. Chengalur, and W. M. Lane. HI 21-cm absorption at z ∼ 3.39 towards PKS
0201+113. MNRAS, 375:1528–1536, March 2007.
[9] R. Srianand, N. Gupta, P. Petitjean, P. Noterdaeme, and C. Ledoux. Detection of 21-cm,
H2 and deuterium absorption at z > 3 along the line of sight to J1337+3152. MNRAS,
405:1888–1900, July 2010.
[10] J. S. Bagla and A. Loeb. The hyperfine transition of 3 He+ as a probe of the intergalactic
medium. ArXiv e-prints, May 2009.
[11] M. McQuinn and E. R. Switzer. Redshifted intergalactic 3 He+ 8.7 GHz hyperfine absorption.
PRD, 80(6):063010, September 2009.
[12] K. Sigurdson and S. R. Furlanetto. Measuring the Primordial Deuterium Abundance during
the Cosmic Dark Ages. Physical Review Letters, 97(9):091301, September 2006.
[13] G. B. Rybicki and A. P. Lightman. Radiative Processes in Astrophysics. Wiley-VCH, June
1986.
[14] V. V. Sobolev. The Diffusion of Lα Radiation in Nebulae and Stellar Envelopes. Sov. Astron.,
1:678, October 1957.
[15] G. B. Field. Excitation of the Hydrogen 21cm line. Proc. I. R. E., 46:240, 1958.
[16] A. C. Allison and A. Dalgarno. Spin Change in Collisions of Hydrogen Atoms. ApJ, 158:423,
October 1969.
[17] B. Zygelman. Hyperfine Level-changing Collisions of Hydrogen Atoms and Tomography of the
Dark Age Universe. ApJ, 622:1356–1362, April 2005.
[18] S. R. Furlanetto and M. R. Furlanetto. Spin-exchange rates in electron-hydrogen collisions.
MNRAS, 374:547–555, January 2007.
[19] S. R. Furlanetto and M. R. Furlanetto. Spin exchange rates in proton-hydrogen collisions.
MNRAS, 379:130–134, July 2007.

CONTENTS

58

[20] M. Kuhlen, P. Madau, and R. Montgomery. The Spin Temperature and 21 cm Brightness of
the Intergalactic Medium in the Pre-Reionization era. ApJ, 637:L1–L4, January 2006.
[21] H. Liszt. The spin temperature of warm interstellar H I. A & A, 371:698–707, May 2001.
[22] C. M. Hirata and K. Sigurdson. The spin-resolved atomic velocity distribution and 21-cm line
profile of dark-age gas. MNRAS, 375:1241–1264, March 2007.
[23] S. A. Wouthuysen. On the excitation mechanism of the 21-cm (radio-frequency) interstellar
hydrogen emission line. AJ, 57:31, 1952.
[24] J. R. Pritchard and S. R. Furlanetto. Descending from on high: Lyman-series cascades and
spin-kinetic temperature coupling in the 21-cm line. MNRAS, 367:1057–1066, April 2006.
[25] A. Meiksin. Detecting the epoch of first light in 21-CM radiation. In Perspectives on Radio
Astronomy: Science with Large Antennae Arrays, page 37. M.P. van Harlem (Ed.), 2000.
[26] G. B. Rybicki. Improved Fokker-Planck Equation for Resonance-Line Scattering. ApJ,
647:709–718, August 2006.
[27] G. B. Field. The Time Relaxation of a Resonance-Line Profile. ApJ, 129:551, May 1959.
[28] X. Chen and J. Miralda-Escudé. The Spin-Kinetic Temperature Coupling and the Heating
Rate due to Lyα Scattering before Reionization: Predictions for 21 Centimeter Emission
and Absorption. ApJ, 602:1–11, February 2004.
[29] C. M. Hirata. Wouthuysen-Field coupling strength and application to high-redshift 21-cm
radiation. MNRAS, 367:259–274, March 2006.
[30] L. Chuzhoy and P. R. Shapiro. Heating and Cooling of the Early Intergalactic Medium by
Resonance Photons. ApJ, 655:843–846, February 2007.
[31] S. R. Furlanetto and J. R. Pritchard. The scattering of Lyman-series photons in the
intergalactic medium. MNRAS, 372:1093–1103, November 2006.
[32] A. Loeb and M. Zaldarriaga. Measuring the Small-Scale Power Spectrum of Cosmic Density
Fluctuations through 21cm Tomography Prior to the Epoch of Structure Formation.
Physical Review Letters, 92(21):211301, May 2004.
[33] R. Barkana and A. Loeb. Detecting the Earliest Galaxies through Two New Sources of 21
Centimeter Fluctuations. ApJ, 626:1–11, June 2005.
[34] X. Chen and J. Miralda-Escude. The 21cm Signature of the First Stars. ApJ, submitted
(astro-ph/0605439), May 2006.
[35] M. G. Santos and A. Cooray. Cosmological and astrophysical parameter measurements with
21-cm anisotropies during the era of reionization. PRD, 74(8):083517, October 2006.
[36] S. R. Furlanetto, M. Zaldarriaga, and L. Hernquist. The Growth of H II Regions During
Reionization. ApJ, 613:1–15, September 2004.
[37] A. Nusser. The spin temperature of neutral hydrogen during cosmic pre-reionization. MNRAS,
359:183–190, May 2005.
[38] M. Kuhlen and P. Madau. The first miniquasar. MNRAS, 363:1069–1082, November 2005.
[39] S. R. Furlanetto and A. Loeb. Large-Scale Structure Shocks at Low and High Redshifts. ApJ,
611:642–654, August 2004.
[40] P. M. Geil and J. S. B. Wyithe. Modification of the 21-cm power spectrum by quasars during
the epoch of reionization. MNRAS, 399:1877–1887, November 2009.
[41] S. Seager, D. D. Sasselov, and D. Scott. A New Calculation of the Recombination Epoch. ApJ,
523:L1–L5, September 1999.
[42] J. Miralda-Escudé, M. Haehnelt, and M. J. Rees. Reionization of the Inhomogeneous Universe.
ApJ, 530:1–16, February 2000.
[43] V. Bromm, R. P. Kudritzki, and A. Loeb. Generic Spectrum and Ionization Efficiency of a
Heavy Initial Mass Function for the First Stars. ApJ, 552:464–472, May 2001.
[44] E. Zackrisson, C.-E. Rydberg, D. Schaerer, G. Östlin, and M. Tuli. The Spectral Evolution of
the First Galaxies. I. James Webb Space Telescope Detection Limits and Color Criteria for
Population III Galaxies. ApJ, 740:13, October 2011.
[45] R. Barkana and A. Loeb. In the beginning: the first sources of light and the reionization of
the universe. Phys. Rep., 349:125–238, July 2001.
[46] R. K. Sheth and G. Tormen. Large-scale bias and the peak background split. MNRAS,
308:119–126, September 1999.
[47] A. H. Pawlik, J. Schaye, and E. van Scherpenzeel. Keeping the Universe ionized: photoheating
and the clumping factor of the high-redshift intergalactic medium. MNRAS, 394:1812–1824,
April 2009.
[48] J. S. Bolton and G. D. Becker. Resolving the high redshift Lyα forest in smoothed particle
hydrodynamics simulations. MNRAS, 398:L26–L30, September 2009.
[49] S. R. Furlanetto and S. P. Oh. Taxing the rich: recombinations and bubble growth during
reionization. MNRAS, 363:1031–1048, November 2005.

CONTENTS

59

[50] S. Naoz and R. Barkana. Growth of linear perturbations before the era of the first galaxies.
MNRAS, 362:1047–1053, September 2005.
[51] P. Madau, A. Meiksin, and M. J. Rees. 21 Centimeter Tomography of the Intergalactic Medium
at High Redshift. ApJ, 475:429, February 1997.
[52] A. Venkatesan, M. L. Giroux, and J. M. Shull. Heating and Ionization of the Intergalactic
Medium by an Early X-Ray Background. ApJ, 563:1–8, December 2001.
[53] J. R. Pritchard and S. R. Furlanetto. 21-cm fluctuations from inhomogeneous X-ray heating
before reionization. MNRAS, 376:1680–1694, April 2007.
[54] S. Zaroubi, R. M. Thomas, N. Sugiyama, and J. Silk. Heating of the intergalactic medium by
primordial miniquasars. MNRAS, 375:1269–1279, March 2007.
[55] B. Ciardi, R. Salvaterra, and T. Di Matteo. Lyα versus X-ray heating in the high-z intergalactic
medium. MNRAS, 401:2635–2640, February 2010.
[56] J. M. Shull and M. E. van Steenberg. X-ray secondary heating and ionization in quasar
emission-line clouds. ApJ, 298:268–274, November 1985.
[57] M. Valdés and A. Ferrara. The energy cascade from warm dark matter decays. MNRAS,
387:L8–L12, June 2008.
[58] S. R. Furlanetto and S. J. Stoever. Secondary ionization and heating by fast electrons. MNRAS,
404:1869–1878, June 2010.
[59] D. A. Verner, G. J. Ferland, K. T. Korista, and D. G. Yakovlev. Atomic Data for Astrophysics.
II. New Analytic FITS for Photoionization Cross Sections of Atoms and Ions. ApJ, 465:487,
July 1996.
[60] S. P. Oh. Reionization by Hard Photons. I. X-Rays from the First Star Clusters. ApJ, 553:499–
512, June 2001.
[61] S. C. O. Glover and P. W. J. L. Brand. Radiative feedback from an early X-ray background.
MNRAS, 340:210–226, March 2003.
[62] S. R. Furlanetto. The global 21-centimeter background from high redshifts. MNRAS, 371:867–
878, September 2006.
[63] H.-J. Grimm, M. Gilfanov, and R. Sunyaev. High-mass X-ray binaries as a star formation rate
indicator in distant galaxies. MNRAS, 339:793–809, March 2003.
[64] M. Gilfanov, H.-J. Grimm, and R. Sunyaev. LX -SFR relation in star-forming galaxies.
MNRAS, 347:L57–L60, January 2004.
[65] B. D. Lehmer, D. M. Alexander, F. E. Bauer, W. N. Brandt, A. D. Goulding, L. P. Jenkins,
A. Ptak, and T. P. Roberts. A Chandra Perspective on Galaxy-wide X-ray Binary Emission
and its Correlation with Star Formation Rate and Stellar Mass: New Results from Luminous
Infrared Galaxies. ApJ, 724:559–571, November 2010.
[66] S. Mineo, M. Gilfanov, and R. Sunyaev. The collective X-ray luminosity of HMXB as a SFR
indicator. Astronomische Nachrichten, 332:349, May 2011.
[67] M. Dijkstra, M. Gilfanov, A. Loeb, and R. Sunyaev. Constraints on the Redshift Evolution of
the L X-SFR Relation from the Cosmic X-Ray Backgrounds. ArXiv e-prints, August 2011.
[68] I. F. Mirabel, M. Dijkstra, P. Laurent, A. Loeb, and J. R. Pritchard. Stellar black holes at the
dawn of the universe. A & A, 528:A149, April 2011.
[69] P. Madau, M. J. Rees, M. Volonteri, F. Haardt, and S. P. Oh. Early Reionization by
Miniquasars. ApJ, 604:484–494, April 2004.
[70] M. Ricotti and J. P. Ostriker. X-ray pre-ionization powered by accretion on the first black holes
- I. A model for the WMAP polarization measurement. MNRAS, 352:547–562, August 2004.
[71] M. Dijkstra, Z. Haiman, and A. Loeb. A Limit from the X-Ray Background on the Contribution
of Quasars to Reionization. ApJ, 613:646–654, October 2004.
[72] L. Chuzhoy, M. A. Alvarez, and P. R. Shapiro. Recognizing the First Radiation Sources through
Their 21 cm Signature. ApJ, 648:L1–L4, September 2006.
[73] C. Leitherer, D. Schaerer, J. D. Goldader, R. M. González Delgado, C. Robert, D. F. Kune,
D. F. de Mello, D. Devost, and T. M. Heckman. Starburst99: Synthesis Models for Galaxies
with Active Star Formation. ApJS, 123:3–40, July 1999.
[74] J. M. Shull. Heating and ionization by X-ray photoelectrons. ApJ, 234:761–764, December
1979.
[75] P. C. Clark, S. C. O. Glover, R. S. Klessen, and V. Bromm. Gravitational Fragmentation
in Turbulent Primordial Gas and the Initial Mass Function of Population III Stars. ApJ,
727:110, February 2011.
[76] E. Caffau, P. Bonifacio, P. François, L. Sbordone, L. Monaco, M. Spite, F. Spite, H.-G. Ludwig,
R. Cayrel, S. Zaggia, F. Hammer, S. Randich, P. Molaro, and V. Hill. An extremely primitive
star in the Galactic halo. Nat., 477:67–69, September 2011.
[77] V. Bromm and A. Loeb. The formation of the first low-mass stars from gas with low carbon

CONTENTS

60

and oxygen abundances. Nat., 425:812–814, October 2003.
[78] J. R. Pritchard and A. Loeb. Evolution of the 21cm signal throughout cosmic history. PRD,
78(10):103511, November 2008.
[79] X. Chen and M. Kamionkowski. Particle decays during the cosmic dark ages. PRD,
70(4):043502, August 2004.
[80] S. R. Furlanetto, S. P. Oh, and E. Pierpaoli. Effects of dark matter decay and annihilation on
the high-redshift 21cm background. PRD, 74(10):103502, November 2006.
[81] M. Valdés, A. Ferrara, M. Mapelli, and E. Ripamonti. Constraining dark matter through 21-cm
observations. MNRAS, 377:245–252, May 2007.
[82] A. V. Belikov and D. Hooper. How dark matter reionized the Universe. PRD, 80(3):035007,
August 2009.
[83] T. R. Slatyer, N. Padmanabhan, and D. P. Finkbeiner. CMB constraints on WIMP
annihilation: Energy absorption during the recombination epoch. PRD, 80(4):043526,
August 2009.
[84] D. T. Cumberbatch, M. Lattanzi, and J. Silk. Signatures of clumpy dark matter in the global
21 cm background signal. PRD, 82(10):103508, November 2010.
[85] D. P. Finkbeiner, N. Padmanabhan, and N. Weiner. CMB and 21-cm signals for dark matter
with a long-lived excited state. PRD, 78(6):063530, September 2008.
[86] K. J. Mack and D. H. Wesley. Primordial black holes in the Dark Ages: Observational prospects
for future 21cm surveys. ArXiv e-prints, May 2008.
[87] M. Ricotti, J. P. Ostriker, and K. J. Mack. Effect of Primordial Black Holes on the Cosmic
Microwave Background and Cosmological Parameter Estimates. ApJ, 680:829–845, June
2008.
[88] R. H. Brandenberger, R. J. Danos, O. F. Hernández, and G. P. Holder. The 21 cm signature
of cosmic string wakes. JCAP, 12:28, December 2010.
[89] A. P. Chippendale, E. Subrahmanyan, and R. Ekers, 2005. New Techniques and Results in
Low Frequency Radio Astronomy, Hobart, Australia, December 6th-10th.
[90] J. D. Bowman, A. E. E. Rogers, and J. N. Hewitt. Toward Empirical Constraints on the Global
Redshifted 21 cm Brightness Temperature During the Epoch of Reionization. ApJ, 676:1–9,
March 2008.
[91] J. D. Bowman and A. E. E. Rogers. A lower limit of ∆z & 0.06 for the duration of the
reionization epoch. Nat., 468:796–798, December 2010.
[92] D. J. Eisenstein, W. Hu, and M. Tegmark. Cosmic Complementarity: Joint Parameter
Estimation from Cosmic Microwave Background Experiments and Redshift Surveys. ApJ,
518:2–23, June 1999.
[93] J. R. Pritchard and A. Loeb. Constraining the unexplored period between the dark ages and
reionization with observations of the global 21 cm signal. PRD, 82(2):023006, July 2010.
[94] A. Morandi and R. Barkana. Studying cosmic reionization with observations of the global
21-cm signal. ArXiv e-prints, February 2011.
[95] J. O. Burns, T. J. W. Lazio, S. D. Bale, J. D. Bowman, R. F. Bradley, C. L. Carilli, S. R.
Furlanetto, G. J. A. Harker, A. Loeb, and J. R. Pritchard. Probing the First Stars and Black
Holes in the Early Universe with the Dark Ages Radio Explorer (DARE). ArXiv e-prints,
June 2011.
[96] G. J. A. Harker, J. R. Pritchard, J. O. Burns, and J. D. Bowman. An MCMC approach
to extracting the global 21-cm signal during the cosmic dawn from sky-averaged radio
observations. MNRAS, 419:1070–1084, January 2012.
[97] M. F. Morales and J. Hewitt. Toward Epoch of Reionization Measurements with Wide-Field
Radio Observations. ApJ, 615:7–18, November 2004.
[98] S. Bharadwaj and S. S. Ali. The cosmic microwave background radiation fluctuations from HI
perturbations prior to reionization. MNRAS, 352:142–146, July 2004.
[99] M. McQuinn, O. Zahn, M. Zaldarriaga, L. Hernquist, and S. R. Furlanetto. Cosmological
Parameter Estimation Using 21 cm Radiation from the Epoch of Reionization. ApJ, 653:815–
834, December 2006.
[100] R. Barkana and A. Loeb. A Method for Separating the Physics from the Astrophysics of
High-Redshift 21 Centimeter Fluctuations. ApJ, 624:L65–L68, May 2005.
[101] X. Wang and W. Hu. Redshift Space 21 cm Power Spectra from Reionization. ApJ, 643:585–
597, June 2006.
[102] G. Mellema, I. T. Iliev, U.-L. Pen, and P. R. Shapiro. Simulating cosmic reionization at
large scales - II. The 21-cm emission features and statistical signals. MNRAS, 372:679–692,
October 2006.
[103] J. R. Shaw and A. Lewis. Nonlinear redshift-space power spectra. PRD, 78(10):103512,

CONTENTS

61

November 2008.
[104] Y. Mao, P. R. Shapiro, G. Mellema, I. T. Iliev, J. Koda, and K. Ahn. Redshift Space Distortion
of the 21cm Background from the Epoch of Reionization I: Methodology Re-examined.
ArXiv e-prints, April 2011.
[105] R. Barkana and A. Loeb. Unusually Large Fluctuations in the Statistics of Galaxy Formation
at High Redshift. ApJ, 609:474–481, July 2004.
[106] W. H. Press and P. Schechter. Formation of Galaxies and Clusters of Galaxies by Self-Similar
Gravitational Condensation. ApJ, 187:425–438, February 1974.
[107] J. R. Bond, S. Cole, G. Efstathiou, and N. Kaiser. Excursion set mass functions for hierarchical
Gaussian fluctuations. ApJ, 379:440–460, October 1991.
[108] O. Zahn, A. Lidz, M. McQuinn, S. Dutta, L. Hernquist, M. Zaldarriaga, and S. R. Furlanetto.
Simulations and Analytic Calculations of Bubble Growth during Hydrogen Reionization.
ApJ, 654:12–26, January 2007.
[109] O. Zahn, A. Mesinger, M. McQuinn, H. Trac, R. Cen, and L. E. Hernquist. Comparison of
reionization models: radiative transfer simulations and approximate, seminumeric models.
MNRAS, page 532, April 2011.
[110] E. Scannapieco and R. Barkana. An Analytical Approach to Inhomogeneous Structure
Formation. ApJ, 571:585–603, June 2002.
[111] R. Barkana. On correlated random walks and 21-cm fluctuations during cosmic reionization.
MNRAS, 376:1784–1792, April 2007.
[112] M. G. Santos, M. B. Silva, J. R. Pritchard, R. Cen, and A. Cooray. Probing the first galaxies
with the Square Kilometer Array. A & A, 527:A93, March 2011.
[113] L. Chuzhoy and Z. Zheng. Radiative Transfer Effect on Ultraviolet Pumping of the 21 cm Line
in the High-Redshift Universe. ApJ, 670:912–918, December 2007.
[114] B. Semelin, F. Combes, and S. Baek. Lyman-alpha radiative transfer during the epoch of
reionization: contribution to 21-cm signal fluctuations. A & A, 474:365–374, November
2007.
[115] S. Naoz and R. Barkana. Detecting early galaxies through their 21-cm signature. MNRAS,
385:L63–L67, March 2008.
[116] M. A. Alvarez, U.-L. Pen, and T.-C. Chang. Enhanced Detectability of Pre-reionization 21 cm
Structure. ApJ, 723:L17–L21, November 2010.
[117] R. Barkana and A. Loeb. Probing the epoch of early baryonic infall through 21-cm fluctuations.
MNRAS, 363:L36–L40, October 2005.
[118] I. T. Iliev, P. R. Shapiro, A. Ferrara, and H. Martel. On the Direct Detectability of the Cosmic
Dark Ages: 21 Centimeter Emission from Minihalos. ApJ, 572:L123–L126, June 2002.
[119] I. T. Iliev, E. Scannapieco, H. Martel, and P. R. Shapiro. Non-linear clustering during the
cosmic Dark Ages and its effect on the 21-cm background from minihaloes. MNRAS, 341:81–
90, May 2003.
[120] S. R. Furlanetto and S. P. Oh. Redshifted 21 cm Emission from Minihalos before Reionization.
ApJ, 652:849–856, December 2006.
[121] P. R. Shapiro, K. Ahn, M. A. Alvarez, I. T. Iliev, H. Martel, and D. Ryu. The 21 cm Background
from the Cosmic Dark Ages: Minihalos and the Intergalactic Medium before Reionization.
ApJ, 646:681–690, August 2006.
[122] D. Tseliakhovich and C. Hirata. Relative velocity of dark matter and baryonic fluids and the
formation of the first structures. PRD, 82(8):083520, October 2010.
[123] D. Tseliakhovich, R. Barkana, and C. M. Hirata. Suppression and spatial variation of early
galaxies and minihaloes. MNRAS, 418:906–915, December 2011.
[124] N. Dalal, U.-L. Pen, and U. Seljak. Large-scale BAO signatures of the smallest galaxies. JCAP,
11:7, November 2010.
[125] A. Stacy, V. Bromm, and A. Loeb. Effect of Streaming Motion of Baryons Relative to Dark
Matter on the Formation of the First Stars. ApJ, 730:L1, March 2011.
[126] U. Maio, L. V. E. Koopmans, and B. Ciardi. The impact of primordial supersonic flows
on early structure formation, reionization and the lowest-mass dwarf galaxies. MNRAS,
412:L40–L44, March 2011.
[127] D. Babich and A. Loeb. Imprint of Inhomogeneous Reionization on the Power Spectrum of
Galaxy Surveys at High Redshifts. ApJ, 640:1–7, March 2006.
[128] J. R. Pritchard, S. R. Furlanetto, and M. Kamionkowski. Galaxy surveys, inhomogeneous
re-ionization and dark energy. MNRAS, 374:159–167, January 2007.
[129] J. S. B. Wyithe and A. Loeb. The imprint of cosmic reionization on galaxy clustering. MNRAS,
382:921–936, December 2007.
[130] M. A. Dopita, L. M. Krauss, R. S. Sutherland, C. Kobayashi, and C. H. Lineweaver. Re-ionizing

CONTENTS

62

the universe without stars. Astrophys. & Space. Sci., page 242, July 2011.
[131] H. Trac and N. Y. Gnedin. Computer Simulations of Cosmic Reionization. ArXiv e-prints,
June 2009.
[132] M. McQuinn, A. Lidz, O. Zahn, S. Dutta, L. Hernquist, and M. Zaldarriaga. The morphology
of HII regions during reionization. MNRAS, 377:1043–1063, May 2007.
[133] A. Mesinger, S. Furlanetto, and R. Cen. 21CMFAST: a fast, seminumerical simulation of the
high-redshift 21-cm signal. MNRAS, 411:955–972, February 2011.
[134] M. G. Santos, L. Ferramacho, M. B. Silva, A. Amblard, and A. Cooray. Fast large volume
simulations of the 21-cm signal from the reionization and pre-reionization epochs. MNRAS,
page 864, June 2010.
[135] R. M. Thomas, S. Zaroubi, B. Ciardi, A. H. Pawlik, P. Labropoulos, V. Jelić, G. Bernardi,
M. A. Brentjens, A. G. de Bruyn, G. J. A. Harker, L. V. E. Koopmans, G. Mellema, V. N.
Pandey, J. Schaye, and S. Yatawatta. Fast large-scale reionization simulations. MNRAS,
393:32–48, February 2009.
[136] H. Trac and R. Cen. Radiative Transfer Simulations of Cosmic Reionization. I. Methodology
and Initial Results. ApJ, 671:1–13, December 2007.
[137] A. M. Partl, A. Maselli, B. Ciardi, A. Ferrara, and V. Müller. Enabling parallel computing in
CRASH. MNRAS, 414:428–444, June 2011.
[138] H. Trac, R. Cen, and A. Loeb. Imprint of Inhomogeneous Hydrogen Reionization on the
Temperature Distribution of the Intergalactic Medium. ApJ, 689:L81–L84, December 2008.
[139] S. Baek, P. Di Matteo, B. Semelin, F. Combes, and Y. Revaz. The simulated 21 cm signal
during the epoch of reionization: full modeling of the Ly-α pumping. A & A, 495:389–405,
February 2009.
[140] S. Baek, B. Semelin, P. Di Matteo, Y. Revaz, and F. Combes. Reionization by UV or X-ray
sources. A & A, 523:A4, November 2010.
[141] A. Lidz, O. Zahn, M. McQuinn, M. Zaldarriaga, and L. Hernquist. Detecting the Rise and Fall
of 21 cm Fluctuations with the Murchison Widefield Array. ApJ, 680:962–974, June 2008.
[142] M. McQuinn, O. Zahn, M. Zaldarriaga, L. Hernquist, and S. R. Furlanetto. Cosmological
Parameter Estimation Using 21 cm Radiation from the Epoch of Reionization. ApJ, 653:815–
834, December 2006.
[143] J. Maldacena. Non-gaussian features of primordial fluctuations in single field inflationary
models. Journal of High Energy Physics, 5:13, May 2003.
[144] E. Komatsu, J. Dunkley, M. R. Nolta, C. L. Bennett, B. Gold, G. Hinshaw, N. Jarosik,
D. Larson, M. Limon, L. Page, D. N. Spergel, M. Halpern, R. S. Hill, A. Kogut, S. S. Meyer,
G. S. Tucker, J. L. Weiland, E. Wollack, and E. L. Wright. Five-Year Wilkinson Microwave
Anisotropy Probe Observations: Cosmological Interpretation. ApJS, 180:330–376, February
2009.
[145] A. Cooray. 21-cm Background Anisotropies Can Discern Primordial Non-Gaussianity. Physical
Review Letters, 97(26):261301, December 2006.
[146] A. Pillepich, C. Porciani, and S. Matarrese. The Bispectrum of Redshifted 21 Centimeter
Fluctuations from the Dark Ages. ApJ, 662:1–14, June 2007.
[147] G. J. A. Harker, S. Zaroubi, R. M. Thomas, V. Jelić, P. Labropoulos, G. Mellema, I. T. Iliev,
G. Bernardi, M. A. Brentjens, A. G. de Bruyn, B. Ciardi, L. V. E. Koopmans, V. N. Pandey,
A. H. Pawlik, J. Schaye, and S. Yatawatta. Detection and extraction of signals from the
epoch of reionization using higher-order one-point statistics. MNRAS, 393:1449–1458, March
2009.
[148] M. M. Friedrich, G. Mellema, M. A. Alvarez, P. R. Shapiro, and I. T. Iliev. Topology and sizes
of H II regions during cosmic reionization. MNRAS, 413:1353–1372, May 2011.
[149] K.-G. Lee and D. N. Spergel. Threshold Probability Functions and Thermal Inhomogeneities
in the Lyα Forest. ApJ, 734:21, June 2011.
[150] S. Joudaki, O. Doré, L. Ferramacho, M. Kaplinghat, and M. G. Santos. Primordial NonGaussianity from the 21 cm Power Spectrum during the Epoch of Reionization. Physical
Review Letters, 107(13):131304, September 2011.
[151] Y. Mao, M. Tegmark, M. McQuinn, M. Zaldarriaga, and O. Zahn. How accurately can 21cm
tomography constrain cosmology? PRD, 78(2):023529, July 2008.
[152] V. Barger, Y. Gao, Y. Mao, and D. Marfatia. Inflationary potential from 21 cm tomography
and Planck. Physics Letters B, 673:173–178, March 2009.
[153] P. Adshead, R. Easther, J. Pritchard, and A. Loeb. Inflation and the scale dependent spectral
index: prospects and strategies. JCAP, 2:21, February 2011.
[154] J. R. Pritchard and E. Pierpaoli. Constraining massive neutrinos using cosmological 21cm
observations. PRD, 78(6):065009, September 2008.

CONTENTS

63

[155] C. Gordon and J. R. Pritchard. Forecasted 21cm constraints on compensated isocurvature
perturbations. PRD, 80(6):063535, September 2009.
[156] S. Jester and H. Falcke. Science with a lunar low-frequency array: From the dark ages of the
Universe to nearby exoplanets. New Astron. Rev., 53:1–26, May 2009.
[157] R. Khatri and B. D. Wandelt. 21-cm Radiation: A New Probe of Variation in the Fine-Structure
Constant. Physical Review Letters, 98(11):111301, March 2007.
[158] R. Khatri and B. D. Wandelt. Cosmic (Super)String Constraints from 21cm Radiation.
Physical Review Letters, 100(9):091302, March 2008.
[159] A. Loeb and J. S. B. Wyithe. Possibility of Precise Measurement of the Cosmological Power
Spectrum with a Dedicated Survey of 21cm Emission after Reionization. Physical Review
Letters, 100(16):161301, April 2008.
[160] J. S. B. Wyithe and A. Loeb. Fluctuations in 21-cm emission after reionization. MNRAS,
383:606–614, January 2008.
[161] T.-C. Chang, U.-L. Pen, J. B. Peterson, and P. McDonald. Baryon Acoustic Oscillation
Intensity Mapping of Dark Energy. Physical Review Letters, 100(9):091303, March 2008.
[162] R. A. Battye, R. D. Davies, and J. Weller. Neutral hydrogen surveys for high-redshift galaxy
clusters and protoclusters. MNRAS, 355:1339–1347, December 2004.
[163] E. Visbal, A. Loeb, and S. Wyithe. Cosmological constraints from 21cm surveys after
reionization. JCAP, 10:30, October 2009.
[164] A. Albrecht, G. Bernstein, R. Cahn, W. L. Freedman, J. Hewitt, W. Hu, J. Huth,
M. Kamionkowski, E. W. Kolb, L. Knox, J. C. Mather, S. Staggs, and N. B. Suntzeff.
Report of the Dark Energy Task Force. ArXiv Astrophysics e-prints, September 2006.
[165] J. S. B. Wyithe, A. Loeb, and P. M. Geil. Baryonic acoustic oscillations in 21-cm emission: a
probe of dark energy out to high redshifts. MNRAS, 383:1195–1209, January 2008.
[166] J. S. B. Wyithe and A. Loeb. The 21-cm power spectrum after reionization. MNRAS, 397:1926–
1934, August 2009.
[167] T.-C. Chang, U.-L. Pen, K. Bandura, and J. B. Peterson. An intensity map of hydrogen 21-cm
emission at redshift z˜0.8. Nat., 466:463–465, July 2010.
[168] R. Barkana and A. Loeb. Identifying the Reionization Redshift from the Cosmic Star Formation
Rate. ApJ, 539:20–25, August 2000.
[169] M. Righi, C. Hernández-Monteagudo, and R. A. Sunyaev. Carbon monoxide line emission
as a CMB foreground: tomography of the star-forming universe with different spectral
resolutions. A & A, 489:489–504, October 2008.
[170] E. Visbal, H. Trac, and A. Loeb. Demonstrating the feasibility of line intensity mapping using
mock data of galaxy clustering from simulations. JCAP, 8:10, August 2011.
[171] E. Visbal and A. Loeb. Measuring the 3D clustering of undetected galaxies through cross
correlation of their cumulative flux fluctuations from multiple spectral lines. JCAP, 11:16,
November 2010.
[172] X. Wang, M. Tegmark, M. G. Santos, and L. Knox. 21 cm Tomography with Foregrounds.
ApJ, 650:529–537, October 2006.
[173] A. Liu and M. Tegmark. A method for 21 cm power spectrum estimation in the presence of
foregrounds. PRD, 83(10):103006, May 2011.
[174] C. L. Carilli. Intensity Mapping of Molecular Gas During Cosmic Reionization. ApJ, 730:L30,
April 2011.
[175] A. Lidz, S. R. Furlanetto, S. P. Oh, J. Aguirre, T.-C. Chang, O. Doré, and J. R. Pritchard.
Intensity Mapping with Carbon Monoxide Emission Lines and the Redshifted 21 cm Line.
ApJ, 741:70, November 2011.
[176] Y. Gong, A. Cooray, M. B. Silva, M. G. Santos, and P. Lubin. Probing Reionization with
Intensity Mapping of Molecular and Fine-structure Lines. ApJ, 728:L46, February 2011.
[177] D. Obreschkow, I. Heywood, H.-R. Klöckner, and S. Rawlings. A Heuristic Prediction of the
Cosmic Evolution of the Co-luminosity Functions. ApJ, 702:1321–1335, September 2009.
[178] R. Shetty, S. C. Glover, C. P. Dullemond, and R. S. Klessen. Modelling CO emission - I. CO
as a column density tracer and the X factor in molecular clouds. MNRAS, 412:1686–1700,
April 2011.
[179] A. Sternberg, A. Dalgarno, E. Herbst, and Y. Pei. Molecular Clouds at the Reionization Epoch.
In IAU Symposium, volume 280 of IAU Symposium, May 2011.
[180] G. B. Field. An Attempt to Observe Neutral Hydrogen Between the Galaxies. ApJ, 129:525,
May 1959.
[181] C. L. Carilli, N. Y. Gnedin, and F. Owen. H I 21 Centimeter Absorption beyond the Epoch
of Reionization. ApJ, 577:22–30, September 2002.
[182] S. R. Furlanetto and A. Loeb. The 21 Centimeter Forest: Radio Absorption Spectra as Probes

CONTENTS

64

of Minihalos before Reionization. ApJ, 579:1–9, November 2002.
[183] K. J. Mack and J. S. B. Wyithe. Detecting the redshifted 21cm forest during reionization.
ArXiv e-prints, January 2011.
[184] Y. Xu, X. Chen, Z. Fan, H. Trac, and R. Cen. The 21 cm Forest as a Probe of the Reionization
and The Temperature of the Intergalactic Medium. ApJ, 704:1396–1404, October 2009.
[185] Y. Xu, A. Ferrara, and X. Chen. The earliest galaxies seen in 21 cm line absorption. MNRAS,
410:2025–2042, January 2011.
[186] S. R. Furlanetto. The 21-cm forest. MNRAS, 370:1867–1875, August 2006.
[187] Y. Xu, A. Ferrara, F. S. Kitaura, and X. Chen. Searching for the earliest galaxies in the 21
cm forest. Science in China G: Physics and Astronomy, 53:1124–1129, June 2010.
[188] A. Meiksin. The micro-structure of the intergalactic medium - I. The 21 cm signature from
dynamical minihaloes. MNRAS, 417:1480–1509, October 2011.
[189] D. J. Mortlock, S. J. Warren, B. P. Venemans, M. Patel, P. C. Hewett, R. G. McMahon,
C. Simpson, T. Theuns, E. A. Gonzáles-Solares, A. Adamson, S. Dye, N. C. Hambly, P. Hirst,
M. J. Irwin, E. Kuiper, A. Lawrence, and H. J. A. Röttgering. A luminous quasar at a
redshift of z = 7.085. Nat., 474:616–619, June 2011.
[190] P. F. Hopkins, G. T. Richards, and L. Hernquist. An Observational Determination of the
Bolometric Quasar Luminosity Function. ApJ, 654:731–753, January 2007.
[191] L. Jiang, X. Fan, Ž. Ivezić, G. T. Richards, D. P. Schneider, M. A. Strauss, and B. C. Kelly. The
Radio-Loud Fraction of Quasars is a Strong Function of Redshift and Optical Luminosity.
ApJ, 656:680–690, February 2007.
[192] Z. Haiman, E. Quataert, and G. C. Bower. Modeling the Counts of Faint Radio-Loud Quasars:
Constraints on the Supermassive Black Hole Population and Predictions for High Redshift.
ApJ, 612:698–705, September 2004.
[193] C. J. Willott, P. Delorme, C. Reylé, L. Albert, J. Bergeron, D. Crampton, X. Delfosse,
T. Forveille, J. B. Hutchings, R. J. McLure, A. Omont, and D. Schade. The CanadaFrance High-z Quasar Survey: Nine New Quasars and the Luminosity Function at Redshift
6. AJ, 139:906–918, March 2010.
[194] K. Ioka and P. Mészáros. Radio Afterglows of Gamma-Ray Bursts and Hypernovae at High
Redshift and Their Potential for 21 Centimeter Absorption Studies. ApJ, 619:684–696,
February 2005.
[195] R. S. de Souza, N. Yoshida, and K. Ioka. Populations III.1 and III.2 gamma-ray bursts:
constraints on the event rate for future radio and X-ray surveys. A & A, 533:A32, September
2011.
[196] M. A. Campisi, U. Maio, R. Salvaterra, and B. Ciardi. Population III stars and the long
gamma-ray burst rate. MNRAS, 416:2760–2767, October 2011.
[197] J. R. Pritchard, A. Loeb, and J. S. B. Wyithe. Constraining reionization using 21-cm
observations in combination with CMB and Lyα forest data. MNRAS, 408:57–70, October
2010.
[198] S. Mitra, T. R. Choudhury, and A. Ferrara. Reionization constraints using principal component
analysis. MNRAS, 413:1569–1580, May 2011.

