                                                         Kaluza-Klein Gravity


                                                                  J. M. Overduin
                                    Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Victoria, P.O. Box 3055,
                                                  Victoria, British Columbia, Canada, V8W 3P6

                                                                           and




arXiv:gr-qc/9805018v1 7 May 1998
                                                                    P. S. Wesson
                                      Department of Physics, University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada N2L 3G1
                                                                          and
                                     Gravity Probe-B, Hansen Physics Laboratories, Stanford University, Stanford,
                                                             California, U.S.A. 94305



                                   Abstract

                                   We review higher-dimensional uniﬁed theories from the general relativity, rather
                                   than the particle physics side. Three distinct approaches to the subject are identi-
                                   ﬁed and contrasted: compactiﬁed, projective and noncompactiﬁed. We discuss the
                                   cosmological and astrophysical implications of extra dimensions, and conclude that
                                   none of the three approaches can be ruled out on observational grounds at the
                                   present time.




                                   Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint                          26 November 2024
1   Introduction


Kaluza’s [1] achievement was to show that ﬁve-dimensional general relativity
contains both Einstein’s four-dimensional theory of gravity and Maxwell’s the-
ory of electromagnetism. He however imposed a somewhat artiﬁcial restriction
(the cylinder condition) on the coordinates, essentially barring the ﬁfth one a
priori from making a direct appearance in the laws of physics. Klein’s [2] con-
tribution was to make this restriction less artiﬁcial by suggesting a plausible
physical basis for it in compactiﬁcation of the ﬁfth dimension. This idea was
enthusiastically received by uniﬁed-ﬁeld theorists, and when the time came
to include the strong and weak forces by extending Kaluza’s mechanism to
higher dimensions, it was assumed that these too would be compact. This line
of thinking has led through eleven-dimensional supergravity theories in the
1980s to the current favorite contenders for a possible “theory of everything,”
ten-dimensional superstrings.

We review the ﬁeld of Kaluza-Klein gravity, concentrating on the general rel-
ativity, rather than particle physics side of the subject. (For the latter there
are already many excellent books [3–8] and review articles [9–14] available.)
We also aim to re-examine the ﬁeld to some extent, as it seems to us that the
cart of compactiﬁcation has in some ways gotten ahead of the horse of uniﬁ-
cation. Kaluza uniﬁed not only gravity and electromagnetism, but also matter
and geometry, for the photon appeared in four dimensions as a manifestation
of empty ﬁve-dimensional spacetime. Modern Kaluza-Klein theories, by con-
trast, routinely require the addition of explicit “higher-dimensional matter”
ﬁelds in order to achieve successful compactiﬁcation (among other things).
Are they necessary? Yes, if extra coordinates must be real, lengthlike and
compact. There are, however, higher-dimensional uniﬁed ﬁeld theories which
require none of these things: projective theories [15–18], in which extra coor-
dinates are not physically real; and noncompactified theories [19–26], in which
they are not necessarily lengthlike or compact. These theories receive special
attention in our report.

We begin in § 2 with a historical overview of higher-dimensional theories
of gravity. In § 3 we review Kaluza’s original mechanism, emphasizing what
to us are its three principal features. The three main approaches to higher-
dimensional uniﬁcation since Kaluza — compactiﬁed, projective and noncom-
pactiﬁed — are reviewed in § 4, § 5 and § 6 respectively. We note that each one
modiﬁes or sacriﬁces at least one of the key features of Kaluza’s theory, and dis-
cuss the implications. The all-important question of experimental constraints
is addressed in § 7 and § 8, which deal respectively with cosmological and
astrophysical eﬀects of extra dimensions. None of the three above-mentioned
approaches can be ruled out on observational grounds at the present time.
Conclusions and prospects for further work are summarized in § 9.


                                       2
2   Historical Overview


2.1 Higher Dimensions


The world of everyday experience is three-dimensional. But why should this
be so? The question goes back at least to Kepler [27], who speculated that
the threefold nature of the Holy Trinity might be responsible. More recent
arguments have involved the stability of planetary orbits and atomic ground
states, the use of wave propagation for information transmission, the fun-
damental constants of nature, and the anthropic principle [28], as well as
wormhole eﬀects [29], the cosmological constant [30], certain “geometry-free”
considerations [31], string theories [32], and nucleation probabilities in quan-
tum cosmology [33]. All these lines of reasoning converge on the same conclu-
sion: that, in agreement with common intuition, space is composed of three
macroscopic spatial dimensions x1 , x2 and x3 .

Nevertheless, the temptation to tinker with the dimensionality of nature has
proved irresistible to physicists over the years. The main reason for this is
that phenomena which require very diﬀerent explanations in three-dimensional
space can often be shown to be manifestations of simpler theories in higher-
dimensional manifolds. But how can this idea be reconciled with the observed
three-dimensionality of space? If there are additional coordinates, why does
physics appear to be independent of them?

It is useful to keep in mind that the new coordinates need not necessarily be
lengthlike (in the sense of being measured in meters, say), or even spacelike
(in regard to their metric signature). A concrete example which violates both
of these expectations was introduced in 1909 by Minkowski [34], who showed
that the successes of Maxwell’s uniﬁed electromagnetic theory and Einstein’s
special relativity could be understood geometrically if time, along with space,
were considered part of a four-dimensional spacetime manifold via x0 = ict.
Many of the abovementioned arguments against more than three dimensions
were circumvented by the fact that the fourth coordinate did not mark dis-
tance. And the reason that physics had appeared three-dimensional for so long
was because of the large size of the dimension-transposing parameter c, which
meant that the eﬀects of “mixing” space and time coordinates (ie., length
contraction, time dilation) appeared only at very high speeds.


2.2 Kaluza-Klein Theory


Inspired by the close ties between Minkowski’s four-dimensional spacetime and
Maxwell’s uniﬁcation of electricity and magnetism, Nordström [35] in 1914 and


                                      3
(independently) Kaluza [1] in 1921 were the ﬁrst to try unifying gravity with
electromagnetism in a theory of five dimensions (x0 through x4 ). Both men
then faced the question: why had no ﬁfth dimension been observed in na-
ture? In Minkowski’s time, there had already been experimental phenomena
(namely, electromagnetic ones) whose invariance with respect to Lorentz trans-
formations could be interpreted as four-dimensional coordinate invariance. No
such observations pointed to a ﬁfth dimension. Nordström and Kaluza there-
fore avoided the question and simply demanded that all derivatives with re-
spect to x4 vanish. In other words, physics was to take place — for as-yet
unknown reasons — on a four-dimensional hypersurface in a ﬁve-dimensional
universe (Kaluza’s “cylinder condition”).

With this assumption, each was successful in obtaining the ﬁeld equations
of both electromagnetism and gravity from a single ﬁve-dimensional theory.
Nordström, working as he was before general relativity, assumed a scalar
gravitational potential; while Kaluza used Einstein’s tensor potential. Specif-
ically, Kaluza demonstrated that general relativity, when interpreted as a
ﬁve-dimensional theory in vacuum (ie., 5 GAB = 0, with A, B running over
0,1,2,3,4), contained four-dimensional general relativity in the presence of an
electromagnetic ﬁeld (ie., 4 Gαβ = 4 Tαβ
                                       EM
                                          , with α, β running over 0, 1, 2, 3),
together with Maxwell’s laws of electromagnetism. (There was also a Klein-
Gordon equation for a massless scalar ﬁeld, but this was not appreciated —
and was in fact suppressed — by Kaluza at the time.) All subsequent attempts
at higher-dimensional uniﬁcation spring from this remarkable result.

Various modiﬁcations of Kaluza’s ﬁve-dimensional scheme, including Klein’s
idea [2,36] of compactifying the extra dimension (which we will discuss in a
moment) were suggested by Einstein, Jordan, Bergmann, and a few others
[37–43] over the years, but it was not extended to more than ﬁve dimensions
until theories of the strong and weak nuclear interactions were developed. The
obvious question was whether these new forces could be uniﬁed with gravity
and electromagnetism by the same method.

The key to achieving this lay in the concept of gauge invariance, which was
coming to be recognized as underlying all the interactions of physics. Elec-
trodynamics, for example, could be “derived” by imposing local U(1) gauge-
invariance on a free-particle Lagrangian. From the gauge-invariant point of
view, Kaluza’s feat in extracting electromagnetism from ﬁve-dimensional grav-
ity was no longer so surprising: it worked, in eﬀect, because U(1) gauge-
invariance had been “added onto” Einstein’s equations in the guise of in-
variance with respect to coordinate transformations along the ﬁfth dimension.
In other words, gauge symmetry had been “explained” as a geometric symme-
try of spacetime. The electromagnetic ﬁeld then appeared as a vector “gauge
ﬁeld” in four dimensions. It was natural — though not simple — to extend
this insight to groups with more complicated symmetry. De Witt [44] in 1963


                                      4
was the ﬁrst to suggest incorporating the non-Abelian SU(2) gauge group of
Yang and Mills into a Kaluza-Klein theory of (4 + d) dimensions. A minimum
of three extra dimensions were required. This problem was picked up by others
[45–47] and solved completely by the time of Cho & Freund [48,49] in 1975.



2.3 Approaches to Higher-Dimensional Unification


We emphasize here three key features of all the models discussed so far:
(i ) They embody Einstein’s vision [50–52] of nature as pure geometry. (This
idea can be traced in nonmathematical form at least to Cliﬀord in 1876 [53],
and there are hints of it as far back as the Indian Vedas, according to Wheeler
and others [54].) The electromagnetic and Yang-Mills ﬁelds, as well as the
gravitational ﬁeld, are completely contained in the higher-dimensional Einstein
tensor (4+d) GAB ; that is, in the metric and its derivatives. No explicit energy-
momentum tensor (4+d) TAB is needed.
(ii ) They are minimal extensions of general relativity in the sense that there is
no modiﬁcation to the mathematical structure of Einstein’s theory. The only
change is that tensor indices run over 0 to (3 + d) instead of 0 to 3.
(iii ) They are a priori cylindrical. No mechanism is suggested to explain why
physics depends on the ﬁrst four coordinates, but not on the extra ones.

The ﬁrst two of these are agreeable from the point of view of elegance and sim-
plicity. The third, however, appears contrived to modern eyes. In the eﬀort to
repair this defect, higher-dimensional uniﬁed theory has evolved in three more
or less independent directions since the time of Kaluza. Each one sacriﬁces or
modiﬁes one of the features (i ) to (iii ) above.

Firstly, it has been proposed that extra dimensions do not appear in physics
because they are compactified and unobservable on experimentally accessible
energy scales. This approach has been successful in many ways, and is the
dominant paradigm in higher-dimensional uniﬁcation (recent reviews include
many excellent books [3–8] and articles [9–14]). If one wants to unify more
than just gravity and electromagnetism in this way, however, it seems that
one has in practice to abandon Einstein’s goal of geometrizing physics, at
least in the sense of (i ) above.

A second way to sweep the extra dimensions out of sight is to regard them
as mathematical artifacts of a more complicated underlying theory, sacriﬁcing
(ii ) above. This can be done, for example, if one replaces the classical (aﬃne)
geometry underlying Einstein’s general relativity with projective geometry (see
for reviews [15–18]). “Extra dimensions” then become visual aids which may
or may not help us understand the underlying mathematics of nature, but
which do not correspond to physical coordinates.


                                       5
The third approach to the problem of explaining exact cylindricity is to con-
sider the possibility that it may not necessarily be exact, relaxing (iii ) above.
That is, one takes the new coordinates at face value, allowing physics to de-
pend on them in principle [19–26]. This dependence presumably appears in
regimes that have not yet been well-probed by experiment — much as the
relevance of Minkowski’s fourth dimension to mechanics was not apparent at
non-relativistic speeds. When dependence on the extra dimensions is included,
one ﬁnds that the ﬁve-dimensional Einstein equations 5 RAB = 0 contain the
four-dimensional ones 4 Gαβ = 4 Tαβ with a general energy-momentum tensor
4
  Tαβ instead of just the electromagnetic one 4 Tαβ
                                                  EM
                                                     .


2.4 The Compactified Approach


Klein showed in 1926 [2,36] that Kaluza’s cylinder condition would arise natu-
rally if the ﬁfth coordinate had (1) a circular topology, in which case physical
ﬁelds would depend on it only periodically, and could be Fourier-expanded;
and (2) a small enough (“compactiﬁed”) scale, in which case the energies of
all Fourier modes above the ground state could be made so high as to be un-
observable (except — as we now add — possibly in the very early universe).
Physics would thus be eﬀectively independent of Kaluza’s ﬁfth dimension, as
desired. As a bonus, it seemed early on that the expansion of the electromag-
netic ﬁeld into Fourier modes could in principle explain the quantization of
electric charge. (This aspect of the theory has had to be abandoned, however,
as the charge-to-mass ratio of the higher modes did not match that of any
known particles. Nowadays elementary charges are identiﬁed with the ground
state Fourier modes only, and their small mass is attributed to spontaneous
symmetry-breaking.)

The scheme was not perfect; one still needed to explain why extra dimensions
diﬀered so markedly in topology and scale from the familiar spacetime ones.
Their size in particular had to be extremely small (below the attometer (1 am
= 10−18 m) scale, according to current experiment [55]). There was also the
question of how to interpret a new scalar ﬁeld which appeared in the theory.
These diﬃculties have, however, proved manageable. Scalar ﬁelds are not as
threatening as they once appeared; one now just assumes that they are too
massive to have been observed. And an entire industry has grown up around
the study of compactiﬁcation mechanisms and the topology of compact spaces.

In fact, Klein’s strategy of compactifying extra dimensions has come to dom-
inate higher-dimensional uniﬁed physics, leading in recent years to new ﬁelds
like eleven-dimensional supergravity and ten-dimensional superstring theory.
We will survey these developments in this section, and make contact with many
of them throughout this report, but it is not our purpose to review them ex-


                                       6
haustively. For this the reader is directed to the books [3–8], and review articles
[9–14] mentioned already. Our goal here is to take a broad view, comparing
and contrasting the various approaches to higher-dimensional gravity, and fo-
cusing in particular on those which have received less critical attention in
the literature. A semantic note: while the term “Kaluza-Klein theory” ought,
strictly speaking, to apply only to models which assume both cylindricity and
compactiﬁed dimensions, we follow popular usage and apply the term to any
higher-dimensional uniﬁed theory of gravity in which the extra dimensions are
regarded as real, whether compactiﬁed or not. When distinguishing between
these two, we will refer in the latter case to “noncompactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein
theories,” though this is to some extent a contradiction in terms.


2.5 Compactification Mechanisms


A diﬃculty with compactiﬁcation is that one cannot impose it indiscriminately
on whichever dimensions one likes — the combination of macroscopic four-
dimensional spacetime plus the compactiﬁed extra-dimensional space must
be a solution of the higher-dimensional Einstein ﬁeld equations. In partic-
ular, one should be able to recover a “ground state” solution consisting of
four-dimensional Minkowski space plus a d-dimensional compact manifold.
Although this is straightforward when d = 1 (Klein’s case), the same thing is
not true in higher-dimensional theories like that of Cho & Freund, where the
compact spaces are in general curved [7,56–59]. The consequences of ignoring
this inconsistency in “Kaluza-Klein ansatz” have been emphasized by Duﬀ et
al. [11,12,14,60]. This and related problems have even led Cho [61–64] to call
for the abandonment of Klein’s “zero modes approximation” as a means of
dimensional reduction.

In general, however, spacetime can still be coaxed into compactifying in the de-
sired manner — at the cost of altering the higher-dimensional vacuum Einstein
equations, either by incorporating torsion [65–68], adding higher-derivative
terms (eg., R2 ) onto the Einstein action [69], or — last but not least —
adding an explicit higher-dimensional energy-momentum tensor to the the-
ory. If chosen judiciously, this last will induce “spontaneous compactiﬁcation”
of the extra dimensions, as ﬁrst demonstrated by Cremmer & Scherk [70,71].
This approach, though, sacriﬁces Einstein and Kaluza’s dream [50–54] of a
purely geometrical uniﬁed theory of nature. Rather than explaining the “base
wood” of four-dimensional matter and forces as manifestations of the “pure
marble” of geometry in higher dimensions, one has essentially been driven to
invent new kinds of wood. Weinberg [72] has likened this situation to the fa-
ble of “stone soup,” in which a miraculous stew, allegedly made out of rocks,
turns out on deeper investigation to be made from rocks plus various kinds of
vegetables, meat and spices.


                                        7
In spite of this aesthetic drawback, however, the idea of spontaneous com-
pactiﬁcation gained rapid acceptance [73–78] and has become the standard
way to reconcile extra dimensions with the observed four-dimensionality of
spacetime in Kaluza-Klein theory (see Bailin & Love [13] for a review). An
important variation is that of Candelas & Weinberg [79,80], who showed that
the quantum Casimir energy of massless higher-dimensional ﬁelds, when com-
bined with a higher-dimensional cosmological constant, can also compactify
the extra dimensions in a satisfactory way. Unfortunately, some 104 − 105
matter ﬁelds are required.


2.6 D = 11 Supergravity


One way to make the addition “by hand” of extra matter ﬁelds more natural
was to make the theory supersymmetric (ie., to match up every boson with
an as-yet undetected fermionic “superpartner” and vice versa). The reason for
this is that the (compactiﬁed) Kaluza-Klein programme of “explaining” gauge
symmetries as (restricted) higher-dimensional spacetime symmetries can only
give rise to four-dimensional gauge bosons. If the theory is to include fermionic
ﬁelds, as required by supersymmetry, then these ﬁelds at least must be put
in by hand. (This limitation may not necessarily apply to noncompactiﬁed
Kaluza-Klein theories, in which the modest dependence on extra coordinates
— subject to experimental constraints — gives the Einstein equations a rich
enough structure that matter of a very general kind can be “induced” in
the four-dimensional universe by pure geometry in higher dimensions. In ﬁve
dimensions, for example, one can obtain not only photons, the gauge bosons
of electromagnetism, but also dustlike, vacuum, or “stiﬀ” matter.)

Supersymmetric gravity (“supergravity”) began life as a four-dimensional the-
ory in 1976 [81,82], but quickly made the jump to higher dimensions (“Kaluza-
Klein supergravity”). It was particularly successful in D = 11, for three prin-
cipal reasons. First, Nahm [83] showed that eleven was the maximum number
of dimensions consistent with a single graviton (and an upper limit of two on
particle spin). This was followed by Witten’s proof [84] that eleven was also
the minimum number of dimensions required for a Kaluza-Klein theory to
unify all the forces in the standard model of particle physics (ie., to contain
the gauge groups of the strong (SU(3)) and electroweak (SU(2) × U(1)) inter-
actions). The combination of supersymmetry with Kaluza-Klein theory thus
appeared to uniquely fix the dimensionality of spacetime. Secondly, whereas
in lower dimensions one had to choose between several possible conﬁgura-
tions for the extra matter ﬁelds, Cremmer, Julia & Scherk [85] demonstrated
in 1978 that in D = 11 exactly one choice was consistent with the require-
ments of supersymmetry (in particular, that there be equal numbers of Bose
and Fermi degrees of freedom). In other words, while a higher-dimensional


                                       8
energy-momentum tensor was still required, its form at least appeared less
contrived. Finally, Freund & Rubin [86] showed in 1980 that compactiﬁcation
of the D = 11 model could occur in only two ways: to seven or four com-
pact dimensions, leaving four (or seven, respectively) macroscopic ones. Not
only did eleven-dimensional spacetime appear to be uniquely favoured for uni-
ﬁcation, but it also split perfectly to produce the observed four-dimensional
world. (The other possibility, of a macroscopic seven-dimensional world, could
unfortunately not be ruled out, and in fact at least one such model was explic-
itly constructed as well [87].) Buoyed by these successes, eleven-dimensional
supergravity appeared set by the mid 1980s as a leading candidate for the
hoped-for “theory of everything” (see [8,12,88] for reviews, and [89] for an
extensive collection of papers. A nontechnical introduction is given in [90].)

A number of blemishes, however — one aesthetic and three more practical
— have dampened this initial enthusiasm. Firstly, the compact manifolds
originally envisioned by Witten [84] (those containing the standard model)
turned out not to generate quarks or leptons, and to be incompatible with
supersymmetry [8,13]. Their most successful replacements are the 7-sphere
and the “squashed” 7-sphere [12], described respectively by the symmetry
groups SO(8) and SO(5) × SU(2). These groups, however, unfortunately
do not contain the minimum symmetry requirements of the standard model
(SU(3) × SU(2) × U(1)). This is commonly rectiﬁed by adding more matter
ﬁelds, the “composite gauge ﬁelds” [91], to the eleven-dimensional Lagrangian.
Secondly, it is very diﬃcult to build chirality (necessary for a realistic fermion
model) into an eleven-dimensional theory [84,92]. A variety of remedies have
been proposed for this, including the ubiquitous additional higher-dimensional
gauge ﬁelds [73,77], noncompact internal manifolds [93–99], and extensions
of Riemannian geometry [100–102]. Thirdly, D = 11 supergravity theory is
marred by a large cosmological constant in four dimensions, which is diﬃcult
to remove, even by ﬁne-tuning [7,8]. Finally, quantization of the theory leads
inevitably to anomalies [89].

Some of these diﬃculties can be eased by descending to ten dimensions: chi-
rality is easier to obtain [92], and many of the anomalies disappear [103].
However, the introduction of chiral fermions leads to new kinds of anomalies.
And the primary beneﬁt of the D = 11 theory — its uniqueness — is lost, since
ten dimensions are not specially favoured, and the higher-energy theory does
not break down naturally into four macroscopic and six compact dimensions.
(One can still ﬁnd solutions in which this happens, but there is no reason
why they should be preferred.) In fact, most D = 10 supergravity models not
only require ad hoc higher-dimensional matter ﬁelds to ensure proper com-
pactiﬁcation, but entirely ignore gauge ﬁelds arising from the Kaluza-Klein
mechanism (ie., from symmetries of the compact manifold), so that all the
gauge ﬁelds are eﬀectively put into the theory by hand [8]. Kaluza’s original
aim of explaining forces in geometrical terms is thus abandoned completely.


                                       9
2.7 D = 10 Superstring Theory


A breakthrough in solving the uniqueness and anomaly problems of D = 10
theory occured when Green & Schwarz [104] and Gross et al. [105] showed that
there were two, and only two ten-dimensional supergravity models in which
all anomalies could be made to vanish: those based on the groups SO(32) and
E8 × E8 respectively. Once again, extra terms (known as Chapline-Manton
terms) had to be added to the higher-dimensional Lagrangian [8]. This time,
however, the addition was not completely arbitrary; the extra terms were those
which would appear anyway if the theory were a low-energy approximation to
certain kinds of superstring theory.

The state of the art in compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein theory, then, has shifted
from supergravity theories to superstring theories, the main signiﬁcance of the
former now being as low-energy limits of the latter [89]. Superstrings (super-
symmetric generalizations of strings) avoid the generic prediction of tachyons
that plagued the ﬁrst string theories [106], but retain their best features, espe-
cially the possibility of an anomaly-free path to quantum gravity [107]. In fact,
their many virtues make them the current favorite contender for a “theory of
everything” [108]. Connections have recently been made between certain su-
perstring states and extreme black holes [14], and it has even been argued
that superstrings can help resolve the long-standing black hole information
paradox [109].

Something of a uniqueness problem has persisted for D = 10 superstrings
in that the groups SO(32) and E8 × E8 admit ﬁve diﬀerent string theories
between them. But this diﬃculty has recently been addressed by Witten [376],
who showed that it is possible to view these ﬁve theories as aspects of a
single underlying theory, now known as M-theory (for “Membrane”) [377].
The low-energy limit of this new theory, furthermore, turns out to be D = 11
supergravity! So it appears that the preferred dimensionality of spacetime in
compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein theory may be switching back to eleven.

Perhaps the biggest obstacle to a wider acceptance of these theories is the
diﬃculty of extracting clear-cut physical predictions from them. String theory
is “promising ... ,” one worker has said, “... and promising, and promising”
[110]. M-theory, which (unlike superstring theory) is not perturbative, is even
more opaque; Witten has suggested that the “M” might equally well stand for
“Magic” or “Mystery” at present [378]. We will not consider these interesting
developments further here, directing the reader instead to the superstring
reviews in [8,111,112] (a nontechnical account may be found in [113]), or the
recent reviews of M-theory in [378,379].




                                       10
2.8 The Projective Approach


Compactiﬁcation of extra dimensions is not the only way to explain Kaluza’s
cylinder condition. Another, less well-known approach goes back to Veblen
& Hoﬀmann [114] in 1931. These authors showed that the ﬁfth dimension
could be “absorbed into” ordinary four-dimensional spacetime if one replaced
the classical (aﬃne) tensors of general relativity with projective ones. Rather
than being regarded as new coordinates, the extra dimensions were eﬀectively
demoted to visual aids. Because they were not physically real, there was no
need to explain why they were not observed. The price for this resolution of
the problem was that one had to alter the geometrical foundation of Einstein’s
theory. This idea received attention from Jordan, Pauli and several others over
the years [39,115–122]. Early versions of the theory ran afoul of experimental
constraints on the Brans-Dicke parameter ω and had to be ruled out as un-
tenable [15]. However the projective approach has been revived in at least two
new formulations. That of Lessner [15] assigns the scalar ﬁeld a purely mi-
croscopic meaning; this has interesting consequences for elementary particles
[123–126]. The other, due to Schmutzer [16–18], endows the vacuum with a
special kind of higher-dimensional matter, the “non-geometrizable substrate,”
thereby sacriﬁcing Einstein’s dream of reducing physics to geometry. This the-
ory, however, does make a number of testable predictions [17,127–129] which
are so far compatible with observation.


2.9 The Noncompactified Approach


An alternative to both the compactiﬁed and projective approaches is to take
the extra dimensions at face value, without necessarily compactifying them,
and assume that nature is only approximately independent of them — much
as it was on Minkowski’s fourth coordinate at nonrelativistic speeds. In other
words, one avoids having to explain why cylindricity should be exact by relax-
ing it in principle. Of course, the question remains as to why nature should be
so nearly cylindrical in practice. If the extra dimensions are lengthlike, then
one might try to answer this by supposing that particles are trapped near a
four-dimensional hypersurface by a potential well. Ideas of this kind have been
around since at least 1962 [130]; for recent discussions see [131–134].

Conﬁning potentials are not, however, an obvious improvement over compact-
iﬁcation mechanisms in terms of economy of thought. An alternative is to
take Minkowski’s example more literally and entertain the idea that extra
dimensions, like time, might not necessarily be lengthlike. In this case the
explanation for the near-cylindricity of nature is to be found in the physical
interpretation of the extra coordinates; ie., in the values of the dimension-


                                     11
transposing parameters (like c) needed to give them units of length. The ﬁrst
such proposal of which we are aware is the 1983 “space-time-mass” theory
of Wesson [135], who suggested that a ﬁfth dimension might be associated
with rest mass via x4 = Gm/c2 . The chief eﬀect of this new coordinate on
four-dimensional physics was that particle rest mass, usually assumed to be
constant, varied with time. The variation was, however, small and quite con-
sistent with experiment. This model has been studied in some detail, par-
ticularly with regard to its consequences for astrophysics and cosmology, by
Wesson [19,136–139] and others [140–148], [149–158], [159–163], and has been
extended to more than ﬁve dimensions by Fukui [164,165], with the constants
h̄ and e playing roles analogous to c and G.

Variable gravity theories are, of course, not new. What is new in the models
just described — and what is important about noncompactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein
theory in principle — is not so much the particular physical interpretation one
attaches to the new coordinates, but the bare fact that physics is allowed to
depend on them at all. It is clearly of interest to study the higher-dimensional
Einstein equations with a general dependence on the extra coordinates; ie.,
without any preconceived notions as to their physical meaning. A pioneering
eﬀort in this direction was made in 1986 by Yoshimura [166], who however
considered only the case where the d-dimensional part of the (4 + d)-space
could depend on the new coordinates. The general theory, in which any part
of the metric can depend on the ﬁfth coordinate, has been explored recently
by Wesson and others [19–26], and its implications for cosmology [167–170],
[171–179] and astrophysics [180–185], [186–194] have become the focus of a
growing research eﬀort. As this branch of Kaluza-Klein theory has not yet been
reviewed in a comprehensive manner, we propose to devote special attention
to it in this report. Our intention is to compare and contrast this branch of
the subject with other ones, however, so we will make frequent contact with
the compactiﬁed and (to a lesser extent) projective theories.




3   The Kaluza Mechanism


Kaluza uniﬁed electromagnetism with gravity by applying Einstein’s general
theory of relativity to a five-, rather than four-dimensional spacetime manifold.
In what follows, we consider generalizations of his procedure that may be new
to some readers, so it will be advantageous to brieﬂy review the mathematics
and underlying assumptions here.




                                      12
3.1 Matter from Geometry


The Einstein equations in ﬁve dimensions with no five-dimensional energy-
momentum tensor are:

                                  ĜAB = 0 ,                                (1)


or, equivalently:

                                  R̂AB = 0 ,                                (2)


where ĜAB ≡ R̂AB − R̂ ĝAB /2 is the Einstein tensor, R̂AB and R̂ = ĝAB R̂AB
are the ﬁve-dimensional Ricci tensor and scalar respectively, and ĝAB is the
ﬁve-dimensional metric tensor. (Throughout this report capital Latin indices
A, B, ... run over 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and ﬁve-dimensional quantities are denoted by
hats.) These equations can be derived by varying a ﬁve-dimensional version
of the usual Einstein action:
                                1
                                       Z    q
                        S=−                R̂ −ĝ d4 x dy ,                 (3)
                              16π Ĝ


with respect to the ﬁve-dimensional metric, where y = x4 represents the new
(ﬁfth) coordinate and Ĝ is a “ﬁve-dimensional gravitational constant.”

The absence of matter sources in these equations reﬂects what we have em-
phasized as Kaluza’s ﬁrst key assumption (i ), inspired by Einstein: that the
universe in higher dimensions is empty. The idea is to explain matter (in four
dimensions) as a manifestation of pure geometry (in higher ones). If, instead,
one introduced new kinds of higher-dimensional matter, then one would have
gained little in economy of thought. One would, so to speak, be getting Wein-
berg’s “stone soup” [72] from a can.


3.2 A Minimal Extension of General Relativity


The ﬁve-dimensional Ricci tensor and Christoﬀel symbols are deﬁned in terms
of the metric exactly as in four dimensions:


    R̂AB = ∂C Γ̂C          C      C   D       C    D
                AB − ∂B Γ̂AC + Γ̂AB Γ̂CD − Γ̂AD Γ̂BC ,
           1 CD
    Γ̂C
      AB = ĝ     (∂A ĝDB + ∂B ĝDA − ∂D ĝAB ) .                          (4)
           2


                                       13
Note that, aside from the fact that tensor indices run over 0 − 4 instead of
0 − 3, all is exactly as it was in Einstein’s theory. We have emphasized this as
the second key feature (ii ) of Kaluza’s approach to uniﬁcation.

Everything now depends on one’s choice for the form of the ﬁve-dimensional
metric. In general, one identiﬁes the αβ-part of ĝAB with gαβ (the four-
dimensional metric tensor), the α4-part with Aα (the electromagnetic poten-
tial), and the 44-part with φ (a scalar ﬁeld). A convenient way to parametrize
things is as follows:
                                                         
                                     2 2
                             gαβ + κ φ Aα Aβ      κφ2 Aα 
                   (ĝAB ) =                                ,              (5)
                                   κφ2 Aβ            φ2


where we have scaled the electromagnetic potential Aα by a constant κ in
order to get the right multiplicative factors in the action later on. (Throughout
this report, Greek indices α, β, ... run over 0, 1, 2, 3, and small Latin indices
a, b, ... run over 1, 2, 3. The four-dimensional metric signature is taken to be
(+ − − −), and we work in units such that c = 1. In addition, for convenience
and accord with other work, we set h̄ = 1 in § 3, and G = 1 in in § 7 and § 8.)



3.3 The Cylinder Condition


If one then applies the third key feature (iii ) of Kaluza’s theory (the cylinder
condition), which means dropping all derivatives with respect to the ﬁfth co-
ordinate, then one ﬁnds, using the metric (5) and the deﬁnitions (4), that the
αβ-, α4-, and 44-components of the ﬁve-dimensional ﬁeld equation (2) reduce
respectively to the following ﬁeld equations [15,41] in four dimensions:


             κ2 φ2 EM 1
        Gαβ =     T    − [∇α (∂β φ) − gαβ ✷φ] ,
              2 αβ       φ
                  α
                 ∂ φ              κ2 φ3
    ∇α Fαβ = −3      Fαβ , ✷φ =         Fαβ F αβ ,                           (6)
                  φ                 4

                                                         EM
where Gαβ ≡ Rαβ − Rgαβ /2 is the Einstein tensor, Tαβ        ≡ gαβ Fγδ F γδ /4 −
Fαγ Fβγ is the electromagnetic energy-momentum tensor, and Fαβ ≡ ∂α Aβ −
∂β Aα . There are a total of 10 + 4 + 1 = 15 equations, as expected since there
are ﬁfteen independent elements in the ﬁve-dimensional metric (5).




                                      14
3.4 The Case φ = constant


If the scalar ﬁeld φ is constant throughout spacetime, then the ﬁrst two of
eqs. (6) are just the Einstein and Maxwell equations:

                       Gαβ = 8πGφ2 Tαβ
                                    EM
                                       ,      ∇α Fαβ = 0 ,                  (7)


where we have identiﬁed the scaling parameter κ in terms of the gravitational
constant G (in four dimensions) by:
                                      √
                                κ ≡ 4 πG .                                (8)


This is the result originally obtained by Kaluza and Klein, who set φ = 1.
(The same thing has done by some subsequent authors employing “special
coordinate systems” [9,195].) The condition φ = constant is, however, only
consistent with the the third of the ﬁeld equations (6) when Fαβ F αβ = 0,
as was ﬁrst pointed out by Jordan [39,40] and Thiry [41]. The fact that this
took twenty years to be acknowledged is a measure of the deep suspicion with
which scalar ﬁelds were viewed in the ﬁrst half of this century.

Nowadays the same derivation is usually written in variational language. Using
the metric (5) and the deﬁnitions (4), and invoking the cylinder condition not
                                                               R
only to drop derivatives with respect to y, but also to pull dy out of the
action integral, one ﬁnds that eq. (3) contains three components [10]:

                                                  2 ∂ α φ ∂α φ
                                                                   !
               Z
                   4   √        R  1
        S=−        d x −g φ       + φ2 Fαβ F αβ + 2                    ,    (9)
                              16πG 4             3κ     φ2


where G is deﬁned in terms of its ﬁve-dimensional counterpart Ĝ by:
                                         Z
                               G ≡ Ĝ/       dy ,                          (10)


and where we have used equation (8) to bring the factor of 16πG inside the
integral. As before, if one takes φ = constant, then the ﬁrst two components
of this action are just the Einstein-Maxwell action for gravity and electromag-
netic radiation (scaled by factors of φ). The third component is the action for
a massless Klein-Gordon scalar ﬁeld.

The fact that the action (3) leads to (9), or — equivalently — that the source-
less ﬁeld equations (2) lead to (6) with source matter, constitutes the central
miracle of Kaluza-Klein theory. Four-dimensional matter (electromagnetic ra-
diation, at least) has been shown to arise purely from the geometry of empty


                                     15
ﬁve-dimensional spacetime. The goal of all subsequent Kaluza-Klein theories
has been to extend this success to other kinds of matter.


3.5 The Case Aα = 0: Brans-Dicke Theory


If one does not set φ = constant, then Kaluza’s ﬁve-dimensional theory con-
tains besides electromagnetic eﬀects a Brans-Dicke-type scalar ﬁeld theory,
as becomes clear when one considers the case in which the electromagnetic
potentials vanish, Aα = 0. Without the cylinder condition, this would be no
more than a choice of coordinates, and would not entail any loss of algebraic
generality. (It would be exactly analogous to the common procedure in ordi-
nary electrodynamics of choosing four-space coordinates in which either the
electric or magnetic ﬁeld disappears.) With the cylinder condition, however,
we are eﬀectively working in a special set of coordinates, so that the theory
is no longer invariant with respect to general (ie., ﬁve-dimensional) coordi-
nate transformations. The restriction Aα = 0 is, therefore, a physical and not
merely mathematical one, and restricts us to the “graviton-scalar sector” of
the theory.

This is acceptable in some contexts — in homogeneous and isotropic situa-
tions, for example, where oﬀ-diagonal metric coeﬃcients would pick out pre-
ferred directions; or in early-universe models which are dynamically dominated
by scalar ﬁelds. Neglecting the Aα -ﬁelds, then, eq. (5) becomes:
                                                      
                                         gαβ     0 
                               (ĝAB ) =                 .               (11)
                                              0   φ2


With this metric, the ﬁeld equations (2), and Kaluza’s assumptions (i ) – (iii )
as before, the action (3) reduces to:

                                1 Z 4 √
                          S=−       d x −g Rφ .                            (12)
                              16πG

This is the special case ω = 0 of the Brans-Dicke action [196]:

                                                ∂ α φ ∂α φ
                                                               !
                      Z
                           4    √        Rφ
            SBD = −       d x −g             +ω            + Sm ,          (13)
                                        16πG         φ


where ω is the dimensionless Brans-Dicke constant and the term Sm refers
to the action associated with any matter ﬁelds which may be coupled to the
metric or scalar ﬁeld.


                                             16
The value of ω is of course constrained to be greater than ∼500 by observation
[197], so this simple model is certainly not viable, in the present era at least.
One can however evade this limit by adding a nonzero potential V (φ) to the
above action, as in extended inﬂation [198] and other theories [199,200]; or
by allowing the Brans-Dicke parameter ω to vary as a function of φ, as in
hyperextended [201] and other inﬂationary models [202].


3.6 Conformal Rescaling


One can also re-formulate the problem by carrying out a Weyl, or confor-
mal rescaling of the metric tensor. Conformal factors have begun to appear
frequently in papers on Kaluza-Klein theory, but they have as yet received
little attention in reviews of the subject, so we will discuss them brieﬂy here,
referring the reader to the literature for details.

The extra factor of φ in the action (9) above implies that, strictly speaking,
the scalar ﬁeld would have to be constant throughout spacetime [10,13] in
order for the gravitational part of the action to be in canonical form. Some
authors [9,195] have in fact set it equal to one by deﬁnition, though this is of
course not a generally covariant procedure. The oﬀending factor can however
be removed by conformally rescaling the ﬁve-dimensional metric:
                                     ′
                            ĝAB → ĝAB = Ω2 ĝAB ,                         (14)


where Ω2 > 0 is the conformal (or Weyl) factor, a function of the ﬁrst four coor-
dinates only (assuming Kaluza’s cylinder condition). This is one step removed
from the simplest possible realization of Kaluza’s idea. In compactiﬁed and
projective theories, however, there can be no physical objection to such a pro-
cedure since it takes place “in higher dimensions” which are not accessible to
observation. Questions only arise in the process of dimensional reduction; ie.,
in interpreting the “real,” four-dimensional quantities in terms of the rescaled
ﬁve-dimensional ones.

The four-dimensional metric tensor is rescaled by the same factor as the ﬁve-
                         ′
dimensional one (gαβ → gαβ  = Ω2 gαβ ), and this has the following eﬀect on the
four-dimensional Ricci scalar [203]:

                                               ✷Ω
                                                   
                                ′    −2
                        R→R =Ω             R+6          .                   (15)
                                                Ω


A convenient parametrization is obtained by making the trivial redeﬁnition
φ2 → φ and then introducing the conformal factor Ω2 = φ−1/3 , so that the


                                      17
ﬁve-dimensional metric reads:
                                                                                  
                                                                 2
                    ′                                gαβ + κ φAα Aβ      κφAα 
                 (ĝAB ) = φ−1/3                                                          ,               (16)
                                                             κφAβ           φ


The same procedure as before then leads [8,12,13] to the following conformally
rescaled action instead of eq. (9) above:

                                                 R′             1 ∂ ′ α φ ∂α′ φ
                                                                                                    !
          ′
                Z
                            4
                                q                    1 ′ ′ αβ
        S =−            dx      −g ′                + φFαβ F  + 2                                       ,   (17)
                                                16πG 4         6κ       φ2


where primed quantities refer to the rescaled metric (ie., ∂ ′ α φ = g ′ αβ ∂β φ), and
G and κ are deﬁned as before. The gravitational part of the action then has
the conventional form, as desired.

The Brans-Dicke case, obtained by putting Aα = 0 in the metric, is also
modiﬁed by the presence of the conformal factor. One ﬁnds (again making the
redeﬁnition φ2 → φ and using Ω2 = φ−1/3 ) that the action (12) becomes [13]:

                                                             R′   1 ∂ ′ α φ ∂α′ φ
                                Z                                                   !
                                                q
                    ′                   4
                S =−                    dx          −g ′        + 2                             .           (18)
                                                            16πG 6κ       φ2

                                         √
In terms of the “dilaton” ﬁeld σ ≡ ln φ/( 3 κ), this action can be written:

                                                              R′
                                                                                   !
                                                                  1
                                    Z           q
                        ′                   4
                 S =−                   dx           −g ′        + ∂ ′ α σ ∂α′ σ        ,                   (19)
                                                             16πG 2


which is the canonical action for a minimally coupled scalar ﬁeld with no
potential [204].


3.7 Conformal Ambiguity


The question of conformal ambiguity arises when we ask, “Which is the real
four-dimensional metric (ie., the one responsible for Einstein’s gravity) — the
                                ′
original gαβ , or the rescaled gαβ ?” The issue was already raised at least as
far back as 1955 by Pauli [119]. (The rescaled metric is sometimes referred to
in the literature as the “Pauli metric,” as opposed to the unrescaled “Jordan
metric.”) Most authors have worked with the traditional (unrescaled) metric,
if indeed they have troubled themselves over the matter at all [205]. Others
[206,207] have considered the interesting idea of coupling visible matter (in-
cluding that involved in the classical tests of general relativity) to the Jordan


                                                            18
metric, but allowing dark matter to couple to a rescaled Pauli metric. In recent
years, a variety of new arguments have been advanced in favor of regarding
the rescaled metric as the true “Einstein metric” for all types of matter in
compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein theory. The following paragraph is intended as a
brief review of these; many are discussed more thoroughly in [205].


The ﬁrst use of conformal rescaling to pick out “physical ﬁelds” was in certain
ten-dimensional supergravity [208] and superstring [209] models of the early
1980s. It then appeared in work on the quantum aspects of Kaluza-Klein
theory [210], and on the stability of compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein cosmologies
[211,212]. In these papers it was asserted that conformal ambiguity aﬀected
the physics at the quantum but not the classical level. This was supported
by a demonstration [213] that the mass of a ﬁve-dimensional Kaluza-Klein
monopole was invariant with respect to conformal rescaling, although it was
speculated in this paper that the addition of matter ﬁelds would complicate
the situation. Cho [207] conﬁrmed this suspicion by showing explicitly that
the conformal invariance of the Brans-Dicke action (13) would be broken for
Sm 6= 0. This resulted in diﬀerent matter couplings to the metric for diﬀer-
ent conformal factors, which would manifest themselves as “ﬁfth force”-type
violations of the weak equivalence principle [214]. He argued in addition that
only one conformal factor — the factor φ−1/3 used above — could allow one to
properly interpret the metric as a massless spin-two graviton [207]; and more-
over that without this factor the kinetic energy of the scalar ﬁeld would be
unbounded from below, making the theory unstable [61]. This last point has
also been emphasized by Sokolowski and others [205,215,216]. (Note that the
                  √
conformal factor ϕ used by these authors is the same as the one discussed
above; the exponent depends on whether one rescales the ﬁve-, or only the
four-dimensional metric. The scalar ϕ is related to φ simply by ϕ = φ−3/2 .) It
has also been claimed that conformal rescaling is necessary in scale-invariant
Kaluza-Klein cosmology [217] if one is to properly interpret the eﬀective four-
dimensional Friedmann-Robertson-Walker scale factor. A recent discussion of
conformal ambiguity in compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein theory is found in [218].


There is also something much like a conformal rescaling of coordinates in
projective Kaluza-Klein theory, notably in the work of Schmutzer after 1980
[16,17,127,128], where it is introduced in order to eliminate unwanted second-
order scalar ﬁeld terms from the generalized gravitational ﬁeld equations.
In noncompactified Kaluza-Klein theory, by contrast, there has been no dis-
cussion of conformal rescaling. This is largely because the extra dimensions
are regarded as physical (if not necessarily lengthlike or timelike). The ﬁve-
dimensional metric, in eﬀect, becomes accessible (in principle) to observation,
and conformally transforming it at will may no longer be so innocuous. We
will not consider the issue further in this report; interested readers are directed
to Sokolowski’s paper [205].


                                       19
4   Compactified Theories


So far we have introduced Kaluza’s theory, with its cylinder condition, but
have deliberately postponed discussion of compactiﬁcation because we wish to
emphasize that it is logically distinct from cylindricity, and in particular that
it is only one mechanism by which to explain the apparently four-dimensional
nature of the world. We now turn to compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein theory, but
keep our discussion short as this subject has been thoroughly reviewed else-
where ([3–7], [8–14,195]).


4.1 Klein’s Compactification Mechanism


The somewhat contrived nature of Kaluza’s assumption, that a ﬁfth dimension
exists but that no physical quantities depend upon it, has struck generations
of uniﬁed ﬁeld theorists as inadequate. Klein arrived on the scene during the
tremendous excitement surrounding the birth of quantum theory, and perhaps
not surprisingly had the idea [2,36] of explaining the lack of dependence by
making the extra dimension very small. (The story that this was suggested
to him on hearing a colleague address him by his last name has, so far as we
know, no basis in historical fact.)

Klein assumed that the ﬁfth coordinate was to be a lengthlike one (like the ﬁrst
three), and assigned it two properties: (1) a circular topology (S 1 ); and (2) a
small scale. Under property (1), any quantity f (x, y) (where x = (x0 , x1 , x2 , x3 )
and y = x4 ) becomes periodic; f (x, y) = f (x, y + 2πr) where r is the scale
parameter or “radius” of the ﬁfth dimension. Therefore all the ﬁelds can be
Fourier-expanded:

                    n=∞                                    n=∞
                            (n)
                           gαβ (x)einy/r ,                        A(n)   iny/r
                     X                                      X
     gαβ (x, y) =                            Aα (x, y) =           α (x)e      ,
                    n=−∞                                   n=−∞
                     n=∞
                           φ(n) einy/r ,
                      X
       φ(x, y) =                                                                   (20)
                    n=−∞


where the superscript (n) refers to the nth Fourier mode. Thanks to quantum
theory, these modes carry a momentum in the y-direction of the order |n|/r.
This is where property (2) comes in: if r is small enough, then the y-momenta
of even the n = 1 modes will be so large as to put them beyond the reach of
experiment. Hence only the n = 0 modes, which are independent of y, will be
observable, as required in Kaluza’s theory.

How big could the scale size r of a fourth spatial dimension be? The strongest
constraints have come from high-energy particle physics, which probes in-


                                             20
creasingly higher mass scales and correspondingly smaller length scales (the
Compton wavelength of massive modes is of the order M −1 ). Experiments of
this kind [55] presently constrain r to be less than an attometer in size (1 am
= 10−18 m). Theorists often set r equal to the Planck length ℓpl ∼ 10−35 m,
which is both a natural value and small enough to guarantee that the mass of
any n 6= 0 Fourier modes lies beyond the Planck mass mpl ∼ 1019 GeV.

In general, one identiﬁes Kaluza’s ﬁve-dimensional metric (5) with the full
(Fourier-expanded) metric ĝAB (x, y), higher modes and all. One then makes
what is known in compactiﬁed theory as the “Kaluza-Klein ansatz,” which
consists in discarding all massive (n 6= 0) Fourier modes, as justiﬁed above. In
the ﬁve-dimensional case, the Kaluza-Klein ansatz amounts to simply drop-
ping the y-dependency of gαβ , Aα , and φ, giving the eﬀective four-dimensional
                                       (0)
“low-energy” theory of the graviton gαβ , photon A(0)              (0)
                                                    α and scalar φ . For higher
dimensions, though, the relationship between the full metric and the metric
obtained with the “Kaluza-Klein ansatz” is more complicated, as has been
emphasized by Duﬀ et al. [11,12]. These authors also stress the diﬀerence be-
tween these two metrics and a third important metric in Kaluza-Klein theory,
the ground state metric hĝAB i which is the vacuum expectation value of the
full metric ĝAB (x, y), and determines the topology of the compact space. In
the ﬁve-dimensional case described above, which is topologically M 4 ×S 1 , this
looks like:
                                                      
                                            ηαβ    0 
                          (hĝAB i) = 
                                                         ,               (21)
                                             0    −1



where ηαβ is the four-dimensional Minkowski space metric.




4.2 Quantization of Charge


The expansion of ﬁelds into Fourier modes suggests a possible mechanism to
explain charge quantization, and it is interesting to see what became of this
idea [8]. One begins by introducing ﬁve-dimensional matter into the theory,
leaving aside for the moment questions as to what this would correspond to
physically. The simplest kind of matter is a massless ﬁve-dimensional scalar
ﬁeld ψ̂(x, y). Its action would have a kinetic part only:
                                 Z          q
                       Sψ̂ = −       d4 xdy −ĝ ∂ A ψ̂ ∂A ψ̂ .             (22)


                                         21
The ﬁeld can be expanded like those in eq. (20):
                                           n=∞
                                                  ψ̂ (n) einy/r .
                                            X
                              ψ̂(x, y) =                                         (23)
                                           n=−∞



When this expansion is put into the action (22), one ﬁnds (using eq. (16)) the
following result [8], analogous to eq. (9):

                                  √           inκAα                    inκAα
              Z        XZ                                              
    Sψ̂ = −        dy         d4 x −g   ∂α +               ψ̂ (n) ∂α +         ψ̂ (n)
                         n                       r                       r
                                             2
                                                         #
                                            n
                                         −      ψ̂ (n) 2      ,                   (24)
                                           φ r2

From this action one can read oﬀ both the charge and mass of the scalar modes
ψ̂ (n) . Comparison with the minimal coupling rule ∂α → ∂α + ieAα of quantum
electrodynamics (where e is the electron charge) shows that in this theory the
nth Fourier mode of the scalar ﬁeld ψ̂ also carries a quantized charge:
                                      −1/2     √
                           nκ                  n 16πG
                               Z
                      qn =      φ dy        =     √      ,                (25)
                            r                    r φ

where we have normalized    the deﬁnition of Aα in the action (17) by dividing
                       1/2
                  R
out the factor (φ dy) , and made use of the deﬁnitions (8) and (10) for κ
and G respectively. As a corollary to this result one can also come close to
predicting the value of the ﬁne structure constant, simply by identifying
                                                                        √ the
charge q1 of the ﬁrst Fourier mode with the√electron charge e. Taking r φ to
be on the order of the Planck length ℓpl = G, one has:
                                   √        √
                            q12   ( 16πG/ G)2
                       α≡       ∼                 =4 .                    (26)
                            4π          4π

                                 √
(An improved determination of r φ would presumably hit closer to the mark.)
The possibility of thus explaining an otherwise “fundamental constant” would
have made compactiﬁed ﬁve-dimensional Kaluza-Klein theory very attractive.

However, the masses of the scalar modes are not at all compatible with these
ideas. These are given by the square root of the coeﬃcient of the ψ̂ (n) 2 -term:
                                          |n|
                                     mn = √   .                                  (27)
                                         r φ

    √
If r φ ∼ ℓpl as we assumed, then the electron mass m1 (corresponding to
the ﬁrst Fourier mode) would be ℓ−1
                                 pl ; ie., the Planck mass mpl ∼ 10
                                                                    19
                                                                       GeV,


                                            22
rather than 0.5 MeV. This discrepancy of some twenty-two orders of magnitude
between theory and observation played a large role in the abandonment of ﬁve-
dimensional Kaluza-Klein theory.

In modern compactiﬁed theories, one avoids this problem by doing three things
[8]: (1) identifying observed (light) particles like the electron with the n = 0,
rather than the higher modes of the Fourier expansion above. From eq. (27),
these particles therefore have zero mass at the level of the ﬁeld equations. How-
ever, one then invokes: (2) the mechanism of spontaneous symmetry-breaking
to bestow on them them the modest masses required by observation. From
eq. (25) above, there is also the problem of explaining how the n = 0 modes
can have nonzero charge (or, more generally, nonzero couplings to the gauge
ﬁelds). This is solved by: (3) going to higher dimensions, where massless par-
ticles are no longer “singlets of the gauge group” corresponding to the ground
state (eg., the 44-part of the metric (21) above). We look at this procedure
brieﬂy in the next section.

The other way to avoid the problems of compactiﬁed ﬁve-dimensional Kaluza-
Klein theory is, of course, to look at projective theories, or indeed to loosen
the restriction of compactiﬁcation on the ﬁfth dimension altogether. These
approaches probably mean giving up the ready-made explanation for charge
quantization described above.


4.3 Extension to Higher Dimensions


The key to extending the Kaluza-Klein formalism to strong and weak nuclear
interactions lies in recognizing that electromagnetism has been eﬀectively in-
corporated into general relativity by adding U(1) local gauge invariance to
the theory, in the form of local coordinate invariance with respect to y = x4 .
Assuming the extra coordinate has a circular topology and a small scale, the
theory is invariant under transformations:

                             y → y ′ = y + f (x) ,                          (28)


where x stands for the four-space coordinates x0 , x1 , x2 , x3 . With the aid of
the usual tensor transformation law (in five dimensions):

                                 ′      ∂xC ∂xD
                        ĝAB → ĝAB =               ĝCD ,                  (29)
                                        ∂x′ A ∂x′ B

one then ﬁnds that the only change to the metric (5) is:

                          Aα → A′α = Aα + ∂α f (x) ,                        (30)


                                        23
which is just a U(1) local gauge transformation. In other words the theory is
locally U(1) gauge invariant. It is thus not surprising that electromagnetism
could be contained in ﬁve-dimensional general relativity.

To extend the same approach to more complicated symmetry groups, one
goes to higher dimensions [8]. The metric corresponding to the “Kaluza-Klein
ansatz” (n = 0 modes only) can be written (cf. eq. (5)):
                                                                            
                                            µ i   ν j
              
                  (0)
                        
                               gαβ + g̃µν Ki Aα Kj Aβ            g̃µν Kiµ Aiα 
               ĝAB =                                                            ,   (31)
                                       g̃µν Kiν Aiβ                  g̃µν


where g̃µν is the metric of the d-dimensional compact space. Indices µ, ν, ...
run from 1 to d, while A, B, ... run from 0 to (3 + d), and α, β, ... run from 0
to 3 as usual. The Kiµ are a set of n linearly independent Killing vectors for
the compact manifold (i = 1, ..., n). Analogously to eq. (28) one then assumes
that the theory is locally invariant under transformations:
                                                      n
                                µ     ′µ      µ
                                                            εi (x)Kiµ ,
                                                      X
                               y →y        =y +                                        (32)
                                                      i=1



where the εi (x) are a set of n inﬁnitesimal parameters. Because Killing vectors
by deﬁnition satisfy:

                            ∂Kiλ         ∂Kiλ            ∂g̃µν
                               µ
                                 g̃ λν +    ν
                                              g̃λµ + Kiλ       =0 ,                    (33)
                            ∂y           ∂y              ∂y λ


the transformation law (29) leaves the g̃µν -part of the metric untouched, and
the only eﬀect on eq. (31) is:

                                Aiα → Aiα′ = Aiα + ∂α εi (x) ,                         (34)


which is a local gauge transformation whose gauge group is the isometry
group (G, say) of the compact manifold. Thus one might hope that higher-
dimensional general relativity could contain any gauge theory.

The larger symmetry of the higher-dimensional mechanism also allows for
nonzero couplings of the n = 0 modes to the gauge ﬁelds; ie., for “charged”
massless particles (which, as we saw, was impossible in the ﬁve-dimensional
case). Massless scalar ﬁelds φa (x) in the adjoint representation of the gauge
group, for example, can be introduced [8] via:

                                     Φµa = φa (x)Kaµ (y) ,                             (35)


                                               24
and these in general have nonzero couplings to the gauge ﬁelds because the
Kaµ (y) are not covariantly constant.




4.4 Higher-Dimensional Matter


It is crucial to realize, however, that the above “ansatz” metric (31) does
not satisfy Einstein’s equations in 4 + d dimensions unless the Killing vectors
are independent of {y}, the extra coordinates [8] — ie., unless the compact
manifold is flat [7]. The ground state metric (cf. eq. (21)) is:

                                                       
                                    ηαβ        0
                        (hĝAB i) =                        .             (36)
                                                        
                                                        
                                        0    g̃µν (y)



The vacuum Einstein equations are R̂AB − R̂ĝAB /2 = 0. Since hĝαβ i = ηαβ is
ﬂat, R̂αβ = 0. Therefore, from the αβ-components of the ﬁeld equations, R̂
must vanish. But then the µν-parts of the same equations imply that R̂µν = 0;
ie., that g̃µν must also be ﬂat. In what is perhaps a symptom of the split that
has developed since Klein between the particle physics and general relativity
sides of higher-dimensional uniﬁcation research, early workers tended to ignore
this “consistency problem” [11,12], and placed no restrictions on the compact
manifold while continuing to use the metric (31). Recently Cho [61–64] has
raised related questions about whether the “zero modes” might not become
massive (and {y}-dependent) in the event of spontaneous symmetry-breaking,
and has even suggested “kicking away the ladder” of Klein’s Fourier modes
entirely, basing dimensional reduction a priori on isometry instead.

It is now widely recognized [13] that conventional compactiﬁcation of d ex-
tra spatial dimensions (where d > 1) requires either (1) explicit higher-
dimensional matter terms, which can induce “spontaneous compactiﬁcation”
by imposing constant curvature on the compact manifold [70,71]; or (2) other
modiﬁcations of the higher-dimensional theory, such as the inclusion of tor-
sion [65–68] or higher-derivative (eg. R2 ) terms [69]. Most higher-dimensional
compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein theories rely on higher-dimensional matter of one
kind or another. For example, in Freund-Rubin compactiﬁcation [86], which
is the basis of eleven-dimensional supergravity, one introduces a third-rank
antisymmetric tensor ﬁeld ÂBCD with ﬁeld strength:

           F̂ABCD ≡ ∂A ÂBCD − ∂B ÂACD + ∂C ÂABD − ∂D ÂABC ,           (37)


                                        25
and free action given by:
                          1
                                 Z           q
                SÂ = −              d(4+d) x −ĝ F̂ABCD F̂ ABCD .            (38)
                        384πG

The eﬀect of this [13] is to add an explicit energy-momentum tensor to the
right-hand side of the higher-dimensional Einstein equations (1):

                        1                 1
                                                                    
           T̂AB = −        F̂CDEA F̂BCDE − F̂CDEF F̂ CDEF ĝAB           ,    (39)
                      48πG                8

The matter ﬁelds required to achieve compactiﬁcation are not the end of the
story, however. Others are in general needed if the theory is to contain the
full gauge group of the standard model (including strong and weak interac-
tions). Witten [84] has shown that this requires a theory of at least eleven
dimensions (including the four macroscopic ones). While there are an inﬁ-
nite number of compact seven-dimensional manifolds whose isometry groups
G ⊃ SU(3) × SU(2) × U(1), none of them give rise to realistic quark and
lepton representations [8,13]. It is possible to obtain quarks and leptons from
other manifolds such as the 7-sphere and the “squashed” 7-sphere [12]. The
symmetry groups of these manifolds (SO(8) and SO(5) × SU(2) respectively)
are, however, not large enough to contain the standard model, and additional
“composite” matter ﬁelds [13,91] are therefore required.

Explicit higher-dimensional ﬁelds may also be required to incorporate chiral-
ity into eleven-dimensional compactiﬁed theory [7,73,77] (this is diﬃcult in an
odd number of dimensions). Two other schemes by which this might be accom-
plished are modiﬁcations of Riemannian geometry [100–102] and noncompact
internal manifolds [93–99]. Thus in the D = 11 “chirality problem” one ﬁnds
again a choice between sacriﬁcing either (i ) the equation “Matter=Geometry;”
(ii ) the geometrical basis of Einstein’s theory; or (iii ) cylindricity. Compacti-
ﬁed theory has in general been characterized by a readiness to drop (i ).

We conclude this section by noting that the situation (with regard to non-
geometrized matter) does not improve in ten-dimensional compactiﬁed theory;
in fact, in many cases a six-dimensional internal manifold with no isometries
is used [8], which means that all the matter is eﬀectively put in by hand,
marking a complete abandonment of the original Kaluza programme. Besides
ensuring compactiﬁcation and making room for fermions, extra terms in the
ten-dimensional Lagrangian also play a role in suppressing anomalies. In the
two most popular D = 10 theories, for example (those based on the symmetry
groups SO(32) [104] and E8 × E8 [105]), this is accomplished by Chapline-
Manton terms [8]. To the extent that these terms arise naturally in the low-
energy limit of ten-dimensional superstring theory, however, they are less ar-
bitrary than some of the others we have mentioned. There is no doubt that


                                        26
superstrings currently oﬀer, within the context of compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein
theory, the best hope for a uniﬁed “theory of everything” [89,108]. Whether
the compactiﬁed approach is the best one remains — as we hope to show in
the rest of this report — an open question.



5   Projective Theories


Projective theories were designed to emulate the successes of Kaluza’s ﬁve-
dimensional theory without the epistemological burden of a real ﬁfth dimen-
sion. Early models did this too well: like Kaluza’s (with no dependence on
the ﬁfth coordinate and no added “higher-dimensional matter” ﬁelds) they
gave back ω = 0 Brans-Dicke theory when the electromagnetic potentials
were switched oﬀ. This contradicted time-delay measurements like that of the
Martian Viking lander [197]. There were other problems as well [16]. Modern
projective theories [15–18] attempt to overcome these shortcomings in at least
two diﬀerent ways.


5.1 A Theory of Elementary Particles


Lessner [15] has suggested that, although experiments rule out a macroscopic
Brans-Dicke-type scalar ﬁeld, the theory might still be applicable on micro-
scopic scales, and could be used to describe the internal structure of elementary
particles. He begins with the same ﬁve-dimensional ﬁeld equations (2) (now in-
terpreted as projector equations), and obtains the same four-dimensional ﬁeld
equations (6), except that the constant G is replaced by “B,” which becomes
essentially a free parameter of the theory. A solution (gαβ , Fαβ , φ) of the ﬁeld
equations is called a “particle” if it satisﬁes certain conditions on symmetry,
positivity and asymptotic behaviour [15]. Some of the properties of these par-
ticles are explored in [123–126]. The theory is only applicable to macroscopic
phenomena when φ = 1 and the third of the ﬁeld equations (6) is omitted.


5.2 Projective Unified Field Theory


Schmutzer has taken an alternate approach since 1980 in his “projective uniﬁed
ﬁeld theory” or PUFT [16–18] by explicitly introducing “non-geometrizable
matter” (the so-called “substrate”). In ordinary Kaluza-Klein theory this
would correspond to higher-dimensional matter and be represented in the
ﬁve-dimensional Einstein equations (1) by a nonzero energy-momentum ten-


                                       27
sor T̂AB ; in the projective theory one has instead an energy projector θ̂AB :

                              ĜAB = 8π Ĝ θ̂AB .                            (40)


There is also a conformal rescaling of the four-dimensional metric, as men-
tioned earlier:
                                   ′
                            gαβ → gαβ = e−σ gαβ ,                            (41)


where σ is a new scalar ﬁeld. Eqs. (40) break down, analogously to the ﬁve-
dimensional ones (2), to the following set of equations in four dimensions:

                                    
                 EM
    Gαβ = 8πG Tαβ   + Σαβ + θαβ   ,           ∇α H αβ = J β ,
               2     1
                            
    ✷σ = 8πG ϑ + Bαβ H αβ       ,                                            (42)
               3     2
        EM
where Tαβ   is the electromagnetic energy-momentum tensor as before, and
where there are also two new energy-momentum tensors: the substrate energy
tensor θαβ = θ̂αβ and the scalaric energy tensor Σαβ deﬁned by:
                           3             1
                                                               
                 Σαβ = −      ∂α σ ∂β σ − gαβ ∂ γ σ ∂γ σ            .        (43)
                         16πG            2

The other terms in eqs. (42) are the electric four-current density J α , the
electromagnetic ﬁeld strength tensor Bαβ , the induction tensor Hαβ = e3σ Bαβ
(the factor e3σ acts here as a kind of “scalaric dielectricity”), and one more
new quantity, the scalaric substrate density:
                                           3
                              ϑ = e−σ θ̂A
                                        A
                                          − θαα .                            (44)
                                           2

The conservation of energy ∇ ˆ A θ̂AB = 0 implies not only conservation of four-
current (∇α J α = 0) but also conservation of substrate energy:

                          ∇β θαβ = −Bβα J β + ϑ∇α σ .                        (45)


The existence of substrate and scalaric matter in PUFT gives rise to phenom-
ena such as “scalaric polarization” of the vacuum, and violations of the weak
equivalence principle for time-dependent scalaric ﬁelds. These can be quan-
tiﬁed in terms of a “scalarism parameter” γ, deﬁned as the ratio of scalaric
substrate density to the density ρ of ordinary matter:

                                     γ ≡ ϑ/ρ .                               (46)


                                         28
This number becomes in practice the primary free parameter of the the-
ory, showing up in PUFT-based cosmological models [127,129], equivalence
principle-type experiments [128], and Solar System tests (perihelion shift, light
deﬂection and time delay) [17]. Experimental constraints on the theory take
the form of upper limits on the size of γ.

In comparing these projective theories to the compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein the-
ories of the last section, one could perhaps summarize as follows: Kaluza’s
uniﬁed theory as it stands is an elegant (no higher-dimensional matter) and
minimal extension of general relativity, but suﬀers from the defect of a very
contrived-looking cylinder condition. Five-dimensional compactiﬁed theory,
beginning with Klein, repairs this ﬂaw (and even oﬀers the possibility of ex-
plaining charge quantization) but turns out to disagree radically with obser-
vation. To overcome this problem within the context of compactiﬁed theory,
one has to go to higher dimensions and either introduce higher-dimensional
matter or higher-derivative terms to the Einstein action, if one wishes to ob-
tain satisfactory compactiﬁcation. Projective theory oﬀers an alternative way
to “explain” the cylinder condition, and can (unlike compactiﬁed theory) be
formulated in a way that is compatible with experiment using only one ex-
tra “dimension.” This comes at the price, however, not only of modifying the
geometrical foundation of Einstein’s theory, but (in Schmutzer’s case) of in-
troducing a “non-geometrizable substrate,” or (in Lessner’s case) of limiting
one’s ambitions to microscopic phenomena. Overall, the projective approach
does not appear to us to be an improvement over compactiﬁed theory.



6   Noncompactified Theories


An alternative is to stay with the idea that the new coordinates are physical,
but to generalize the compactiﬁed approach by relaxing the cylinder condition
[19–26], instead of restricting the topology and scale of the ﬁfth dimension in
an attempt to satisfy it exactly. This means that physical quantities, including
in particular those derived from the metric tensor, will depend on the ﬁfth
coordinate. In fact it is precisely this dependence which allows one to obtain
not only electromagnetic radiation, but matter of a very general kind from
geometry via the higher-dimensional ﬁeld equations. The equations of motion,
too, are modiﬁed by dependence on extra coordinates. We review these facts
in the next few sections.

Of course, the ﬁfth dimension might also be expected to appear elsewhere in
physics, and one of the primary challenges of noncompactiﬁed theory is to
explain why its eﬀects have not been noticed so far. Why, for example, have
experiments such as those mentioned earlier [55] been able to restrict the size
of any extra dimensions to below the attometer scale? In noncompactiﬁed the-


                                      29
ory, the answer is that extra coordinates are not necessarily lengthlike, as these
experiments assume. Following Minkowski’s example, one can imagine coordi-
nates of other kinds, scaled by appropriate dimension-transposing parameters
(like c) to give them units of length. We review this important issue, and the
evidence for the hypothesis that a ﬁfth dimension might be physically related
to rest mass, at the end of § 6. For the moment, however, we put oﬀ questions
of interpretation and begin by simply seeing how far Kaluza’s ﬁve-dimensional
uniﬁed ﬁeld theory can be taken when the cylinder condition is dropped.


6.1 The Metric


Without cylindricity, there is no reason to compactify the ﬁfth dimension,
so this approach is properly called “noncompactiﬁed.” Noncompact extra di-
mensions have also been considered in compactified Kaluza-Klein theory by
Wetterich and others [93–99] as a way to bring chiral fermions into the the-
ory and arrange for a vanishing four-dimensional cosmological constant. These
authors, however, retain Klein’s mechanism of harmonic expansion, which in
turn means that the compact manifold must have ﬁnite volume. In the fully
noncompactiﬁed approach we wish to make no a priori assumptions about
the nature of the extra-dimensional manifold.

We begin with the same ﬁve-dimensional metric (5) as before, but choose co-
ordinates such that the four components of Aα vanish. Since we are no longer
imposing cylindricity on our solutions, this entails no loss of algebraic gen-
erality; it is analogous to the common strategy in electromagnetic theory of
choosing coordinates such that either the electric or magnetic ﬁeld vanishes.
We also eschew any conformal factor here, preferring to treat the ﬁfth dimen-
sion on the same footing as the other four. The ﬁve-dimensional metric tensor,
then, is:
                                                   
                                     gαβ      0 
                           (ĝAB ) =                  ,                    (47)
                                         0    εφ2


where we have introduced the factor ε in order to allow a timelike, as well as
spacelike signature for the ﬁfth dimension (we require only that ε2 = 1).

Timelike extra dimensions are rarely considered in compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein
theory, for several reasons [13]: (1) they lead to the wrong sign for the Maxwell
action in eq. (9) relative to the Einstein one; and (2) they lead to the wrong
sign for the mass mn of the charged modes in eq. (24); ie., to the prediction
of tachyons. The relevance of these two arguments to noncompactiﬁed theory
may be debated. A third common objection (3) is that additional temporal [13]


                                         30
or timelike [7,86] dimensions would lead to closed timelike curves and hence
allow causality violation. One should be careful here to discriminate between
temporal dimensions, which actually have physical units of time; and timelike
ones, which merely have timelike signature. If the physical nature of the ﬁfth
coordinate were actually temporal, one could certainly imagine problems with
causality. One can, however, transpose units with the proper combination of
fundamental constants; changing a temporal one, for instance, into a spatial
one with c. With regard to timelike extra dimensions, the situation is also less
clear than is sometimes claimed. It has even been argued [219] that physics
might be quite compatible with closed timelike curves. All in all, it is prob-
ably prudent to keep an open mind toward the signature of a physical ﬁfth
dimension.


6.2 The Field Equations


One now follows the same approach as Kaluza, using the same deﬁnitions (4) of
the ﬁve-dimensional Christoﬀel symbols and Ricci tensor. Now, however, one
keeps derivatives with respect to the ﬁfth coordinate x4 rather than assuming
that they vanish. The resultant expressions for the αβ-, α4- and 44-parts of
the ﬁve-dimensional Ricci tensor R̂AB are [20]:


                     ∇β (∂α φ)        ε      ∂4 φ ∂4 gαβ
    R̂αβ = Rαβ −                  + 2                     − ∂4 gαβ
                          φ          2φ           φ
                                      g γδ ∂4 gγδ ∂4 gαβ
                                                         !
                γδ
           + g ∂4 gαγ ∂4 gβδ −                               ,
                                               2
           g 44 g βγ                                       ∂β g βγ ∂4 gγα
    R̂α4 =           (∂4 gβγ ∂α g44 − ∂γ g44 ∂4 gαβ ) +
               4                                                  2
              g βγ ∂4 (∂β gγα ) ∂α g βγ ∂4 gβγ         g βγ ∂4 (∂α gβγ )
           +                     −                  −
                       2                   2                   2
                βγ δǫ                         βγ
              g g ∂4 gγα ∂β gδǫ ∂4 g ∂α gβγ
           +                          +                    ,
                         4                      4
                          ∂4 g αβ ∂4 gαβ g αβ ∂4 (∂4 gαβ )
    R̂44 = −εφ✷φ −                        −
                                 2                   2
                      αβ              αβ γδ
              ∂4 φ g ∂4 gαβ         g g ∂4 gγβ ∂4 gαδ
           +                     −                           ,              (48)
                      2φ                       4

where “✷” is deﬁned as usual (in four dimensions) by ✷φ ≡ g αβ ∇β (∂α φ).

We assume that there is no “higher-dimensional matter,” so the Einstein equa-
tions take the form (2), R̂AB = 0. The ﬁrst of eqs. (48) then produces the
following expression for the four-dimensional Ricci tensor:


                                             31
            ∇β (∂α φ)   ε     ∂4 φ ∂4 gαβ
    Rαβ =             − 2                  − ∂4 (∂4 gαβ )
                φ      2φ          φ
                                g γδ ∂4 gγδ ∂4 gαβ
                                                   !
               γδ
            + g ∂4 gαγ ∂4 gβδ −                        .                     (49)
                                         2

The second can be written in the form of a conservation law:

                                    ∇β Pαβ = 0 ,                             (50)


where we have deﬁned a new four-tensor by:
                           1  βγ                          
                    Pαβ ≡ √     g ∂4 gγα − δαβ g γǫ ∂4 gγǫ   .               (51)
                         2 ĝ44


And the third of eqs. (48) takes the form of a scalar wave equation for φ:

                   ∂4 g αβ ∂4 gαβ   g αβ ∂4 (∂4 gαβ ) ∂4 φ g αβ ∂4 gαβ
          εφ✷φ = −                −                  +                   .   (52)
                          4                 2                2φ


Eqs. (49) – (52) form the basis of ﬁve-dimensional noncompactiﬁed Kaluza-
Klein theory. It only remains to interpret their meaning in four dimensions,
and then to apply them to any given physical problem by choosing the appro-
priate metric ĝAB . The rest of § 6 is taken up with interpretation; applications
to cosmology and astrophysics are the subjects of § 7 and § 8. We concen-
trate in this report on the ﬁve-dimensional case. The extension to arbitrary
dimensions has yet to be investigated in detail, although some aspects of this
have recently been discussed by Rippl, Romero & Tavakol [24]. (These au-
thors also consider noncompactiﬁed lower -dimensional gravity, which might
be more easily quantized than Einstein’s theory).


6.3 Matter from Geometry


The best-understood of eqs. (49) – (52) is the ﬁrst. It allows us to interpret
four-dimensional matter as a manifestation of five-dimensional geometry [20].
One simply requires that the usual Einstein equations (with matter) hold in
four dimensions:
                                          1
                           8πG Tαβ = Rαβ − R gαβ ,                           (53)
                                          2

where Tαβ is the matter energy-momentum tensor. Contracting eq. (49) with
the metric g αβ gives (with the help of eq. (52)) the following expression for


                                         32
the four-dimensional Ricci scalar:
                          ε h αβ               αβ           2
                                                              i
                    R=       ∂4 g ∂4 g αβ + (g    ∂4 g αβ )       .            (54)
                         4φ2


Inserting this result, along with eq. (49), into eq. (53), one ﬁnds that:

                                  "
              ∇β (∂α φ)       ε ∂4 φ ∂4 gαβ
    8πG Tαβ =            − 2                 − ∂4 (∂4 gαβ ) + g γδ ∂4 gαγ ∂4 gβδ
                  φ         2φ       φ
                g γδ ∂4 gγδ ∂4 gαβ gαβ  γδ
                                                                           #
                                                                         
                                                             γδ        2
              −                   +       ∂4 g ∂4 gγδ + (g ∂4 gγδ )           . (55)
                         2           4

Provided we use this expression for Tαβ , the four-dimensional Einstein equa-
tions Gαβ = 8πG Tαβ are automatically contained in the ﬁve-dimensional vac-
uum ones ĜAB = 0. The matter described by Tαβ is a manifestation of pure
geometry in the higher-dimensional world. This has been termed the “induced-
matter interpretation” of Kaluza-Klein theory, and eq. (55) is said to deﬁne
the energy-momentum tensor of induced matter.

This tensor satisﬁes the appropriate requirements: it is symmetric (the ﬁrst
term is a second derivative, while the others are all explicitly symmetric), and
reduces to the expected limit when the cylinder condition is re-applied (ie.,
when all derivatives ∂4 with respect to the ﬁfth dimension are dropped). In this
case, the scalar wave equation (52) becomes just the Klein-Gordon equation
for a massless scalar ﬁeld:

                                      ✷φ = 0 ;                                 (56)


and the contracted energy momentum tensor of the induced matter vanishes:

                               T = g αβ Tαβ = 0 ,                              (57)


which implies a radiationlike equation of state (p = ρ/3) for the induced
matter, in agreement with earlier work [220] based on the cylinder condition.
The induced matter in this case consists of photons, the gauge bosons of
electromagnetism — exactly the same result obtained by Kaluza. This is the
only kind of matter one can obtain in the induced-matter interpretation as
long as the cylinder condition is in place. To extend Kaluza’s approach to
other kinds of matter, it is necessary to do one of two things: (1) go to higher
dimensions and add an explicit energy-momentum tensor (or other terms)
to the higher-dimensional vacuum ﬁeld equations (compactiﬁed theories in
practice involve both these things); or (2) loosen the restriction of cylindricity.
In noncompactiﬁed theory, which takes the latter course, it turns out that


                                        33
matter described by Tαβ — even in ﬁve dimensions — is already general enough
to describe many physical systems, including in particular those connected
with cosmology and the classical tests of general relativity.

The interpretation of eqs. (50) and (52) — the α4- and 44- components of the
ﬁve-dimensional ﬁeld equations (R̂AB = 0) — is not as straightforward as that
of eq. (49). The relative simplicity of the conservation equation (50) suggests
that there is a deeper physical signiﬁcance to the √four-tensor Pαβ , whose fully
                                         γδ
covariant form is Pαβ ≡ (∂4 gαβ − gαβ g ∂4 gγδ )/(2 ĝ44 ). It may be related to
more familiar conserved physical quantities, or to the Bianchi identities [20].

Alternatively, it has been conjectured [177] that, as the αβ-components of the
ﬁeld equations link geometry with the macroscopic properties of matter, so the
α4- and 44-components might describe their microscopic ones. In particular,
if one makes the tentative identiﬁcation:

                         Pαβ = k(mi vα vβ + mg gαβ ) ,                      (58)


where k is a constant, mi and mg are the (suitably deﬁned) inertial and grav-
itational mass of a particle in the induced-matter ﬂuid, and v α ≡ dxα /ds
is its four-velocity, then the conservation equation (50) turns out to be the
four-dimensional geodesic equation (for one class of metrics at least). This is
interesting, since equations of motion are usually quite distinct from the ﬁeld
equations. Similarly, using appropriate deﬁnitions of particle mass m, one can
identify the scalar wave equation (52) with the simplest possible relativistic
quantum wave equation, namely the Klein-Gordon equation:

                                 ✷φ = m2 φ .                                (59)


The relevant expression for particle mass turns out to depend explicitly on
the components of the metric, which means that this variant of noncompact-
iﬁed Kaluza-Klein theory is a realization of Mach’s Principle [251,252]. These
are interesting results, but speculative ones, and we do not discuss them fur-
ther here. Some other Machian aspects of noncompactiﬁed theories have been
explored in [25,150,178,179,184].


6.4 The Spherically-Symmetric Case


To appreciate what the induced-matter energy-momentum tensor (55) means
physically, one has to supply a ﬁve-dimensional metric ĝAB — preferably one
speciﬁc enough to simplify the mathematics but general enough to be broadly
applicable, eg., to both cosmological and one-body problems. We begin here


                                      34
with the general spherically-symmetric ﬁve-dimensional line element:
                                                        
          dŝ2 = eν dt2 − eλ dr 2 − R2 dθ2 + sin2 θ dφ2 + εeµ dψ 2 ,        (60)


where ε serves the same function as before, t, r, θ and φ have their usual
meanings, ψ is the ﬁfth coordinate, and ν, λ, R and µ are, for now, arbitrary
functions of r, t and ψ. Denoting derivatives with respect to t by overdots (˙),
derivatives with respect to r by primes (′ ), and derivatives with respect to ψ
by star superscripts (∗ ), one ﬁnds [21] that the energy-momentum tensor (55)
of induced matter has the following nonzero components:


                                          R′ µ′ λ′ µ′ µ′′ µ′ 2
                                !                                    !
                    λ̇µ̇ Ṙµ̇
    8πG T00 = −e−ν       +        + e−λ         −    +     +
                     4      R              R       4    2     4
                        ∗∗     ∗2     ∗ ∗      ∗ ∗    ∗ ∗     ∗2
                                                                 2R∗∗
                                                                      !
                  −µ λ       λ      µλ       R λ     Rµ     R
               −εe         +      −       +        −      + 2 +
                       2      4       4        R      R      R    R
                      µ̇′ µ̇µ′ ν ′ µ̇ λ̇µ′
                                                 !
    8πG T01 = −e−λ       +    −      −
                       2    4   4       4
                    µ̈ µ̇2 ν̇ µ̇ Ṙµ̇             R ′ µ′ ν ′ µ′
                                             !                   !
    8πG T11 = −e−ν     +     −     +      + e−λ           +
                     2     4    4    R             R          4
                                ∗∗    ∗ ∗     ∗ ∗        ∗∗
                        ∗2
                                                               ν ∗ 2 ν ∗ µ∗
                                                                            !
                  −µ R       2R      R ν    R µ        ν
               −εe         +       +      −       +         +       −
                       R2      R      R       R         2       4      4
                      Ṙµ̇ ν̇ µ̇ λ̇µ̇ µ̈ µ̇2               R′ µ′ µ′′
                                                     !
    8πG T22 = −e−ν         −      +      + +        + e−λ        +
                      2R      4       4     2   4           2R      2
                µ ′ 2 λ′ µ ′ ν ′ µ ′            R∗∗ R∗ ν ∗ R∗ λ∗ R∗ µ∗
                                     !
              +      −       +          − εe−µ      +       +       −
                 4       4        4              R     2R       2R    2R
                  ∗∗     ∗2      ∗∗      ∗2    ∗ ∗    ∗ ∗     ∗ ∗
                                                                  !
                ν      ν       λ       λ      ν λ    ν µ    µλ
              +      +      +       +       +      −      −
                 2       4      2        4     4      4       4
          3    2
         T3 = T2 .                                                       (61)

If one then assumes that this induced matter takes the form of a perfect ﬂuid:

                          Tβα = (ρ + p) uαuβ − p δβα ,                      (62)


where uα is the four-velocity of the ﬂuid elements, then the density ρ and
pressure p can be readily identiﬁed [21] from the relations ρ = T00 + T11 − T22
and p = −T22 . Inserting the expressions (61), one obtains:


                 e−λ µ′ R′ e−ν µ̇Ṙ        ν ∗ λ∗ 3R∗ µ∗ R∗ λ∗
                                    !
           3
    8πGρ =                −         + εe−µ       +      −
           2        R        R               4     2R     2R


                                        35
               R∗ ν ∗ 2R∗ 2 3R∗∗
                                        !
             −       −     −                  ,
                2R     R2    R
                e−λ µ′ R′ e−ν µ̇Ṙ        ν ∗ λ∗ R ∗ µ ∗ R ∗ λ∗
                                    !
           1
    8πGp =               −         + εe−µ       +       +
           2       R           R            4     2R      2R
                ∗ ∗       ∗∗ 
               Rν       R
             +      −          .                                             (63)
               2R        R

It is immediately apparent that under the restriction of cylindricity (all starred
quantities vanish), one can obtain only radiation (p = ρ/3) from Kaluza’s
mechanism, as noted already.

With the relaxation of this condition, by contrast, one obtains a very general
equation of state. For example, one can split the density and pressure into
four components (ρ = ρr + ρd + ρv + ρs and p = pr + pd + pv + ps ), where
the radiation component obeys pr = ρr /3, the dust-like component obeys
pd = 0, the vacuum component obeys pv = −ρv , and the stiﬀ component
obeys ps = ρs . One then ﬁnds from eqs. (63) that:



                   e−λ µ′ R′ e−ν µ̇Ṙ   3εe−µ         R∗ µ∗ R∗∗
                                     !
           3
                                                                 
    ρr =                    −         +                    −          ,
         16πG         R        R         8πG           2R    R
             −µ ∗ 2
           εe R
    ρd = −               ,
            4πGR2
           εe−µ R∗ ∗
    ρv = −           (ν + λ∗ ) ,
            16πG
         εe−µ ν ∗ λ∗
    ρs =               .                                                     (64)
           32πG

From the ﬁrst of these equations, it follows that in a radiationlike universe
whose metric coeﬃcients depend only on time, the ﬁfth dimension must con-
tract with time (µ̇ < 0) if one is to have spatial expansion (Ṙ > 0) and
positive density (ρr > 0). Mechanisms of this sort have been used in com-
pactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein cosmology to pump entropy into the four-dimensional
universe, solving the horizon and ﬂatness problems [221]; or indeed to explain
why the ﬁfth dimension is compact in the ﬁrst place [222] (see § 7.1). In the
noncompactiﬁed approach, they no longer have to be assumed a priori, but
can be seen to be required by the field equations. From the second of the above
equations, meanwhile, it follows that a dustlike universe must have a space-
like ﬁfth dimension (ε = −1 in our convention) in order for its density to be
positive (ρd > 0). This agrees with the causality argument (§ 6.1).




                                         36
6.5 The Isotropic and Homogeneous Case


One can go farther by making additional assumptions about the metric. Sup-
pose the line element (60) is rewritten in spatially isotropic form:
                                                 
                 dŝ2 = eν dt2 − eω dr 2 + r 2 dΩ2 + εeµ dψ 2 ,                   (65)


where dΩ2 ≡ dθ2 + sin2 θ dφ2 . If one assumes that ν, ω and µ are separable
functions of the variables t, r and ψ, one can obtain specialized solutions to
the ﬁeld equations (2) whose properties of matter, as speciﬁed by the energy-
momentum tensor (61), agree very closely with those expected from four-
dimensional theory.

Consider ﬁrst the case of dependence on t only. The metric (65) is then
just a ﬁve-dimensional generalization of a ﬂat homogeneous and isotropic
Friedmann-Robertson-Walker (FRW) cosmology. But in the context of non-
compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein theory, one ought also to allow dependence on the
extra coordinate ψ. So the general ﬂat ﬁve-dimensional cosmological metric,
assuming separability, should have:

      eν ≡ T 2 (t) X 2 (ψ) ,   eω ≡ U 2 (t) Y 2 (ψ) ,       eµ ≡ V 2 (t) Z 2 (ψ) . (66)


Ponce de Leon [145] was the ﬁrst to investigate solutions of the vacuum Ein-
stein equations (2) with this form. Of his eight solutions, one is of special
interest because it reduces on hypersurfaces ψ = constant to the spatially ﬂat
four-dimensional FRW metric. This solution has ε = −1 and:


    T (t) = constant    , X(ψ) ∝ ψ ,
          U(t) ∝ t1/α   , Y (ψ) ∝ ψ 1/(1−α) ,
            V (t) ∝ t   , Z(ψ) = constant ,                                       (67)

and can be written in the form:
                                                               α2
      dŝ2 = ψ 2 dt2 − t2/α ψ 2/(1−α) dx2 + dy 2 + dz 2 −              t2 dψ 2 , (68)
                                                              (1 − α)2


where dx2 + dy 2 + dz 2 = dr 2 + r 2 dΩ2 are the usual rectangular coordinates,
and α is a free parameter of the theory [168]. Because this solution reduces
on spacetime sections (dψ = 0) to the familiar k = 0 FRW metric:
                                                             
                    ds2 = dt2 − R2 (t) dx2 + dy 2 + dz 2          ,               (69)


                                        37
it can properly be called the generalization of the flat FRW cosmological metric
to five dimensions.

Assuming that cosmological matter behaves like a perfect ﬂuid, one obtains
from eqs. (63) the following expressions for density and pressure [167]:
                           3                      2α
                                                            
                    ρ=              ,          p=    −1 ρ .                           (70)
                       8πGα2 ψ 2 t2                3

These are consistent with a wide variety of equations of state: a radiation-
dominated universe, for example, if α = 2; a dust-ﬁlled one if α = 3/2; or
an inﬂationary one if 0 < α < 1. Physical properties of cosmologies based
on the metric (68) have been explored in [167–171], and its implications for
the equations of motion (eg., of galaxies) are known [172]. Generalizations
to k 6= 0 cosmologies [173,174] and extended (eg., Gauss-Bonnet) theories
of gravity [175,176] have been made, and a connection to Mach’s principle
[25,177–179] has been identiﬁed. These and related issues are reviewed in § 7.

One other of Ponce de Leon’s homogeneous and isotropic solutions [145] de-
serves mention. It has:


          T (t) = constant      ,   X(ψ) ∝ ψ ,
                  q       
    U(t) ∝ exp         Λ/3 t    ,   Y (ψ) ∝ ψ ,
          V (t) = constant      ,   Z(ψ) = constant ,                                 (71)

and looks like:
                                    √                      
             dŝ2 = ψ 2 dt2 − ψ 2 e2 Λ/3 t dx2 + dy 2 + dz 2 − dψ 2 .                 (72)


This reduces on spacetime hypersurfaces (ψ = constant) to the de Sitter met-
ric, and Λ ≡ 3/ψ 2 is a cosmological constant induced in four-dimensional
spacetime by the existence of the ﬁfth coordinate ψ. The equation of state
of the “matter” induced in four dimensions is that of the classical de Sitter
vacuum, p = −ρ, with ρ = Λ/(8πG).

Billyard & Wesson [171] have considered generalizations of this solution:
                                                                   
       dŝ2 = ψ 2 dt2 − ψ 2 eiωt eik1 x dx2 + eik2 y dy 2 + eik3 z dz 2 + ℓ2 dψ 2 ,   (73)


where ω is a frequency, ki a wave vector, and ℓ measures the size of the extra di-
mension. The induced-matter equation of state is again p = −ρ, but now with
ρ = −3ω 2 /(32πGψ 2). The ﬁeld equations (2) turn out to require ℓ2 = 4/ω 2 so
the vacuum has positive energy density if the ﬁfth dimension is spacelike. The


                                          38
metric coeﬃcients of ordinary three-space exhibit wave-like behaviour, but the
associated medium is an unperturbed de Sitter vacuum — so this solution de-
scribes what might be termed “vacuum waves” in Kaluza-Klein theory. (They
are not gravitational waves of the conventional sort because three-space is
spherically-symmetric.) One might apply this to the inﬂationary universe sce-
nario; imagining, for example, that ω starts out with real values (corresponding
to a vacuum-dominated universe with oscillating three-space coeﬃcients) but
later takes on imaginary values (for which the universe enters an expanding
de Sitter phase of the usual kind). On this interpretation, the big bang occurs
as a (presumably quantum-induced) phase change — as has previously been
suggested elsewhere on other grounds [223,224].


6.6 The Static Case


The metric (65) reduces to another well-known form when the coeﬃcients ν, ω
and µ depend only on the radial coordinate r. This is just a ﬁve-dimensional
generalization of the one-body or Schwarzschild metric, and has been vari-
ously interpreted in the literature as describing a magnetic monopole [225],
“black hole” [227], and soliton [226] (see § 8.1 for discussion). Again, however,
from a noncompactiﬁed point of view there is no a priori reason to suppress
dependence on ψ, so a general static spherically-symmetric metric, assuming
separability, should have:

      eν ≡ A2 (r) D 2 (ψ) ,   eω ≡ B 2 (r) E 2 (ψ) ,   eµ ≡ C 2 (r) F 2 (ψ) . (74)


Ponce de Leon & Wesson [21] searched for two-parameter solutions of the
ﬁve-dimensional ﬁeld equations (2) with this form and found only four. (Liu
& Wesson [193,194] have recently obtained a three-parameter generalization
of this class). The most useful is the one which contains the ordinary four-
dimensional Schwarzschild solution as a limiting case. This is the solution with
D, E and F constant (= 1 without loss of generality), and is thus identical to
the soliton metric just mentioned. The coeﬃcients A, B and C are:


             ar − 1 ǫk                  1 (ar + 1)ǫ(k−1)+1
                    
    A(r) =               ,    B(r) =                           ,
             ar + 1                    a2 r 2 (ar − 1)ǫ(k−1)−1
             ar + 1 ǫ
                   
    C(r) =             ,                                                     (75)
             ar − 1
where a is a constant related to the mass of the central body, and ǫ and k are
other parameters (in the notation of [227]). Only one of these is strictly a free
parameter, as they are related by a consistency relation:

                              ǫ2 (k 2 − k + 1) = 1 .                         (76)


                                       39
Written out explicitly, the metric is:
                                                              
               dŝ2 = A2 (r)dt2 − B 2 (r) dr 2 + r 2 dΩ2 − C 2 (r)dψ 2 ,                    (77)


where we have assumed a spacelike ﬁfth coordinate (ε = −1) in agreement with
other work. In the limits ǫ → 0, k → ∞, and ǫk → 1 (where a ≡ 2/GM∗ and
M∗ is the mass of the central body), this metric reduces on spacetime sections
dψ = 0 to the familiar Schwarzschild metric (in isotropic coordinates):
                                 !2                           4 
                   1 − GM∗ /2r                 GM∗
                                                                                   
           2
         ds =                          2
                                      dt − 1 +                     dr 2 + r 2 dΩ2       .   (78)
                   1 + GM∗ /2r                  2r


It is therefore properly called the generalization of the Schwarzschild metric
to five dimensions. Elsewhere in § 6 we will refer to the above values of ǫ and
k as the “Schwarzschild limit” of the theory.

Assuming as usual that the induced matter takes the form of a perfect ﬂuid,
eqs. (63) give for both solutions the following density and pressure [180]:
                                                            2ǫ(k−1)
                   ǫ2 ka6 r 4                      ar − 1                      ρ
                                               
          ρ=                                                           , p=      .          (79)
             2πG(ar − 1)4 (ar + 1)4                ar + 1                      3


The soliton metric (77) thus describes a central mass surrounded by an inho-
mogeneous cloud of radiation-like matter whose density goes as ∼1/a2 r 4 at
large values of r. (The Schwarzschild limit deﬁned above is the special case
where the density and pressure of the cloud are zero; in this case p = 0 = −ρ
which is the usual vacuum solution, with its attendant classical tests of general
relativity.) The ǫ2 k-term indicates that this combination of the two (related)
parameters ǫ and k may characterize the soliton’s energy density [181]. (This is
somewhat diﬀerent from the traditional interpretation, in which these param-
eters are related to its “scalar charge” [215,228].) The equation of state (79)
obtained in the induced-matter interpretation diﬀers from the one found by
Davidson & Owen [227], who used an approach based on Kac-Moody symme-
tries [59] and concluded that p = −ρ/3. Density shows the same r-dependence
at large distances in both approaches, however, and goes to zero in the same
Schwarzschild limit. Both solutions are invariant under a → −a, ǫ → −ǫ, and
require k > 0 for positive density. One can deﬁne a pressure three-tensor pab
in the induced-matter interpretation, using the ab-components of the vacuum
ﬁeld equations (2), and this yields a result [180] very similar to the series
expression obtained by Davidson & Owen. If one then takes p ≡ paa /3 (as in
[227]), one gets back exactly the result in eq. (79).

In Cartesian spatial coordinates the pressure tensor in general contains oﬀ-
diagonal components, which implies that the matter making up the soliton


                                           40
is a sum of both a material (perfect) ﬂuid and a free electromagnetic ﬁeld
[180]. The terms “density” and “pressure” therefore have to be treated with
caution. Solitonic matter, in fact, is best be described as a relativistic fluid
with anisotropic pressure [181]. Anisotropic spherically-symmetric ﬂuids have
an energy-momentum tensor given by:

               Tαβ = (ρ + p⊥ ) uα uβ + (pk − p⊥ )χα χβ + p⊥ gαβ ,              (80)


where χα is a unit spacelike vector orthogonal to uα , and pk , p⊥ refer to pressure
parallel and perpendicular to the radial direction. Assuming that the induced
matter (61) takes this form rather than that of the perfect ﬂuid (62); and
choosing uα = (u0 , 0, 0, 0), χα = (0, χ1 , 0, 0), one ﬁnds:


               a2 r 2 − 2ǫ(k − 1)ar + 1
          "                               !#
    pk = 1 −                                     ρ ,
                           ǫar
           2 2
                                  !
          a r − 2ǫ(k − 1)ar + 1
    p⊥ =                            ρ ,                                        (81)
                     2ǫar
with ρ exactly as in eq. (79). These expressions satisfy ρ = pk +2p⊥ , conﬁrming
that the ﬂuid has the nature of radiation. The physical properties of solitons
based on the metric (77) have been studied by several authors [180–183,225–
228]. Their implications for astrophysics [184,185], the classical tests of general
relativity [187–189], and the equivalence principle [190] have been explored,
and the class has been extended to time-dependent [191,192] and charged
solutions [193,194]. These and related issues are reviewed in § 8.

We mention for completeness the other three static solutions of the form (74)
obtained by Ponce de Leon & Wesson [21]. Two of them have A(r), B(r) and
C(r) exactly as in eqs. (75), but have F (ψ) an arbitrary function of ψ, with
D ∗ (ψ) ∝ F (ψ) and E(ψ) = constant in the ﬁrst case, and D(ψ) ∝ E −1 (ψ)
and E ∗ (ψ) ∝ F (ψ)/E(ψ) in the second one. The density and pressure for both
these solutions is exactly as in eqs. (79) above, except for an added factor
of E 2 (ψ) in the denominators. This is physically innocuous in the ﬁrst case
(E(ψ) = constant) but means in the second one that these attributes of the
radiation cloud depend on the extra coordinate. The ψ-dependent components
of the ﬁeld equations place an extra constraint on these both these solutions,
restricting the allowed values of the parameters ǫ and k. The ﬁnal solution is
more interesting, and can be written in the form:
                                             2
                      ψ2          (ψ 2 + ℓ)  2           
           dŝ2 =     2
                            dt2
                                −    2
                                             dr + r 2
                                                      dΩ2
                                                            + εdψ 2 ,          (82)
                    (ψ + ℓ)       (ar + b)

where a is related to the mass of the central object as before, b = −ε/4a,
and ℓ is one other independent constant of the system. Although this solu-


                                        41
tion was found by assuming separability in r and ψ, it also satisﬁes the ﬁeld
equations (2) when a and b are arbitrary functions of ψ. This is intriguing,
as it hints at a relationship between the mass of the central object and the
ﬁfth coordinate. Another interesting feature of the metric (82) is its induced-
matter equation of state, which — unlike that of the other soliton solutions
found so far — is not radiationlike, but turns out to be the one discussed by
Davidson & Owen [227]: p = −ρ/3. This is an unusual form of matter, but
has been considered previously in several other contexts [229–232], largely be-
cause it describes matter that does not disturb other objects gravitationally
(gravitational or Tolman-Whittaker mass is proportional to 3p + ρ). Thus it
might, for instance, be useful in reconciling the extremely high energy densi-
ties expected for quantum zero-point ﬁelds with the small value observed for
Einstein’s cosmological constant [231].


6.7 General Covariance in Higher Dimensions


We have reviewed a number of solutions to the spherically-symmetric vacuum
ﬁeld equations in ﬁve dimensions. In each case the ﬁve-dimensional geome-
try manifests itself in four dimensions as induced matter, with an associated
equation of state. The equation of state, in fact, follows from the ﬁeld equa-
tions in the induced-matter interpretation of Kaluza-Klein theory, rather than
having to be supplied separately as in four-dimensional general relativity. In
several cases, the physical form of the metric on spacetime hypersurfaces dψ =
constant, or the equation of state for the induced matter, is such as to make
the solutions useful for testing the predictions of noncompactiﬁed theory. The
theory is so far not in conﬂict with any experimental data (see § 7 and § 8).

However, it is important to keep in mind that physical quantities such as
the scalars ρ and p, which are designed to be invariant with respect to four-
dimensional coordinate changes xα → x̃α cannot in general stay that way in
noncompactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein theory, which is invariant with respect to five-
dimensional ones xA → x̃A . Any quantities — even those normally thought
of as conserved — are vulnerable if they depend on the ﬁfth coordinate x4 .

What this means in practice is that density, pressure, and the equation of
state in the induced-matter interpretation are to some extent dependent on
the coordinates in which one chooses to express them. A search for the cor-
rect solution to a (four-dimensional) physical problem is also a search for the
appropriate system of (ﬁve-dimensional) coordinates. This can perhaps best
be illustrated with a series of simple x4 -dependent coordinate transformations
[23], beginning with ﬁve-dimensional Minkowski space:

                      dŝ2 = dt2 − dr 2 − r 2 dΩ2 − dψ 2 .                (83)


                                      42
Spacetime sections of this metric are of course four-dimensional Minkowski
spaces. If one transforms to primed coordinates:
                                                                !−1/2                                  !1/2
                        r   r2                                                           r2
         t′ = t , r ′ =   1+ 2                                             ,   ψ′ = ψ 1 + 2                   ,   (84)
                        ψ   ψ                                                            ψ


this metric becomes:
                                                                 dr ′ 2
                                                                                     !
                        ′2                ′2          ′2
                      dŝ = dt − ψ                                      + r ′ 2 dΩ2 − dψ ′ 2 .                    (85)
                                                               1 − r′ 2


Spacetime sections (ψ ′ = constant) of the new primed metric are static Ein-
stein cosmologies; ie., four-dimensional FRW metrics:

                                          dr ′ 2
                                                                                           !
                              ′2           ′2              2    ′
                       ds = dt − R (t )            + r ′ 2 dΩ2                                     ,              (86)
                                        1 − kr ′ 2


with k = +1 and a constant scale factor R(t′ ) = ψ ′ . One can obtain from
the Friedmann equations the value of Einstein’s cosmological constant Λ, and
(assuming a perfect ﬂuid) expressions for the density and pressure of matter:

                                       1                              1
                         Λ=                ,           ρm =                  ,      pm = 0 .                      (87)
                                      ψ′ 2                          4πGψ ′ 2


The cosmological constant represents a vacuum energy density ρv = Λ/(8πG)
with associated pressure pv = −ρv . So altogether one has:
                                                        3                                      ρ
                     ρ = ρm + ρv =                             ,          p = pm + pv = −        .                (88)
                                                      8πGψ ′ 2                                 3


The eﬀective equation of state in the four-dimensional spacetime sections of
the primed metric (85) is thus that of non-gravitating matter of the kind
discussed in § 6.6. (The same result could have been obtained by plugging
the metric directly into eqs. (63) for induced-matter density and pressure.) A
second coordinate transformation to double-primed coordinates:

                     t′ = ψ ′′ sinh t′′ ,                      r ′ = r ′′ , ψ ′ = ψ ′′ cosh t′′ ,                 (89)


puts the metric into the new form:

                                                                          dr ′′ 2
                                                                                               !
             ′′ 2      ′′ 2        ′′ 2        ′′ 2            2 ′′ 2
       dŝ          = ψ dt                −ψ          cosh t                        + r ′′ 2 dΩ2 − dψ ′′ 2 .      (90)
                                                                         1 − r ′′ 2


                                                                    43
Spacetime sections of this double-primed metric are expanding FRW cosmolo-
gies, with k = +1 and R(t′′ ) = ψ ′′ cosh t′′ . The density and pressure of the
accompanying perfect ﬂuid, as obtained from eqs. (63), are:

                                    3
                            ρ=              ,    p = −ρ ,                            (91)
                                  8πGψ ′′ 2


so that the eﬀective equation of state is that of a pure vacuum.

Of the metrics (83), (85) and (90), which one is the best choice for a description
of the real universe? None, of course, since none of them admits spacetime
sections with realistic four-dimensional properties. A metric which is adequate
to this task is the cosmological one (68). It can be obtained from Minkowski
space (83) by transforming from t, r, ψ to t̃, r̃, ψ̃ via:


             r̃ 2
                     !
        α                              α     h                i(1−2α)/α
     t=   1 + 2 t̃1/α ψ̃ 1/(1−α) −            t̃−1 ψ̃ α/(1−α)                    ,
        2    α                     2(1 − 2α)
    r = r̃ t̃1/α ψ̃ 1/(1−α) ,
                       r̃ 2 1/α 1/(1−α)
                           !
        α                                     α     h                i(1−2α)/α
    ψ=         1 − 2 t̃ ψ̃              +            t̃−1 ψ̃ α/(1−α)             ,   (92)
         2            α                   2(1 − 2α)

and dropping the tildes [25]. The cosmological metric, as we have seen (§ 6.5),
gives back good models for the early (radiation) and late (dust) universe on
spacetime sections ψ = constant if α is chosen appropriately.

The point of this exercise is that all four of the metrics (68),(83), (85) and
(90) are flat in five dimensions, although they would be perceived very dif-
ferently by four-dimensional observers (as evinced by their expansion factors
and equations of state). The reason for these diﬀerences is the ψ-dependence
of the coordinate transformations, and the fact that the theory is covariant
with respect to five-, not four-dimensional coordinates. To properly describe a
given four-dimensional problem in noncompactiﬁed theory, one needs to choose
ﬁve-dimensional coordinates judiciously. This is not a reﬂection of some fun-
damental ambiguity in the theory, but is rather forced on us as long as we
insist on retaining four-dimensional concepts like density and pressure in a
ﬁve-dimensional theory (see also § 7.6).


6.8 Other Exact Solutions


Similar remarks apply to astrophysical situations. One has to choose ﬁve-
dimensional coordinates appropriate to each problem, if one wants to couch
the results in terms of familiar four-dimensional quantities. There is thus a


                                           44
rich ﬁeld here for future inquiry. The one-body metric which has received
most attention so far is that of the soliton (77), which contains the four-
dimensional Schwarzschild solution on spacetime sections. As we saw in § 6.6,
however, the induced matter associated with this metric is necessarily radi-
ationlike (except in the Schwarzschild limit), and its density falls oﬀ with
distance rather steeply. To describe bodies with different properties, one must
ﬁnd new static spherically-symmetric solutions of the ﬁeld equations. This
is possible in Kaluza-Klein theory because Birkhoﬀ’s theorem (which guaran-
tees the uniqueness of the Schwarzschild solution in four dimensions) no longer
holds in higher dimensions [22,184,214,226].

One such solution has recently been found by Billyard & Wesson [186]. It is
actually a modiﬁcation of the cosmological metric (68):


           r 2(α+1) 2(α+3)/α 2
               
       2
    dŝ =          ψ          dt − (3 − α2 )ψ 2 dr 2 − ψ 2 r 2 dΩ2
           r0
          +3(3α−2 − 1)r 2 dψ 2 ,                                              (93)

where r0 is a constant and α is a parameter related to the properties of matter.
On spacetime hypersurfaces dψ = 0 this metric is very similar to a four-
dimensional one originally used to describe inhomogeneous spheres of matter
in static isothermal equilibrium [233]. With the aid of eqs. (63), one ﬁnds that
the associated induced matter has:

                     (2 − α2 )                  α2 + 2α + 2/3
                                                                   !
               ρ=                     , p=                             ρ .    (94)
                  8πG(3 − α2 )ψ 2 r 2               2 − α2


In addition, one can use the standard (Tolman-Whittaker) deﬁnition [234] of
the gravitational mass of a volume of ﬂuid to obtain:
                                                     2+α
                             (1 + α)           r
                                                 
                    Mg (r) = √         ψ 2+3/α              r0 .              (95)
                            G 3−α    2         r0


The object described by this metric has positive density for α2 ≤ 2, and
positive mass (assuming
                      √ α 6= 0) for α ≥ −1. So altogether one has a nonzero
α between −1 and 2, which allows for equations of state (94) anywhere in
the range −ρ/3 ≤ p ≤ ρ. These are potentially relevant to a wide variety of
astrophysical problems. But the fact that ρ and p are both proportional to
r −2 , rather than ∼r −4 as for solitons, indicates that eq. (93) may be especially
useful for modelling phenomena such as galaxies, or clusters of them [235–237].
To go further one needs to rederive the classical tests of general relativity for
this metric, just as has been done for the soliton one (see § 8). Some work has
been done in this direction in [186].


                                       45
6.9 The Equations of Motion


Like the higher-dimensional ﬁeld equations, the higher-dimensional equations
of motion are also modiﬁed when dependence is allowed on extra coordinates.
In this section, in order to explicitly include electromagnetic eﬀects, we no
longer restrict our choice of coordinates to those in which Aα = 0. The metric
ĝAB is given by eq. (5), with the addition of the ε-factor to allow for timelike, as
well as spacelike x4 . We then obtain the equations of motion by minimizing the
ﬁve-dimensional interval dŝ2 = ĝAB dxA dxB . This results in a ﬁve-dimensional
version of the geodesic equation [172]:

                           d2 xA          B
                                     A dx dx
                                              C
                                 + Γ̂BC         =0 ,                                  (96)
                            dŝ2        dŝ dŝ


with the ﬁve-dimensional Christoﬀel symbol deﬁned as in eq. (4). The A = 4
component of eq. (96) can be shown [172] to take the form:

                             dB    1 ∂ĝCD dxC dxD
                                 =                 ,                                  (97)
                             dŝ   2 ∂x4 dŝ dŝ

where B is a scalar function:

                                       dx4       dxα
                                                        !
                                   2
                          B ≡ εφ           + κAα            .                         (98)
                                       dŝ        dŝ


In the case where ĝAB does not depend on x4 , B is a constant of the motion
(since dB/dŝ = 0), but this is not generally so in noncompactiﬁed theory.
The deﬁnition of B, together with the form of the metric (5), allow us to
express the ﬁve-dimensional interval in terms of the four-dimensional one via
dŝ = (1−εB2 /φ2 )−1/2 ds. Using this relation, the A = α components of eq. (96)
can be shown [172] to take the form:


     d2 xµ         α  β                       ν
                                                  κAµ dB               4
                                              "                                         #
              µ dx dx         B          µ dx                 µλ ∂Aλ dx
           + Γαβ        = q            Fν       −        − κg
      ds2        ds ds     1 − εB2 /φ2      ds     B ds          ∂x4 ds
                                     εB2                                    dxµ
                                                  "                     !         #
                                                       φ dB dφ
                             +        2  2   3
                                                ∇µ φ +      −
                               (1 − εB /φ )φ           B ds   ds             ds
                                         ν    4
                                  ∂gλν dx dx
                             −g µλ 4            .                                     (99)
                                   ∂x ds ds
This is the fully general equation of motion in Kaluza-Klein theory, and for
µ = 1, 2, 3 shows how a test particle moves in ordinary space.


                                         46
The left-hand side of eq. (99) is identical to that in Einstein’s theory; the terms
on the right-hand side are deviations from four-dimensional geodesic motion.
In the case of no dependence on the extra coordinate x4 , the four terms in
dB/ds and ∂/∂x4 all vanish and we correctly recover the same result obtained
previously by those working in compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein theory [238–240].
The terms in the ﬁrst set of square brackets depend on a nonvanishing electro-
magnetic potential Aα , and the ﬁrst of these can be recognized as the Lorentz
force if the charge-to-mass ratio of the test particle is:

                             Q      B
                               =q            .                                (100)
                             M   1 − εB2 /φ2


This relation, however, is only useful in the limit where the metric is indepen-
dent of x4 , and its extra-dimensional part is ﬂat [172]. In coordinate frames
where this is not the case, one cannot readily identify quantities like mass
or charge, which after all are four-dimensional concepts. The same caution
applies to the “scalar charge-to-mass ratio” given by:

                            Q′         εB2
                               =                  ,                           (101)
                            M    (1 − εB2 /φ2 )φ3


which can be identiﬁed analogously to the electromagnetic one from the mul-
tiplicative factor in front of the second set of square brackets in eq. (99).

The 0-component of the geodesic equation (99), meanwhile, can be written
[172] in a form analogous to eq. (97) above:

                            dC   1 ∂ĝCD dxC dxD
                               =                 ,                            (102)
                            ds   2 ∂x0 ds dŝ

where C is a new scalar function:
                        v                      !
                               g00      εB2
                        u
                        u
                      C≡t           1 −            + κ BA0 .                  (103)
                             1 − v2      φ2


Here v 2 = λab v a v b is the square of the test particle’s spatial 3-velocity v a =
      √
dxa /( g00 [dx0 + (g0b /g00 )dxb ]), with λαβ ≡ gα0 gβ0 /g00 − gαβ a suitable pro-
jector. If the metric ĝAB were independent of time x0 then C would be a
constant of motion. Where this is not the case, as in cosmology, the geodesic
equation (99) could in principle be applied to test noncompactiﬁed theory.
We return to this question in § 7.5. The possible physical signiﬁcance of the
quantity C is explored in more detail in [172].


                                        47
6.10 Physical Meaning of the Fifth Coordinate


We have noted that the charge of a test particle can be readily identiﬁed in
the limit as ψ ≡ x4 = constant. We have also found that a variety of realistic
four-dimensional cosmological models and one-body metrics can be identiﬁed
as constant-ψ hypersurfaces of ﬂat ﬁve-dimensional Minkowski space. So far,
then, it appears that useful coordinate systems can be speciﬁed by the condi-
tion u4 ≡ dψ/ds = 0. (This is perfectly legitimate from a mathematical point
of view as the introduction of a ﬁfth coordinate into general relativity means
an extra degree of freedom that can always be used if one wishes to set a
condition on u4 .) However, we have not much improved on Kaluza’s cylinder
condition unless we confront the question: are there any physical reasons why
we should expect dψ/ds = 0?

In answering this one is obliged to interpret ψ physically. We review here one
such interpretation, which has been advanced by Wesson and his collaborators
[23,25,135,168]. Noncompactiﬁed theory in general (and elsewhere in this re-
port, including the next two parts on experimental constraints) stands or falls
quite independently of this additional work. The proposal we consider is that
the ﬁfth coordinate ψ might be related to rest mass. The coordinate frame
picked out by u4 = 0 is then just the one in which particle rest masses are
constant. There are at least three independent pieces of evidence (besides the
empirical fact that rest masses are conserved!) in support of this conjecture:
(1) All of mechanics depends on base units of length, time and mass. So if the
former two can be treated as coordinates, then maybe the last should also.
Dimensionally, x4 = Gm/c2 allows us to treat the rest mass m of a particle
as a length coordinate, in analogy with x0 = ct. (2) Metrics which do not de-
pend on x4 , like the soliton metric (77), can give rise only to induced matter
composed of photons; while those which depend on x4 , like the cosmological
metric (68), give back equations of state for ﬂuids composed of massive parti-
cles. (3) The metrics dŝ2 = dT 2 − dσ 2 − dΨ2 and dŝ2 = ψ 2 dt2 − dσ 2 − t2 dψ 2
are related by the coordinate transformations T = t2 ψ 2 /4 + ln[(t/ψ)1/2 ] and
Ψ = t2 ψ 2 /4 − ln[(t/ψ)
                    R
                         1/2
                             ]. The former metric is ﬂat, while the latter gives an
action principle δ ψdt = 0 for particles at rest in ordinary space (dσ/ds = 0),
viewed on hypersurfaces ψ = constant. This action principle is formally the
same as that of particle physics if ψ → m in the local, low-velocity limit. (The
same argument applies to cosmological metrics (68).) This view of the origin of
mass is similar to that in some quantum ﬁeld theories [241], where rest masses
are generated spontaneously in a conformally invariant theory that includes a
scalar dilaton ﬁeld or Nambu-Goldstone boson in Minkowski space.

Several other, more philosophical reasons [23,25] to consider the STM (“Space-
Time-Matter”) hypothesis that ψ might be related to m can perhaps be men-
tioned here: (4) A theory in which mass is placed on the same footing as


                                       48
space and time will be naturally scale-invariant, simply by virtue of being
coordinate-invariant (because particle masses are a necessary part of any sys-
tem of units, or “scales”). The idea that nature might be scale-invariant has
been considered from time to time by such eminent thinkers as Dirac, Hoyle
and others [23,242–250]. (The STM approach is, however, otherwise quite dis-
tinct from these theories, not least in the fact that it predicts a variation in
rest mass m rather than the dimension-transposing constant G.) (5) There is
also a pleasing symmetry in the elevation of G to the same status as c: as the
latter puts distances into temporal units, so the former is needed to do the
same for masses. The actual conversion factors are 1/c and G/c3 respectively,
and this helps explain why any change in mass with time — a generic feature
of scale-invariant theories — has been so small as to have escaped detection
so far: the latter factor is some 43 orders of magnitude smaller than the for-
mer, and the former is already tiny enough to have made special relativistic
eﬀects unnoticeable until the second half of this century. (6) Finally, we note
that if x4 is not restricted to be lengthlike (or timelike) in nature, then the
extra part of the metric can have either sign without running afoul of closed
timelike curves and causality problems (§ 6.1). We will not consider the STM
theory further in this report, noting however that its observational implica-
tions have been studied over the years by Wesson [19,136–139] and numerous
others [140–148], [149–158], [159–163].



7   Cosmology


7.1 Compactified Kaluza-Klein Cosmology


Cosmological aspects of compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein theory have received less
attention than those related to particle physics [12]. Where they have been
addressed [7,13], much of the discussion has focused on the search for exact so-
lutions of higher-dimensional general relativity (or extended gravity theories)
which contain the familiar FRW universes on spacetime-like sections. This was
ﬁrst done in ﬁve dimensions (with no extra-dimensional matter) by Chodos
& Detweiler [222] in 1980, and extended to ten- and eleven-dimensional su-
pergravities (with appropriate higher-dimensional matter tensors) by Freund
[253]. The key feature of these and subsequent models [254–260], [261–267] was
that extra dimensions could (and in some cases necessarily would ) shrink as
the spatial ones expanded, thus lending support to the whole notion of com-
pactiﬁcation. (The possibility that compact subspaces could “bounce back”
from a contracting phase was also investigated [268,269].) This approach to
explaining why the universe appears four-dimensional is sometimes referred
to as “dynamical” or “cosmological” dimensional reduction. Non-compactiﬁed
theory can exhibit the same behaviour, as noted in § 6.4 and § 8.10.


                                      49
In more than ﬁve dimensions, compactiﬁcation requires either explicit matter
terms or modiﬁcations to the Einstein equations (§ 4.4). All kinds of matter
have been invoked to induce cosmological compactiﬁcation (usually in addition
to that already required for spontaneous compactiﬁcation; eg., as in super-
gravity [253,256–258]). There are theories with dilaton ﬁelds [258], quantized
ﬁve-dimensional scalar ﬁelds [259], a D-dimensional gas of non-interacting
scalar particles [260], general higher-dimensional perfect ﬂuids [256,261–264],
D-dimensional radiation [265], ﬁve-dimensional dust [266], and scalar ﬁelds
in nonlinear sigma models [267]. Cosmological compactiﬁcation mechanisms
based on modiﬁcations of Einstein’s theory of gravity are just as colorful,
employing quadratic [270,271], cubic [272], and even quartic terms [273] in
the curvature, both generally and in special combinations known variously as
Gauss-Bonnet terms [255,265,274,275], Lanczos terms [276], Lovelock terms
[273,277], Euler-Poincaré densities [278], and dimensionally continued Euler
forms [279,280]. Even changes of metric signature [281] have been considered
as instruments of compactiﬁcation. An exhaustive survey and classiﬁcation of
generalized higher-dimensional vacuum cosmologies has recently been carried
out by Coley [175].

An important step in Kaluza-Klein cosmology was the demonstration that
shrinking extra dimensions could transfer entropy into the four-dimensional
universe, providing a new way to solve the horizon and ﬂatness problems
[221,282], although many (∼40) extra dimensions were required [283]. Inﬂa-
tion itself has also been incorporated directly in compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein
theories [284,285], and indeed “Kaluza-Klein inﬂation” has burgeoned into a
sub-ﬁeld of its own [286]. It is diﬃcult to obtain in some supergravity [256]
and most superstring [287] theories, and again requires in general that ei-
ther additional matter terms [284] or higher-derivative corrections [285] be
added to Einstein’s theory. Examples of the former include higher-dimensional
dust [288], scalar ﬁelds with conformal transformations of the metric [64,289]
or non-minimal couplings to the curvature [290], generalized perfect ﬂuids
[291,292], and others [293]. Examples of the latter include higher-derivative
corrections to Einstein’s equations [294,295], Gauss-Bonnet terms [274,281],
and Euler forms [280]. Inﬂation has also been obtained with multiple compact
subspaces [296] and explicit “chaotic inﬂaton” ﬁelds [297]. Other inﬂation-
ary Kaluza-Klein cosmologies include versions of extended inﬂation [298] and
STM theory [147]. An exciting recent development is the use of COBE mea-
surements of microwave background anisotropy to put experimental limits —
surprisingly restrictive ones in some cases — on inﬂationary Kaluza-Klein
models [299–302].

Cosmological constraints on compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein theories apart from
those relating to inﬂation in the early universe have also received attention,
beginning with Marciano’s observation [303] that time-variation in the scale
of extra dimensions would have important consequences for the fundamental


                                     50
constants of four-dimensional physics. Implications of the same phenomenon
for primordial nucleosynthesis [304] and nuclear resonance levels in carbon
and oxygen atoms [305] have also been discussed. If the extra dimensions are
spatial in nature, these arguments imply that the present rate of change in
their mean radius is less than about 10−19 yr−1 . Another interesting idea is to
use observations of gravitational waves to constrain Kaluza-Klein cosmologies;
this however turns out to be impractical at the present time [306]. Other issues
in compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein cosmology include the possibility of excessive
contributions to the global energy density from massive Fourier modes [13,307]
and solitons [13,308] (see also § 8.4), gravitational eﬀects due to massless
scalar components of the compactiﬁed higher-dimensional metric [309], and
the stability of solutions with respect to classical perturbations [310], chaotic
behaviour [311], and quantum eﬀects [212,268,312]. Inhomogeneous Kaluza-
Klein cosmologies have been considered in [313].



7.2 The Equation of State


Compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein cosmology, as described above, is characterized by
a profusion of competing expressions for the energy-momentum tensor T̂AB in
higher dimensions, reﬂecting the fact that there is no consensus on how to de-
ﬁne “higher-dimensional matter.” In noncompactiﬁed cosmology, by contrast,
one avoids this ambiguity with the natural and economical assumption that
T̂AB ≡ 0; that is, that the universe in higher dimensions is empty.

This cannot be done in compactiﬁed theory because the cylinder condition
imposes uncomfortable restrictions on the resulting equation of state (and
other properties of matter) in four dimensions. Consider as a simple example
the uniform ﬁve-dimensional line element (65) with ν = 0, ω = ln t, and
µ = − ln t:

                        dŝ2 = dt2 − tdσ 2 − t−1 dψ 2 ,                    (104)


where dσ 2 = dx2 + dy 2 + dz 2 is shorthand for the spatial part of the metric.
This would be an acceptable solution in compactiﬁed cosmology in that its
constant-ψ sections are FRW, none of the metric coeﬃcients depend on ψ, and
the extra coordinate shrinks with time. Indeed its spatial part grows in exactly
the same way as that of a four-dimensional FRW model with the radiation
equation of state, p = ρ/3. And in fact, in the induced-matter interpretation,
this metric literally does describe radiation. That is, putting eq. (104) into
the ﬁve-dimensional vacuum ﬁeld equations ĜAB = 0 gives back the four-
dimensional ones Gαβ = 8πTαβ , where Tαβ is the energy-momentum tensor of


                                      51
a perfect ﬂuid with:
                                    3              ρ
                             ρ=         ,     p=     ,                      (105)
                                  32πt2            3

as can be shown explicitly using eqs. (63). (Units are such that G = c = 1
throughout § 7, except where otherwise noted.) These are the same expressions
as those used to describe the radiation era in (ﬂat) four-dimensional cosmology
[168]. In fact, unless ﬁve-dimensional matter is put in to begin with, this metric
is incapable of manifesting itself as anything but electromagnetic radiation in
four dimensions (§ 6.3).

In noncompactiﬁed cosmology, by contrast, one can describe the universe at
any stage of its history without higher-dimensional matter (or modiﬁcations
to the higher-dimensional ﬁeld equations). As discussed in § 6.5, the best
metric for this purpose is the “cosmological metric” (68). Consider ﬁrst the
case α = 2, which looks like:

                       dŝ2 = ψ 2 dt2 − tψ −2 dσ 2 − 4t2 dψ 2 .             (106)


This line element again has FRW-like constant-ψ sections, and gives exactly
the same expressions for induced density and pressure as eqs. (105) above,
provided that the unphysical coordinate label t is replaced by the proper
time ψt. So it again describes a radiation-dominated universe, or one ﬁlled
with relativistic particles such as neutrinos. This time, however, the metric
coeﬃcients depend on ψ, and the ﬁfth dimension grows with time. Solutions of
this type tend to be discarded in particle physics, where the assumed lengthlike
nature of the extra coordinates constrains them to be very small at the present
time [55]. Here we make no a priori assumptions about the physical nature of
extra dimensions. This allows us to obtain more general kinds of cosmological
matter [167,168]. In the case α = 3/2, for instance, the same metric (68) reads:

                    dŝ2 = ψ 2 dt2 − t4/3 ψ −4 dσ 2 − 9t2 dψ 2 ,            (107)


which, from eqs. (70), represents matter with induced density and pressure:
                                     1
                            ρ=            ,     p=0 ,                       (108)
                                  6π(ψt)2


and therefore describes a dust-filled universe. One can also model inflation (in
ﬂat FRW models) by choosing 0 < α < 1. Provided one is willing to tolerate
a dependence on the extra coordinate, then, and a non-lengthlike interpreta-
tion of its physical nature, one can describe the universe at any stage of its
history as a manifestation of pure geometry in ﬁve dimensions. In every case,


                                         52
the parameters ρ and p appear as products of an underlying geometric theory,
and the equation of state manifests itself as a consequence of the ﬁeld equa-
tions. This is more satisfying than the usual situation in (four-dimensional)
cosmology, where pressure and density have merely phenomenological status
and the equation of state must be put into the theory by hand.


7.3 Extension to k 6= 0 Cosmologies


The cosmological metric (68), and the others mentioned in § 6.5, are all ﬁve-
dimensional generalizations of spatially flat four-dimensional FRW spacetimes.
One could also consider a curved version of the homogeneous and isotropic
line element (65):

                                       dr 2
                                                       !
                2      ν   2    ω
              dŝ = e dt − e                2
                                              + r 2 dΩ2 − eµ dψ 2 .        (109)
                                     1 − kr


McManus [174] has investigated solutions of the vacuum Einstein equations (2)
with this form. Like Ponce de Leon [145], he assumed that ν, ω and µ were
separable functions, as given by eq. (66), with T (t) = Z(ψ) = constant. He
found four solutions with k 6= 0, each associated with a well-deﬁned induced-
matter equation of state. We list his ﬁnal results here. In the ﬁrst solution,
X(ψ) and Y (ψ) are constant as well as Z(ψ), and the line element reads:

                                                    (kt − ξ/2)2
           dŝ2 = dt2 − (−kt2 + ξt + η)dχ2 −                     dψ 2 ,    (110)
                                                   −kt2 + ξt + η

where dχ2 = [(1 − kr 2 )−1 dr 2 + r 2 dΩ2 ] is new shorthand for the spatial part
of the metric and ξ and η are arbitrary constants. Since none of the metric
coeﬃcients depend on ψ, the equation of state is that of radiation:
                               3(ξ 2 + 4kη)                ρ
                     ρ=                        ,      p=     .             (111)
                           32π(−kt2 + ξt + η)2             3


This solution was originally discussed by Davidson et al. [254]. The second
solution reads:
                     (kψ + ξ/2)2 2
           dŝ2 =                 dt − (kψ 2 + ξψ + η)dχ2 − dψ 2 ,         (112)
                    kψ 2 + ξψ + η

and has:
                                    3k                     ρ
                     ρ=                        ,    p=−      .             (113)
                           8π(kψ 2 + ξψ + η)               3


                                         53
This is the equation of state of “nongravitating matter” discussed in § 6.6.
The same equation of state characterizes the third solution:
                                  1
                      dŝ2 = dt2 − t2 (eψ − ke−ψ )2 dχ2 − t2 dψ 2 ,                    (114)
                                  4

which has:
                                             3      1
                                       ρ=                  .                           (115)
                                            8πt (tanh ψ)2k
                                               2



Finally, McManus’ fourth solution is given by:
                                      1
                      dŝ2 = ψ 2 dt2 − ψ 2 (et + ke−t )2 dχ2 − dψ 2 ,                  (116)
                                      4

with:
                                              3
                                   ρ=             ,       p = −ρ .                     (117)
                                            8πψ 2

This is the equation of state of a vacuum.

Liu & Wesson [173] have extended the search to non-separable k 6= 0 solu-
tions (109). Instead of eq. (66), they assume metric coeﬃcients of the form:

            eν ≡ L2 (t − λψ) ,         eω ≡ M 2 (t − λψ) ,       eµ ≡ N 2 (t − λψ) ,   (118)


where L, M and N are wavelike functions of the argument (t − λψ), with λ
acting as a “wave number.” Their solutions turn out to be determined by two
relations:

                               κ
                                               
        2         2    2   2       2    2
    L̇ + kM = ζ M λ M + 2                             ,
                              L
                         k   κ
          N 2 = λ2 M 2 − 2 + 2 ,                                                       (119)
                        ζ   L

where L (or M) must be supplied, and ζ and κ are integration constants.
With L, M and N speciﬁed in this way, the induced-matter energy-momentum
tensor can be calculated, and the density and pressure of the cosmological
induced matter found. If one supposes, for example, that κ = 0 and M =
L(3γ+1)/2 , with γ a new constant, then one obtains a perfect ﬂuid with:

                                         3ζ 2λ2
                                   ρ=                 ,    p = γρ .                    (120)
                                        8πL3+3γ


                                                 54
In this case the metric (109) reads:

                                                λ2
                                                         !
                 2      1                    k
                              2
               dŝ = 1+3γ dt − L χ −  2 2
                                      1+3γ
                                           − 2 dψ 2 ,                      (121)
                    L                L      ζ


where L(t − λψ) plays the role of the cosmological scale factor , obeying the
ﬁeld equation:

                                      k     ζ 2 λ2
                            L̇2 +         =          .                     (122)
                                    L1+3γ   L2+6γ


This solution can be used to describe, for example, the matter-dominated
era (γ = 0) or the radiation-dominated one (γ = 1/3). The properties of
this model are discussed in more detail in [173]. The fact that the scale factor
depends on ψ as well as t is particularly interesting, and implies that observers
with diﬀerent values of ψ would disagree on the time elapsed since the big bang;
that is, on the age of the universe. Rather than being a single event, in fact,
the big bang in this picture resembles a sort of shock wave propagating along
the ﬁfth dimension. This eﬀect could in principle allow one to constrain the
theory using observational data on the age spread of objects such as globular
clusters [315–317]. This has yet to be investigated in detail.


7.4 Newton’s Law, the Continuity Equation, and Horizon Size


Besides the equation of state, there are two other important laws relating ρ
and p in cosmology; and it is natural to ask whether or not they are auto-
matically satisﬁed by the induced-matter ﬂuid. These are the continuity (or
mass conservation) equation, or equivalently the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics
dE + p dV = 0 (where E is energy and V is the three-dimensional volume);
and the equation of motion (or geodesic equation). The former can be written:

                          ∂             ∂
                            (ρR3 ) + p    (R3 ) = 0 .                      (123)
                         ∂T            ∂T


The latter is in general quite complicated (see § 6.9), and we defer discussion
of the noncomoving case to the next section. For matter which is comoving
with a uniform ﬂuid, however, only the radial direction is of interest and the
equation of motion is just Newton’s law:

                     ∂2R    M                4
                        2
                          =− 2 ,          M ≡ πR3 (ρ + 3p) ,               (124)
                     ∂T     R                3


                                           55
where we have used gravitational, rather than inertial mass, as pressure can
be signiﬁcant in cosmological problems [314]. In these equations one must be
careful to use proper time T = eν/2 dt and distance R = eω/2 dr rather
                                      R                            R

than the “raw coordinates” t and r (where r 2 = x2 + y 2 + z 2 is comoving
radial distance). For the cosmological metric (68) one has just T = ψt and
R = t1/α ψ 1/(1−α) r, and it is straightforward to show, using eqs. (70) for ρ and
p, that the conservation equation (123) and equation of motion (124) are both
satisﬁed [167]. In fact, the same thing is true for any spatially-ﬂat perfect-ﬂuid
cosmology induced in this way by ﬁve-dimensional geometry[168]. As far as
Newton’s law and the continuity equation are concerned, then, noncompacti-
ﬁed Kaluza-Klein cosmology is indistinguishable from standard cosmology. To
the extent that these laws depend on the ﬁeld equations, this is not surprising,
since the ﬁve-dimensional ﬁeld equations Ĝαβ = 0 contain exactly the same
information as the usual four-dimensional ones Gαβ = 8πTαβ .

There are, however, eﬀects which depend on the metric but not the ﬁeld equa-
tions, and the noncompactiﬁed versions of these will in general show departures
from standard cosmology. The size of the particle horizon, for example, can be
computed directly from the line element (assuming a null geodesic, dŝ2 = 0).
For the above “dust-like” metric (107), it reads:

                              Zt0
                                                     !2 1/2
                        2/3         ψ 2 − 9t2
                                                 dψ              dt
                   d = t0               0
                                                                    .                 (125)
                                                 dt             t2/3
                              0



This is just the usual (four-dimensional) expression, plus a term in (dψ/dt).
(This term necessarily acts to reduce the size of the particle horizon because
the extra dimension of the cosmological metric (68) is spacelike.) Similar re-
sults are found for the “radiation” metrics (106) and (104) above [168]. The
value of the derivative (dψ/dt) can be evaluated with the help of the full
geodesic equation, to which we turn next.



7.5 The Equation of Motion


The general equation of motion, or geodesic equation (99), is also a metric-
based relation and will contain nonstandard terms if the ﬁfth dimension is real.
Since the cosmological ﬂuid is neutral, we disregard electromagnetic terms.
The spatial components (µ = i, with i = 1, 2, 3) of eq. (99) then read:


     d2 xi         α  β
                                εB2                                          dxi
                                                 "                       !         #
              i dx dx                            φ dB dφ
        2
           + Γαβ        =        2  2   3
                                          ∇i φ +      −
     ds          ds ds    (1 − εB /φ )φ          B ds   ds                   ds


                                            56
                                      ∂gλν dxν dx4
                              −g iλ                ,                          (126)
                                      ∂x4 ds dx

where B is as given in eq. (98). We then deﬁne a ﬁve-velocity v̂ A ≡ dxA /dŝ,
which is related to the usual four-velocity v α ≡ dxα /ds by v α = (dŝ/ds)v̂ α .
Using the cosmological metric (68), one can show that, for objects which are
comoving with the cosmological ﬂuid (v̂ i = 0), all terms on the right-hand side
of eq. (126) vanish [172]. Comoving objects, in other words, satisfy the spatial
components of the ﬁve-dimensional geodesic equation in exactly the same way
as in the standard four-dimensional theory. This echoes the result obtained
above for Newton’s law.

For noncomoving objects, however, the right-hand side of eq. (126) will in gen-
eral contain nonzero terms involving the spatial velocities, the extra part of the
metric, and derivatives of the metric coeﬃcients with respect to the extra co-
ordinate. From the viewpoint of four-dimensional general relativity such terms
would appear as violations of the weak equivalence principle or manifestations
of a “ﬁfth force” [188,214,226]. To put this in practical terms, eq. (126) tells us
that galaxies with large peculiar velocities will not necessarily travel along four-
dimensional geodesics. Observations of the peculiar motions of galaxies (and
groups and clusters of them) are now becoming available [318–323], and in
principle these can be used to discriminate between noncompactiﬁed Kaluza-
Klein theory and ordinary general relativity [172], although this has yet to
be investigated in detail. Similar considerations will apply to the dynamics of
charged test particles such as cosmic rays, for which the electromagnetic terms
in eq. (99) would need to be included.

We turn next to the 0- and 4-components of the geodesic equation (99). With
comoving spatial coordinates (v̂ i = 0) one ﬁnds, using the metric (68):


     dv̂ 0   2 0 4      α2      t 4 4
           + v̂ v̂ +               v̂ v̂ = 0 ,
     dŝ     ψ       (1 − α) ψ 2
                              2

      dv̂ 4 (1 − α)2 ψ 0 0 2 0 4
            +           v̂ v̂ + v̂ v̂ = 0 .                                   (127)
       dŝ      α2 t2            t

A solution of these must be compatible with the metric itself, which imposes
the condition:

                                             α2
                        ψ 2 v̂ 0 v̂ 0 −            t2 v̂ 4 v̂ 4 = 1 .         (128)
                                          (1 − α)2


From eqs. (127) and (128) the 0- and 4-components of the ﬁve-velocity are


                                               57
found [170] to be:

                              α     1                  (1 − α)2 1
                v̂ 0 = ∓ √            ,       v̂ 4 = ± √          .       (129)
                             2α − 1 ψ                 α 2α − 1 t

The ratio of these gives us the rate of change with time of the extra coordinate
(dψ/dt = v̂ 4 /v̂ 0 ), and this is easily integrated to yield:
                                               A
                                        t0
                                          
                                 ψ(t) =              ,                    (130)
                                         t

where t0 is an integration constant and A ≡ (1 − α)2 /α2 . For α = 2 (the
radiation-dominated era), A = 0.25; while for α = 3/2 (the matter-dominated
era), A ≈ 0.11. The relative rate of change of the extra coordinate is:

                                 dψ/dt    A
                                       =−   ,                             (131)
                                   ψ      t

and this is comfortably small in either case at late times. (This is also true
in the STM interpretation, where ψ is related to rest mass; we return to this
in the next section.) The small size of dψ/dt means that the horizon sizes
discussed in the last section will be close to those in standard cosmology. The
discrepancies are, however, necessarily nonzero if the spatial coordinates are
chosen to be comoving.


7.6 Cosmological Implications of General Covariance


In the previous section we worked entirely in coordinates deﬁned by the cosmo-
logical metric (68). We are of course free to transform to coordinates in which
the spatial components of the ﬁve-velocity are not comoving. For example, we
can switch from t, r, ψ to t′ , r ′ and ψ ′ , where:

                     t′ = tψ , r′ = t1/α r ,        ψ ′ = At±A ψ .        (132)


In terms of these new coordinates, the density and pressure of the cosmological
ﬂuid are no longer given by eqs. (70) but by:
                            3                2α
                                                        
                       ρ=          ,      p=    −1 ρ .                    (133)
                          8πα2t′ 2            3

These are identical to the expressions in standard early (α = 2) and late
(α = 3/2) cosmology. Also, since the metric transforms as a tensor, ĝ ′ AB =


                                          58
(∂x′ A /∂xC )(∂x′ B /∂xD )ĝ CD , we have the result that ĝ ′ 00 = (2α − 1)/α2 =
constant, which implies that in the new coordinates (132) there is a uni-
versal or cosmic time. Similarly, using the vector transformation law v̂ ′ A =
(∂x′ A /∂xB )v̂ B , we ﬁnd that the new components of the ﬁve-velocity are:
                 √
          ′0        2α − 1                  1     r′
        v̂ = ∓              , v̂ ′ 1 = ∓ √           , v̂ ′ 2 = v̂ ′ 3 = v̂ ′ 4 = 0 . (134)
                     α                     2α − 1 t′

The 0-component of the test particle velocity (which in four-dimensional the-
ory is related to its energy) is constant. The ﬁrst component is proportional to
r ′ , which represents a version of Hubble’s law. And the fourth component van-
ishes. Taken together, the above observations tell us that the new coordinates
deﬁned by eq. (132) — the ones in which v̂ 4 = dψ/dŝ = 0 — are just the ones
which give back standard cosmology. In a fully covariant ﬁve-dimensional the-
ory, there can be no a priori reason to prefer coordinates in which v̂ 4 = 0 over
those in which v̂ 4 6= 0. It is a matter for experiment to decide. As emphasized
in § 6.7, the choice between the coordinates deﬁned by the metric (68) and
those deﬁned by (132) is not arbitrary — not as long as the laws of physics
are written in terms of four-dimensional concepts like density, pressure, and
comoving four-velocity [23,170]. To decide whether or not the coordinates of
the last section are appropriate to describe the “real world,” one must look
for the eﬀects associated with them, like the nongeodesic motion of galaxies
with large peculiar velocities.

Another promising possibility arises if one can interpret the ﬁfth dimension
physically, since eq. (131) shows explicitly how it will change with time. In
particular, in the context of STM theory, where ψ is related to particle rest
mass, this equation implies a slow variation in rest mass with time:
                                      ṁ    A
                                         =−   .                                     (135)
                                      m     t

Putting A ≈ 0.11 for the matter-dominated era and t ≈ 15 × 109 yr for
the present epoch, we obtain a value of ṁ/m = −7 × 10−12 yr−1 . This is
marginally consistent with ranging data from the Viking space probe to Mars,
where errors are reported as ±4 × 10−12 yr−1 , and ±10 × 10−12 yr−1 ; and
quite consistent with timing data for the binary pulsar 1913+16, where errors
are reported as ±11 × 10−12 yr−1 [170,197]. If the STM hypothesis is valid,
these data tell us that observation is close to settling the question of whether
cosmology is using coordinates with v̂ 4 = 0 or ones with v̂ 4 6= 0.

It may seem unusual that physical eﬀects can depend on the reference frame
in which one observes them. In fully covariant Kaluza-Klein theory this is
a necessary consequence of trying to measure a higher-dimensional universe
with four-dimensional tools. Perhaps the most graphic example of this is the


                                           59
big bang itself. As demonstrated in § 6.7, the cosmological metric (68) is ﬁve-
dimensionally flat. The universe may therefore be far simpler than previously
suspected, in that it may have zero curvature. What then of the big bang
singularity, the Hubble expansion, the microwave background, and primordial
nucleosynthesis? In noncompactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein cosmology, these phenom-
ena, which are all deﬁned in four-dimensional terms, are in a sense recognized
as geometrical illusions — artifacts of a choice of coordinates in the higher-
dimensional world [169]. Something like this occurs even in four-dimensional
general relativity when one works with comoving spatial coordinates, in which
galaxies remain forever apart and there is no initial singularity [170]. Relativity
is founded on the idea that there should be no preferred coordinate systems;
yet in spatially comoving frames there is no big bang. This paradox has no
resolution within Einstein’s theory, which must consequently be seen as in-
complete. In practice, one usually regards the comoving coordinates as useful
but “not real.” Noncompactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein theory gives us a new way to
think about these issues in terms of general covariance in higher dimensions.



8   Astrophysics


8.1 Kaluza-Klein Solitons


To model astrophysical phenomena like the Sun or other stars in Kaluza-Klein
theory, one must extend the spherically-symmetric Schwarzschild solution of
general relativity to higher dimensions. Birkhoﬀ’s theorem guarantees that
the four-dimensional Schwarzschild metric is both static and unique to within
its single free parameter (the mass of the central object). This theorem, how-
ever, does not hold in higher dimensions, where solutions that are spherically-
symmetric (in three or more spatial dimensions) depend in general on a num-
ber of parameters (such as electric and scalar charge) besides mass, and can in
some cases be time-dependent as well. Unlike four-dimensional stationary so-
lutions, some can also be nonsingular [226,324,325]. Such localized solutions of
ﬁnite energy can legitimately be called “solitons” in the same broad sense used
elsewhere in physics [326]. In fact, some workers [180,182,185,191,192] have
found it convenient to apply this term to the entire class of higher-dimensional
generalizations of the Schwarzschild metric with ﬁnite energy (including those
which, technically speaking, do contain geometrical singularities). We follow
this convention here.

Kaluza-Klein solitons (in this general sense) were noted as early as 1951 by
Heckmann, Jordan & Fricke [327], who found several solutions of the ﬁve-
dimensional vacuum Einstein equations that were stationary and spherically-
symmetric in three-space. Kühnel & Schmutzer [328] carried the problem fur-


                                       60
ther in 1961, studying for the ﬁrst time the motion of test particles in the
ﬁeld of the central mass. (Tangherlini [329] used the alleged instability of such
“generalized Keplerian orbits” to argue that there were only three spatial di-
mensions.) This crucial aspect of Kaluza-Klein theory has been re-examined
over the years by several other authors [226,239,240,330], and provides one of
the most promising ways to constrain it observationally. We will return to it
below.

The ﬁrst systematic studies of stationary Kaluza-Klein solutions with spher-
ical symmetry appeared in 1982 with the work of Chodos & Detweiler [228]
and Dobiasch & Maison [331]. The former authors obtained a class of ﬁve-
dimensional solutions characterized by three parameters (mass plus electric
and scalar charge) and emphasized the important point that solitons are
generic to Kaluza-Klein theory in the same way that black holes are to ordi-
nary general relativity. This is what makes them so important in confronting
the theory with experiment. The latter authors worked in D dimensions (al-
though the internal space was restricted to be ﬂat) and their solutions accord-
ingly possess four or more parameters. Various aspects of Chodos-Detweiler
and Dobiasch-Maison solitons have been studied in [215,332].

The physical properties of ﬁve-dimensional solitons with zero electric charge
were ﬁrst described in detail by Sorkin [225], Gross & Perry [226], and David-
son & Owen [227], whose solutions (given by eq. (77) in the notation of [227])
are characterized by two parameters. Although these latter authors (along
with many others) describe their solutions as “black holes,” it is important to
note that in some cases the objects being considered are naked singularities
[332], or have singular event horizons [215,333]. The term “monopole” is also
potentially misleading since more complicated solitons can, for example, take
the form of dipoles [226]. For these reasons we prefer to stay with the broader
term “solitons” in this report.

The Chodos-Detweiler metric was generalized by Gibbons & Wiltshire [334] to
include extra nondiagonal terms, introducing a fourth parameter (associated
with magnetic charge). These authors also considered the thermodynamics of
Kaluza-Klein solitons for the ﬁrst time. Myers & Perry [335] then extended
the discussion to D-dimensional solitons with spherical symmetry in (D − 1),
rather than three spatial dimensions, which allowed them to obtain Kaluza-
Klein versions of the Reissner-Nördstrom and Kerr metrics, as well as the
Schwarzschild one. The thermodynamical properties of these objects, espe-
cially in six and ten dimensions, were examined by Accetta & Gleiser [336].
Myers [337] considered solitons which were not asymptotically Minkowskian.
And Yoshimura [166] took the bold step of allowing dependence of his solutions
(albeit only the (D − 4)-dimensional part) on extra dimensions. Others have
studied the stability of soliton solutions with respect to classical perturbations
[338–340] and quantum eﬀects [341].


                                       61
All this work was done in a higher-dimensional vacuum; that is, with no ex-
plicit higher-dimensional matter. But most compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein theo-
ries, as we have seen, operate in curved higher-dimensional spaces and re-
quire such matter (or other modiﬁcations of the Einstein equations) to ensure
proper compactiﬁcation, among other things. This is just as true for soliton
solutions as cosmological ones. Non-Abelian solitons have accordingly been
constructed by many authors using, for example, the Freund-Rubin ﬁelds of
D = 11 supergravity [342], suitably deﬁned six-dimensional [343] or seven-
dimensional matter ﬁelds [344], and various D-dimensional scalar ﬁelds [345–
350]. Others have preferred to stay in a higher-dimensional vacuum, opting for
higher-derivative corrections to the Einstein equations, including (quadratic)
Gauss-Bonnet [351] and cubic [352] curvature terms; or for modiﬁcations of
the Kaluza-Klein mechanism such as “local compactiﬁcation” [353].


8.2 Are Solitons Black Holes?


The rest of this report is concerned with solitons of the ﬁve-dimensional
Gross-Perry-Davidson-Owen-Sorkin (GPDOS) type [225–227], with the line el-
ement (77) in the notation of Davidson & Owen. Other spherically-symmetric
static solutions, like the class found by Billyard & Wesson [186], and those
with more than two independent parameters [193,194], are subjects for fu-
ture research. Insofar as the metric coeﬃcients of eq. (77) do not depend on
the ﬁfth coordinate, the distinction between compactiﬁed and noncompact-
iﬁed approaches is not an issue here. It would, however, become crucial in
higher-dimensional generalizations of what follows. We will interpret the four-
dimensional properties of Kaluza-Klein solitons as induced by the geometry
of empty five-dimensional space [20] in the manner of § 6.3. When D > 5
this requires either a noncompactiﬁed approach, or modiﬁcations to the ﬁeld
equations, as described at the end of the last section.

The ﬁrst question to address is whether GPDOS solitons in the induced-matter
interpretation can rightly be considered black holes. The two classes of object
are alike in one important respect: they contain a curvature singularity at the
center of ordinary three-space. However: (1) solitons do not have an event
horizon (not as understood in ordinary general relativity, at any rate); and
(2) they have an extended matter distribution, rather than having all their
mass compressed into the central singularity. In this section we try to clarify
these properties, which make the term “black hole” an inappropriate one in
the context of induced-matter Kaluza-Klein theory.

To begin with, it is apparent from the spatial components of the metric (77)
that the center of the 3-geometry is at r = 1/a and not r = 0. The surface
area of 2-shells varies as (ar − 1)1−ǫ(k−1) , and this shrinks to zero at r =


                                     62
1/a, given that k > 0 (as required above for positive density), and that the
consistency relation (76) holds. The point r = 0 is, in fact, not even part of the
manifold, which ends at r = 1/a. That this spatial center marks the location
of a bona ﬁde curvature singularity, and not merely a coordinate one, may be
veriﬁed by evaluating the appropriate invariant geometric scalars. The square
of the ﬁve-dimensional Riemann-Christoﬀel tensor (or Kretschmann scalar
K̂ ≡ R̂ABCD R̂ABCD ), for example, reads in isotropic coordinates [182]:

                                        4ǫ(k−1) h
            192a10 r 6         ar − 1
                           
    K̂ =                                             1 − 2ǫ(k − 1)(2 + ǫ2 k)ar
           (a2 r 2 − 1)8       ar + 1
                                                                           i
           + 2(3 − ǫ4 k 2 )a2 r 2 − 2ǫ(k − 1)(2 + ǫ2 k)a3 r 3 + a4 r 4         ,     (136)

and this is manifestly divergent at r = 1/a (with k > 0). (In the Schwarzschild
limit this expression simpliﬁes to K̂ = 192a10 r 6 (ar + 1)−12 , which is formally
the same as that in four-dimensional Einstein theory. This however has little
signiﬁcance from the Kaluza-Klein point of view since the point r = −1/a is
not in the manifold.) The relevant four -dimensional curvature invariant is the
square of the Ricci tensor, C ≡ Rαβ Rαβ , and this comes out as [182]:

                                        2ǫ(k−1) h
            8ǫ2 a10 r 6        ar − 1
                           
    C=                                           3 + 4ǫ(3 − 2k)ar + 2(3 + 6ǫ2 + 4ǫ2 k 2
           (a2 r 2 − 1)8       ar + 1
                                                     i
           −8ǫ2 k)a2 r 2 + 12ǫa3 r 3 + 3a4 r 4            ,                          (137)

which is also manifestly divergent at the center of the soliton, r = 1/a.

For black holes in general relativity, the event horizon is commonly deﬁned
in general coordinates as the surface where the norm of the timelike Killing
vector vanishes. In our case the Killing vector is just (1, 0, 0, 0) so its norm
vanishes where g00 does. For the soliton metric (77) this happens at r → 1/a,
given that k > 0 and ǫ > 0 (we will ﬁnd below that physicality requires both
these conditions). For physical solitons, in other words, the event horizon
shrinks to a point at the center of ordinary space. Kaluza-Klein solitons must
therefore be classified as naked singularities, as noticed previously by several
authors [142,215,333,348]. According to the cosmic censorship hypothesis, such
objects should not be realized in nature. The relevance of this (essentially four-
dimensional) postulate to ﬁve-dimensional objects may, however, be debated.
In any case we will show below that if they exist, they could be detectable by
conventional astrophysical techniques.

What of the soliton’s mass distribution? Applying the standard deﬁnition [234]
and using the soliton metric (77), one ﬁnds [182]:
                                                                  ǫ
                                          2ǫk            ar − 1
                                                     
                                 Mg (r) =                              .             (138)
                                           a             ar + 1


                                                 63
(G = c = 1 throughout § 8 unless otherwise noted.) This is the gravita-
tional (or Tolman-Whittaker) mass of a Kaluza-Klein soliton as a function of
(isotropic) radius r. Other commonly-used deﬁnitions of mass can be evalu-
ated [182] but do not lend themselves readily to physical interpretation. For
positive mass (as measured at inﬁnity) one must have ǫk > 0. Since positive
density requires in addition that k > 0, it is apparent that both k and ǫ must
be positive for realistic solitons. Eq. (138) therefore implies that the gravita-
tional mass of the soliton goes to zero at the center — behaviour which diﬀers
radically from that exhibited by black holes. Rather than being concentrated
into a pointlike singularity, the mass of the soliton is distributed in an extended
fashion (although the ∼1/r 4-dependence of density noted above means that
this distribution is still a sharply peaked one).

The soliton deﬁned by the Schwarzschild limit is, however, special in this re-
gard. If one simply takes the Schwarzschild values ǫ = 0, ǫk = 1 and puts them
directly into eq. (138), one ﬁnds that Mg (r) = 2/a = constant for all r. Replac-
ing the parameter a via M∗ ≡ 2/a and putting this into the metric, eq. (77),
one recovers on spacetime sections the four-dimensional Schwarzschild solu-
tion (78), with “Schwarzschild mass” M∗ . Alternatively, however, one might
keep ǫ arbitrarily small and allow r → 1/a. In this case one ﬁnds that
Mg (r) → 0 irrespective of ǫ. In other words, there is an ambiguity in the
limit by which one is supposed to recover the Schwarzschild solution from the
soliton metric. The problem is reminiscent of one investigated by Janis, New-
man & Winicour [354,355] and others [347,356,357], in which the presence of
a scalar ﬁeld in four-dimensional general relativity led to ambiguity in deﬁn-
ing the center of the geometry. In their case perturbation analysis led to a
satisfactory resolution of the problem (in which the Schwarzschild “horizon”
at r = 2M∗ turned out to be a point). Adopting the same approach, Wesson
& Ponce de Leon [182] have conducted a numerical study of eq. (138), and
this leads unambiguously to the conclusion that in the Schwarzschild limit
(as deﬁned by k → ∞ and ǫ → 0) the mass does go to zero at r = 1/a.
The picture that emerges from this numerical work is of an extended cloud of
matter whose mass distribution becomes more and more compressed near its
center as the parameters ǫ and k approach their Schwarzschild values. Due to
the nature of the geometry, however, the enclosed gravitational mass at the
center is always zero.


8.3 Extension to the Time-Dependent Case


The results of the last section make it clear that Kaluza-Klein solitons, al-
though they contain singularities at their centers, are not black holes, since
they have neither pointlike mass distributions nor event horizons of the con-
ventional type. A third crucial diﬀerence between these two classes of objects,


                                       64
which follows from the fact that Birkhoﬀ’s theorem does not hold in ﬁve di-
mensions, is that soliton metrics can be generalized to include time-dependence.
This goes somewhat against the idea of a soliton as a static solution of the
ﬁeld equations. However, it is reasonable to suppose that solitons, if they exist,
must have been formed in some astrophysical or cosmological process during
which they could not have been entirely static. So it is of physical, as well as
mathematical interest to study the extension to time-dependent solutions.

Liu, Wesson & Ponce de Leon [192] have considered the case in which the
coeﬃcients ν, ω and µ of the general spherically-symmetric metric (65) depend
not only on the radial coordinate r (as in the GPDOS solution (77)), but on
t as well. The metric coeﬃcients are still assumed to be separable functions,
so that eqs. (6.6) are in eﬀect replaced by:

       eν ≡ A2 (r) T 2 (t) ,   eω ≡ B 2 (r) U 2 (t) ,   eµ ≡ C 2 (r) V 2 (t) . (139)


The ﬁeld equations then produce two sets of diﬀerential equations, for which
four classes of solutions have been identiﬁed. We list these here, with brief
comments. All the solutions have T (t) = constant. The ﬁrst class has U(t) =
constant as well, along with A(r) = C(r), and looks like:

               dŝ2 = A2 (r)dt2 − B 2 (r)dσ 2 − A2 (r)V 2 (t)dψ 2 ,           (140)


where dσ 2 = dr 2 + r 2 dΩ2 as usual, and V (t) can have either an oscillating
form V (t) = cos(ωt + ϕ) or an exponentially varying one V (t) = exp(±Ht)
(the parameters ϕ and H are arbitrary constants). The four-dimensional parts
of these solutions are static, and only the extra-dimensional part varies with
time. In the case of the decaying exponential solution, the time-dependent
soliton tends toward a static one as t ≫ H −1 .

The second class of solutions has V (t) = U −1 (t) and C(r) = A−1/2 (r), and
can be written in the form:

           dŝ2 = A2 (r)dt2 − U 2 (t)B 2 (r)dσ 2 − U −2 (t)A−1 (r)dψ 2 ,      (141)


where U(t) satisﬁes a diﬀerential equation exactly
                                                √     analogous to one in stan-
dard FRW cosmology, and is given by U(t) = ϕ + Ht − κt2 (with κ = ±1, 0
playing the role of a curvature constant). This is the most interesting of the
time-dependent soliton solutions, and has been looked at separately by Wes-
son, Liu & Lim [191]. The functions A(r) and B(r) can, for instance, be taken
to be the same as those of the static soliton, eqs. (75). The parameters ǫ and
                                                                            √
k obey the consistency relation (76) as before, and here take the values 1/ 3
and 2 respectively. Choosing in addition ϕ = 1 and κ = 0 for convenience, the
metric (141) becomes:


                                        65
                       4/√3                        !2             2/√3
          ar − 1                    a2 r 2 − 1             ar + 1
           
       2                          2
    dŝ =                      dt −                                         (1 + Ht) dσ 2
          ar + 1                      a2 r 2               ar − 1
                          2/√3
             ar + 1
               
           −                      (1 + Ht)−1 dψ 2 .                                              (142)
             ar − 1

In the induced-matter interpretation this geometry manifests itself in four
dimensions as matter with anisotropic pressure. Using the same technique as
in § 6.6 (identifying the pressure three-tensor pji and deﬁning p ≡ pii /3), one
can nevertheless derive a unique equation of state. This turns out to be [191]:


                                                   2/√3                                         4/√3
                a6 r 4                    ar − 1                 3H 2                   ar + 1
                                                                                   
    ρ=                                                     +
        3π(1 + Ht)(a2 r 2 − 1)4           ar + 1             32π(1 + Ht)2               ar − 1
    p = ρ/3 .                                                                                    (143)

The matter comprising this time-dependent soliton satisﬁes the the relativistic
equation of state, as expected since the metric coeﬃcients are all independent
of ψ. What is interesting about this solution (142) is that it reduces to the
radiation-dominated cosmological metric (104) in the limit of zero central mass
a → ∞ (ie., M∗ → 0). So what began as a metric suitable for astrophysical
problems may have cosmological applications, perhaps for modelling solitons
in the early universe [191].

The third class of solutions found in [192] has A(r) = constant and U(t) =
V (t) = 1 + Ht, and reads:
                                            h                               i
                   dŝ2 = dt2 − (1 + Ht)2 B 2 (r)dσ 2 + C 2 (r)dψ 2             .                (144)


For these solitons the ﬁfth dimension is expanding along with the three-
dimensional spatial part. The fourth class of solutions, ﬁnally, also has U(t) =
1 + Ht, but uses V (t) = U ℓ (t) and C(r) = [A(r)](ℓ+2)/(ℓ−1) , where ℓ is another
arbitrary constant. The associated line element looks like:


    dŝ2 = A2 (r)dt2 − (1 + Ht)2 B 2 (r)dσ 2
           −(1 + Ht)2ℓ [A(r)]2(ℓ+2)/(ℓ−1) dψ 2 .                                                 (145)

For these solitons the three-dimensional space expands, but the ﬁfth dimension
can either expand, contract, or remain static accordingly as ℓ > 0, ℓ < 0, or
ℓ = 0 respectively.




                                             66
8.4 Solitons as Dark Matter Candidates


Viewed in four dimensions via the induced-matter mechanism, the soliton
resembles a hole in the geometry surrounded by a spherically-symmetric ball
of ultra-relativistic matter whose density falls oﬀ at large distances as 1/r 4 .
If the universe does have more than four dimensions, these objects should
be quite common, being generic to Kaluza-Klein gravity in exactly the same
way black holes are to general relativity [180,228]. It is therefore natural to ask
whether they could supply the as-yet undetected dark matter which according
to many estimates makes up more than 90% of the matter in the universe.
Other dark matter candidates, like massive neutrinos or axions, primordial
black holes, and a ﬁnite-energy vacuum, encounter problems with excessive
contributions to the extragalactic background light (EBL) and the cosmic
microwave background radiation (CMB), among other things [358]. In view of
this we consider here the possibility that the so-called “missing mass” consists
of solitons.

Adopting the same approach that has led to strong constraints on some of
these other dark matter candidates [358], one can begin by attempting to assess
the eﬀects of solitons on background radiation [185], assuming that the ﬂuid
making up the soliton is in fact composed of photons (although there are no a
priori reasons to rule out, say, ultra-relativistic neutrinos or gravitons). Rather
than guessing at their spectral distribution we restrict ourselves to bolometric
calculations for the time being. The soliton density ρs at large distances comes
from eq. (79), and in the same regime eq. (138) gives Mg ∼ 2ǫk/a. Therefore,
for solitons of asymptotic mass Ms :

                                       Ms2
                                ρs ∼           ,                             (146)
                                     8πc2 kr 4


where we have restored conventional units. Because this goes as 1/r 4 while
volume (in the uniform case) increases as only r 3 , local density will be over-
whelmingly due to just one soliton — the nearest one — and we do not need
to know about the global distribution of these objects in space. The average
separation between solitons of mass Ms in terms of their mean density ρ¯s is
r = (Ms /ρ¯s )1/3 , and we can use this as the distance to the nearest one. Writ-
ing the mean soliton density as a fraction Ωs ≡ ρ¯s /ρcrit of the critical density
ρcrit = 1.88 × 10−26 h2 kg m−3 [359] (where h is the usual Hubble parameter in
units of 100 km s−1 Mpc−1 ), we then ﬁnd that the eﬀective local density (146)
of solitonic radiation, expressed as a fraction of the CMB density, is:
                                                              !2/3
                  ρs                 −13 8/3 −1          Ms
                        ∼ 5.0 × 10     h      k   Ω4/3
                                                   s                 ,       (147)
                ρCM B                                    M⊙


                                         67
where M⊙ stands for one solar mass and ρCM B = 2.5 × 10−5 h−2 ρcrit is the
equivalent mass density of the CMB at zero redshift [359]. The quantity k is
a free parameter, subject only to the consistency relation (76). A particularly
convenient choice for illustrative purposes is k = 1 (which implies ǫ = 1
also). This class of solutions was discovered independently by Chatterjee [142]
and has the special property that gravitational mass Mg (r) at large distances
r ≫ 1/a is equal to the Schwarzschild mass M∗ . If we suppose that individual
solitons have galactic mass (Ms = 5×1011 M⊙ ) and that they collectively make
up all the dark matter required to close the universe (Ωs = 0.9), then eq. (147)
tells us that distortions in the CMB will be of the order:
                                ρs
                                    ∼ 1.0 × 10−5 ,                         (148)
                              ρCM B

where we have used h = 0.7 for the Hubble parameter. This is precisely the up-
per limit set by COBE and other experiments on anomalous contributions to
the CMB. So we can conclude that solitons, if they are to provide a signiﬁcant
part of the missing mass, are probably less massive than galaxies.

A similar argument can be made on the basis of tidal effects. It is known that
conventional dark matter candidates such as black holes can be ruled out if
they exceed ∼108 M⊙ in mass, since such objects would excessively distort the
shapes of nearby galaxies. The same thing would apply to solitons. However,
one has to keep in mind that there is no reason for the parameters k and ǫ to
be equal to one for all solitons. They are not universal constants like c or G,
but can in principle vary from soliton to soliton. Those with k < 1 will have
eﬀective gravitational masses below the corresponding Schwarzschild ones, and
will consequently be less strongly constrained. A soliton with k = 0.1, for
example, will have ǫ = 1.05 from eq. (76), and its gravitational mass (138) at
large r will be Mg = 0.105M∗ — only one-tenth the conventional value. And
in the extreme case ǫk → 0, its gravitational mass will vanish altogether. So
while these are promising ways to look for Kaluza-Klein solitons, caution must
be taken in interpreting the results. Ideally one would like to be able to apply
one or more independent tests to a given astrophysical system. We therefore
devote the rest of this report to outlining the implications of Kaluza-Klein
gravity for the classical tests of general relativity, and for related phenomena
such as those having to do with the principle of equivalence.


8.5 The Classical Tests


It is convenient to switch from the notation of Davidson & Owen [227] to
that of Gross & Perry [226], and to convert from isotropic coordinates to
nonisotropic ones (in which r ′ = r(1 + GM∗ /2r)2 ). The soliton metric (77)
then takes the form:


                                      68
                        1/α
                  2M∗                  (1 − 2M∗ /r ′ )(α−β−1)/α ′ 2
          
    dŝ2 = 1 −                 dt2 −                           dr
                   r′                      (1 − 2M∗ /r ′ )
                          (α−β−1)/α                          β/α
              2M∗                                  2M∗
                                                   
                                          ′2    2
          − 1− ′                         r dΩ − 1 − ′                 dψ 2 .      (149)
               r                                    r

where α and β are related to ǫ and k by ǫ = −β/α and k = −1/β, and where
we have replaced the Gross-Perry parameter m by M∗ /2. Eq. (149) clearly
reduces to the familiar Schwarzschild solution on hypersurfaces ψ = constant
as α → 1 and β → 0. Deﬁning two new parameters a ≡ 1/α and b ≡ β/α,
together with the function A(r) ≡ 1 − 2M∗ /r, eq. (149) becomes:

           dŝ2 = Aa dt2 − A−(a+b) dr 2 − A(1−a−b) r 2 dΩ2 − Ab dψ 2 ,            (150)


where we have dropped the primes on r for convenience. The consistency
relation (76) takes the form:

                                  a2 + ab + b2 = 1 .                              (151)


We wish to analyze the motion of photons and massive test particles in the
ﬁeld described by the metric (150). The Lagrangian density L can be obtained
from L2 = gik ẋi ẋk , where the xi are generalized coordinates and the overdot
denotes diﬀerentiation with respect to an aﬃne parameter (such as proper time
in the case of massive test particles) along the particle’s geodesic trajectory.
For the metric (150) this gives:

         L2 = Aa ṫ2 − A−(a+b) ṙ 2 − A1−a−b r 2 (θ̇2 + sin2 θφ̇2 ) − Ab ψ̇ 2 .   (152)


From symmetry we can assume that θ̇ = 0, so θ = π/2 without loss of gen-
erality. Application of the Euler-Lagrange equations to the Lagrangian (152)
immediately produces three constants of the motion:

                  l ≡ Aa ṫ ,    h ≡ A(1−a−b) r 2 φ̇ , k ≡ Ab ψ̇ .                (153)


The third of these quantities, k, is related to the velocity of the test particle
along the ﬁfth dimension. The “Schwarzschild limit” of the theory hereafter
refers to the values a = 1, b = 0 and k = 0. With eqs. (152) and (153) we are
in a position to describe the motion of photons and test bodies in the weak-
ﬁeld approximation (ie., neglecting terms in (M∗ /r)2 and higher orders). The
procedure is exactly analogous to that in ordinary general relativity [360], and
since details have been given elsewhere [148,187–190] we conﬁne ourselves in
what follows to summarizing only the main assumptions and conclusions.


                                               69
8.6 Gravitational Redshift


This test depends only on the coeﬃcients of the metric (150) and, since the
latter is static, one can consider emitters and receivers of light signals with
ﬁxed spatial coordinates. The ratio of frequencies of the received and emitted
signals is simply:

                                    νr   g00 (re )
                                       =           ,                           (154)
                                    νe   g00 (rr )


where re and rr are the positions of the emitter and receiver respectively. Using
the metric (150) and discarding terms of second and higher orders in M∗ /r,
one ﬁnds [188] that:
                              νr − νe       1   1
                                                        
                                      = aM∗   −                 .              (155)
                                 νe         rr re

From this result it is clear that the gravitational redshift in Kaluza-Klein
theory is in perfect agreement with that of four-dimensional general relativity,
as long as one deﬁnes the gravitational mass Mg of the soliton by Mg ≡ aM∗ .


8.7 Light Deflection


The light deﬂection test is more interesting. Noting that dŝ2 = 0 for photons,
and substituting the expressions (153) into eq. (150), one ﬁnds the following
equation of motion:
                   !2
              dr                                         r4
                        − A(2−2a−b) l2 − A(2−a−2b) k 2          + Ar 2 = 0 .   (156)
              dφ                                          h2


For weak ﬁelds this can be solved [188] to yield a hyperbolic orbit r(φ) in
which the photon approaches the central mass from inﬁnity at φ = 0 and
escapes to inﬁnity along φ = π + ω. The total deﬂection angle ω is given by:
                                     4M∗
                                ω=       + 2M∗ pr0 ,                           (157)
                                      r0


where p ≡ (2 − a − 2b)(k/h)2 − (2 − 2a − b)(l/h)2 and r0 is the impact
parameter (distance of closest approach to the central mass). The ﬁrst term
in eq. (157) is the familiar Einstein light deﬂection angle. The second term
represents a correction due to the presence of the ﬁfth dimension, and is in


                                          70
principle measurable. (Note that the apparent linear dependence of this term
on r0 is illusory as p involves the square of the “angular momentum” constant
h ∝ r0 in its denominator.)

The physical meaning of this result can be clariﬁed by using the metric (150)
and the deﬁnitions (153) to recast eq. (157) in the form [189]:

                              f − m(dψ/dt)2
                              "                       !#
                       4M∗
                    ω=     1−                              ,               (158)
                        r0    1 − n(dψ/dt)2


where:


    f ≡ (1 − a − b/2)A−(1−2a−b) ,
    m ≡ (1 − a/2 − b)A−(1−3b) , n ≡ A−(a−b) .                              (159)

The m- and n-terms can be ignored when the velocity dψ/dt of the test body
along the ﬁfth dimension is negligible. This is certainly true for photons (whose
velocity is constant in four dimensions). In addition one can go to the weak-
ﬁeld limit and neglect terms of ﬁrst order in M∗ /r compared to one, so that
A = 1. In that case f = 1 − (a + b/2) and eq. (158) becomes:
                                              !
                               4M∗    b
                            ω=     a+             .                        (160)
                                r0    2


This reduces to the general relativistic result in the Schwarzschild limit. For
other values of a and b, the Kaluza-Klein light-bending angle will depart from
Einstein’s prediction, and it is natural to inquire how big such q  a departure
could be. The consistency relation (151) implies that (a + b/2) = 1 − 3b2 /4,
so in principle eq. (160) is compatible with a range of angles −ωGR ≤ ω ≤ ωGR ,
where ωGR is the general relativistic value. This would allow for null deflection
(for b2 = 4/3) and even light repulsion (for negative roots). These possibilities
are, however, unphysical to the extent that they imply negative values for the
(four-dimensional) mass of the soliton. Inertial mass Mi , for example, can be
obtained from the Landau pseudo energy-momentum tensor [190,214,226,361],
and turns out to be Mi = (a + b/2)M∗ . Therefore if one requires positivity of
inertial mass, then (a + b/2) ≥ 0, which is incompatible with light repulsion.
Similarly, gravitational mass Mg is found from the asymptotic behaviour of
ĝ00 [190,214,226,361] to be given by Mg = aM∗ (see also § 8.6). (As discussed
in these references, and in § 8.11, the fact that Mg 6= Mi for b 6= 0 need
not necessarily constitute a violation of the equivalence principle in Kaluza-
Klein theory.) Combining the requirements that Mg ≥ 0 and Mi ≥ 0 with the
consistency relation (151), one ﬁnds that 0 ≤ b ≤ 1. Therefore if one requires
positivity of both inertial and gravitational mass, then the Kaluza-Klein light


                                      71
deﬂection angle (160) must lie in the range 0.5ωGR ≤ ω ≤ ωGR , which rules
out null deﬂection as well as light repulsion.

This however still leaves room for signiﬁcant departures from general relativ-
ity. Why have these not been observed? Most tests to date have been carried
out in the solar system which, considered as a soliton, is very close to the
limiting Schwarzschild case since nearly all its mass is concentrated near the
center. From this perspective the fact that long-baseline interferometric mea-
surements of solar light-bending [197] have conﬁrmed Einstein’s prediction to
within a factor of ±10−3 merely tell us — via eq. (160) — that the Sun must
have b < 0.05. Larger values of this parameter, and hence larger deviations
from the predictions of general relativity, might be looked for in the halos of
large elliptical galaxies, or in clusters of galaxies, where mass is more evenly
distributed. Much of the dark matter is widely believed to be in these places,
and if some or all of it is made up of Kaluza-Klein solitons then one could hope
to ﬁnd evidence of anomalous deﬂection angles in observations of gravitational
lensing by elliptical galaxies [362], galaxy clusters [363–366], and perhaps in
observations of microlensing by rich clusters [367].

Just as in four-dimensional general relativity, one can also solve the equation
of motion (156) for circular, as well as hyperbolic photon orbits. Putting ṙ = 0
gives [188]:

                                A 3                    k2 r4
            (1 − 2a − b)r 2 +      r + (b − a)A(1−a−2b) 2 = 0 .            (161)
                                M∗                      h


For negligible motion along the ﬁfth dimension (k = 0) this leads to:

                            r = (1 + 2a + b)M∗ .                           (162)


In the Schwarzschild limit this gives back the general relativistic result. For
other values of a and b, circular photon orbits can occur at other radii. How-
ever, prospects for distinguishing between alternative theories of gravity based
on this phenomenon are slim [197], so we do not consider it further.



8.8 Perihelion Advance


The elliptical orbits of massive test bodies in orbit around the central mass are
of greater interest [187]. Using dŝ2 6= 0 leads to a slightly more complicated
version of the equation of motion (156). This can be solved for the orbit of the
test body, which is nearly periodic. The departure from periodicity per orbit,


                                       72
or perihelion shift, is found [188] to be:

                                   6πM∗2    e
                                                            
                              δφ =    2
                                         d+                         ,                   (163)
                                     h      6

where:


    d ≡ (1 + k 2 ) + (a − 1)(−1 + 2l2 − k 2 ) + b(−1 + l2 − 2k 2 ) ,
    e ≡ 2(2 − a − b)(−1 + a + b) + 2l2 (−2 + 2a + b)(−1 + 2a + b)
        +2k 2 (2 − a − 2b)(−1 + a + 2b) .                                               (164)

This gives back the usual general relativistic result in the Schwarzschild limit.
If the orbit is nearly circular then eq. (163) can be simpliﬁed to read:
                                                              !
                                   6πM∗    2b
                              δφ =      a+                              ,               (165)
                                     r     3


where r is the orbit’s coordinate radius. As with the light deﬂection test, solar
system experiments (precession of Mercury’s orbit) imply that the Sun, if mod-
elled as a soliton, must have values of a and b very close to the Schwarzschild
ones. Extrasolar systems, however, might show nonstandard periastron shifts.
Candidate systems could include DI Herculis [368] and AS Camelopardalis
[369], as well as binary pulsars [370], x-ray binaries [371], and possibly pulsars
with planetary companions [372,373]. (Eq. (163) would require modiﬁcations
for systems with signiﬁcant mass ratios.)


8.9 Time Delay


A similar procedure gives the proper time taken by a photon on a return trip
between any two points in the ﬁeld of the central mass. The deﬁnitions (153)
and equation of motion (156) lead to the following result [188]:

                                   !2  
                       a 
               2M∗               1 k
                                          q           q          
    ∆τ = 2 1 −              1 +           rp2 − ro2 + re2 − ro2
                r               2 l
                          !  q
                               2
                                            q          
                      1   k                 rp2 − ro2         re2 − ro2
           −M∗ 1 +                                   +                   
                      2   l                   rp                   re
                                           !2                  q                
                           3b           k                   rp +        rp2 − ro2
           +M∗ (2a + b) +                     ln                                
                           2            l                           ro


                                               73
                          q           
                    re +   re2 − ro2     
          + ln                             ,                             (166)
                           ro            


where ro , re and rp are the photon’s distance of closest approach to the cen-
tral mass and the radius measures to the emitting planet (usually Earth) and
reﬂecting planet respectively, and r is the coordinate radius at which measure-
ment is made (usually the same as re ). In the Schwarzschild limit, eq. (166)
gives back the usual result of four-dimensional general relativity. Experimen-
tal data such as that from the Viking spacecraft [197] tell us that our solar
system is close to this limit.


8.10 Geodetic Precession


The motion of a spinning object in ﬁve dimensions is more complicated, but
can be usefully studied in at least two important special cases: (1) the case in
which the 4 component of the spin vector Ŝ A is zero [188]; and (2) the case in
which the 4-component of spacetime is flat [183]. We review these in turn.

The object in both cases is to solve for Ŝ A as a function of proper time ŝ. The
requirement of parallel transport implies:

                                dŜ M
                                      + Γ̂M    A B
                                          AB Ŝ v̂ = 0 ,                    (167)
                                 dŝ


where v̂ A ≡ dxA /dŝ is the ﬁve-velocity. Since Ŝ A is spacelike whereas v̂ B is
timelike, their inner product can be made to vanish:

                                     ĝAB Ŝ A v̂ B = 0 .                   (168)


Eqs. (167) and (168), together with the metric, can be solved for the compo-
nents of the spin vector Ŝ A if some simplifying assumptions are made.

To evaluate case (1) we use the Gross-Perry soliton metric (150), we restrict
ourselves to circular orbits xA (ŝ), (for which the velocity vector v̂ A can be
written v̂ A = (t, 0, 0, tdφ/dt, 0)), and assume that Ŝ 4 = 0. The resulting ex-
pressions for the components of Ŝ A are lengthy [188] and not particularly
illuminating. The important thing about them is that the spatial components
Ŝ i show a rotation relative to the radial direction, with proper angular speed
[188]:

                               [r − (1 + a + b)M∗ ]r (a−1)/2
                                                               !
                    Ω=                                             Ω0 ,     (169)
                                     (r − 2M∗ )(a+1)/2


                                             74
where Ω0 ≡ dφ/dt is given by:

            "                            1−2a−b
         (1 − a − b)           1 − 2M∗
                           
    Ω0 =                                               r2
              a                   r
                                  2−2a−b           #1/2
               1        1 − 2M∗
                    
                                                3
            +                               r               .                                (170)
              aM∗          r

A spin vector Ŝ A whose initial orientation is along the radial direction will,
after one revolution along xA (ŝ), undergo a geodetic precession:
                         q                                q                         
                            r − (1 + a + b)M∗                   r − (1 + 2a + b)M∗
           δφ = 2π 1 −                        q                                        .   (171)
                                                    r(r − 2M∗ )


Going to the weak-ﬁeld limit and using the consistency relation (151), one can
reduce this expression to:
                                                                 !
                                    3πM∗    2b
                               δφ =      a+                          ,                       (172)
                                      r     3


which gives back the usual general relativistic result in the Schwarzschild limit.
In general there will be deviations from Einstein’s theory which are in prin-
ciple measurable. One way to detect them would be with orbiting gyroscopes
like those aboard the Gravity Probe-B (GP-B) satellite [374], designed to or-
bit the earth at an altitude of 650 km. Assuming for the sake of illustration
the same value of b = 0.05 mentioned in § 8.7 as the largest one compat-
ible with solar light-bending experiments, one ﬁnds from eq. (172) that the
geodetic precession in Kaluza-Klein theory would be 1.238 milliarcseconds per
revolution, or an angular rate of 6.674 arcsec yr−1 . This exceeds the general
relativistic prediction (6.625 arcsec yr−1 ) by 49 milliarcsec yr−1 — a diﬀerence
that would easily be detected by GP-B. In fact this satellite is expected to
measure angular rates as small as 0.1 milliarcsec yr−1 , which would allow it
to probe b-values as small as 10−4 .

We turn now to case (2), in which the spin vector Ŝ A is arbitrary but the ﬁfth
dimension of spacetime is ﬂat. Instead of the soliton metric (150) we intro-
duce a simpler ﬁve-dimensional line element [183] which is also spherically-
symmetric in three-dimensional space:


         ψ2                 r2
                "                    !
       2               2M∗
    dŝ = 2         1−     − 2           dt2
         L              r   L


                                                75
                             !−1                       
                2M∗  r2                2        2     2
           − 1−     − 2               dr − r dΩ            − dψ 2 .                   (173)
                 r   L

This reduces to the four-dimensional Schwarzschild-de Sitter line element on
surfaces ψ = constant:
                                                               !−1
                   r2                         r2
                            !
       2      2M∗                 2      2M∗
     ds = 1 −     − 2           dt − 1 −     − 2                      dr 2 − r 2 dΩ2 , (174)
               r   L                      r   L


and the constant L (which has units of length) gives rise to an eﬀective four-
dimensional cosmological constant Λ = 3/L2 [178,179]. The four-dimensional
universe is characterized by induced matter whose density and pressure are
found from eqs. (63) to be given by ρ = 3/ψ 2 and p = −ρ.

Consider ﬁrst of all an object which is not spinning. Its orbit xA (ŝ) is found
using the metric relation (173), which satisﬁes a consistency relation:

                                ĝAB v̂ A v̂ B = 1 ,                                  (175)


together with the geodesic equation (96). The A = 5 component of this latter
equation turns out [183] to be:
                                             !2
                         d2 ψ   1      dψ             1
                              +                   +     =0 .                          (176)
                         dŝ2   ψ      dŝ            ψ


This has the simple solution ψ 2 = ψm    2
                                           − ŝ2 , where ψm = constant. Since
eqs. (173) and (174) are related by dŝ2 = (ψ/L)2 ds2 − dψ 2 , one ﬁnds that:

                                        ψm
                          ψ=                       ,                                  (177)
                                cosh [(s − sm )/L]


where sm is some ﬁducial value of the four-dimensional proper time at which
ψ = ψm . Physically, the ﬁfth coordinate in this spacetime expands from zero
size to a maximum value of ψm , and then contracts back to zero. We are
living in the period s > sm , when ψ is decreasing (cf. § 7.1) on cosmological
timescales. (The length L is large if the cosmological constant Λ is small.)

The spatial components of the geodesic equation (96) for this ﬁve-dimensional
metric turn out to be identical with the usual four-dimensional ones [178,183].
This is somewhat surprising since the four-dimensional metric (174) depends
on ψ. It means that the classical tests of relativity discussed in § 8.6 – § 8.9
are by themselves insuﬃcient to distinguish between Einstein’s theory and its
ﬁve-dimensional counterpart. When spin is included , however, the two theories


                                           76
lead to very diﬀerent predictions. For this we require the full machinery of
eqs. (167) and (168) as well as eqs. (96) and (175). Consider for simplicity
a circular orbit as before, and assume that the spin vector lies in the plane
of the orbit (so Ŝ 2 = 0), and that one can arrange mechanically to satisfy
the inequality r Ŝ 3 ≪ Ŝ 1 . (These conditions are close to those in the GP-B
experiment, or alternatively might be used to model the Sun–Uranus system,
since the spin axis of Uranus lies near its orbital plane.) In this case the four
equations noted above allow one to solve for all the components of the spin
vector (including Ŝ 4 ). Its precession from the radial direction after one orbit
turns out in the weak-ﬁeld limit (r 2 /L2 ≪ M∗ /r ≪ 1) to be [183]:

                          3πM∗           2πH4r
                   δφ =        −                          ,                 (178)
                            r    H1 L cosh [(s0 − sm )/L]


where s0 is the value of s at the beginning of the orbit, and H1 and H4 are
normalized amplitudes of the spin vector along the x1 and x4 axes respectively.
The ﬁrst term is the usual geodetic precession of four-dimensional general
relativity. The extra term depends on the size H4 /H1 of the spin component
along the ﬁfth dimension, the mass M∗ of the central body, and cosmological
factors like the elapsed four-dimensional proper time. It also involves radius
in a manner quite diﬀerent from that of the ﬁrst term, which suggests that
the two terms could be separated experimentally. Whether this is practical or
not has yet to be established, but further investigation is warranted insofar
as geodetic precession is the only test of relativity which can in principle
allow us to distinguish between the ﬁve-dimensional metric (173) and the
four-dimensional one (174).


8.11 The Equivalence Principle


Many of the above tests show departures from four-dimensional geodesic mo-
tion. These could be interpreted as violations of the weak equivalence principle
(WEP) by the curvature of the ﬁfth dimension. However, Gross & Perry [226]
have argued that they should more appropriately be attributed to a break-
down of Birkhoff ’s theorem, since the underlying theory is fully covariant in
ﬁve dimensions and involves only gravitational eﬀects. Cho & Park [214] have
made similar comments, arguing that the extra dimension acts like a ﬁfth
force which is, however, indistinguishable from gravity for an uncharged par-
ticle. The nature of the ﬁfth force in noncompactiﬁed theory has recently been
treated in depth by Mashhoon et al. [26]. Here we consider only the simple but
dramatic illustration aﬀorded by a test body in radial free fall near a soliton.
This is the analog of Galileo’s experiments with objects dropped vertically in
the Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld. And while this case is somewhat impractical
in the context of modern tests of gravity, we will see that it leads to several


                                       77
simple and instructive results.

For vertical free-fall, dθ = dφ = 0, and the equation of motion (156) leads
directly to the following result in terms of the constants (153):

                           ṙ 2 = Ab l2 − Aa k 2 − A(a+b) .                                   (179)


For a particle which begins at rest (ṙ = 0) at r = r0 , this equation gives:

                          l2 = [A(r0 )]a + [A(r0 )](a−b) k 2 .                                (180)


Combining eqs. (179) and (180), one obtains the “energy condition” [188]:

           "         b              (a−b)                        a #
               2M∗             2M∗                     2M∗
                                                      
      2
    ṙ =    1−              1−                    − 1−                       k2
                r               r0                      r
                       b              a                       (a+b)
                2M∗             2M∗               2M∗
                                                 
           + 1−              1−              − 1−                             .               (181)
                 r               r0                r

In the Schwarzschild limit this gives back the familiar four-dimensional formula
ṙ 2 = 2M∗ (1/r − 1/r0 ), which has the same form as the energy equation (for
vertical free-fall) in classical Newtonian theory.

The particle’s coordinate velocity in the r-direction is given by ur ≡ dr/dt =
ṙds/dt, and can be calculated from eq. (181) and the metric (150). It turns
out (for r0 → ∞) to be [188]:

                                   a ("                   b                    a #
               1          2M∗                   2M∗                   2M∗
                                                                    
    ur = − √           1−                    1−                  − 1−                    k2
             1 + k2        r                     r                     r
                       b "                       a #)1/2
                2M∗                 2M∗
                                 
           + 1−               1− 1−                              .                            (182)
                 r                   r

This explicitly depends on velocity along the ﬁfth dimension through k. Test
particles with nonzero values for this parameter will deviate from geodesic
trajectories (in four dimensions) and appear to violate the WEP. The a and
b parameters also produce discrepancies with four-dimensional theory. For
example, the radius where ur begins to decrease (as the test particle nears the
Schwarzschild surface) diﬀers from the simple value of r ∗ = 6M∗ predicted in
Einstein’s theory. In the case where k 2 ≪ 1 one ﬁnds instead [188]:
                                                         !1/a −1
                                     2a + b
                      r ∗ = 2M∗ 1 −                                    .                    (183)
                                     3a + b


                                             78
This reduces to the general relativistic result in the Schwarzschild limit.

The eﬀects of the ﬁfth dimension can perhaps be most readily appreciated in
the particle’s acceleration, which comes from diﬀerentiating eq. (179):

                      M∗ h        (a+b−1)      2 (b−1)      2 (a−1)
                                                                    i
             r̈ = −       (a + b)A        − bl  A      + ak  A            (184)
                      r2


In the Schwarzschild limit (a = 1, b = 0) this reduces to:

                                        (1 + k 2 )M∗
                                 r̈ = −              ,                    (185)
                                            r2

which gives back the familiar four-dimensional result when k = 0. In general,
though, the particle’s hidden velocity in the ﬁfth dimension aﬀects its rate of
fall towards the central body in a very signiﬁcant way. For completeness we
note that a particle which has k = 0 and starts from rest at inﬁnity (in which
case eq. (180) implies l2 = 1 + k 2 ) will have:

                                              aM∗
                                     r̈ = −       ,                       (186)
                                               r2


at large distances (r ≫ 2M∗ ). This conﬁrms that a particle accelerates in the
ﬁeld of the soliton at a rate governed by Mg = aM∗ (the gravitational mass)
and not M∗ . As mentioned in § 8.7, neither Mg nor M∗ is necessarily the same
as the soliton’s inertial mass Mi in Kaluza-Klein theory, the two quantities
being related [190,214,226,361] by:
                                                !
                                           b
                                 Mi = 1 +           Mg .                  (187)
                                          2a


These are strictly identical only in the Schwarzschild limit b = 0, and in other
cases there will be apparent violations of the WEP. (Note that the factor of
two is missing in ref. [226].) Experimentally, one can focus on the quantity:

                                 (Mg /Mi )A − (Mg /Mi)B
                      ∆≡     1
                                 h                          i   ,         (188)
                             2
                                  (Mg /Mi )A + (Mg /Mi )B


where the subscripts A and B stand for two objects with diﬀerent compo-
sitions. This is known from experiments on the Earth to be less than about
2×10−11 , and would be measured to as little as 10−17 by the proposed Satellite
Test of the Equivalence Principle (STEP) [375]. If eq. (187) is valid, then one


                                          79
expects two diﬀerent solitons to have:
                                        !           !
                             1      b           b
                          ∆≈                  −             ,              (189)
                             2      a       B
                                                a       A


which vanishes in the Schwarzschild limit b = 0. This relation provides yet
another way to probe experimentally for the possible existence of extra di-
mensions.


9   Conclusions


Kaluza uniﬁed Einstein’s theory of gravity and Maxwell’s theory of electro-
magnetism by the simple device of letting the indices run over ﬁve values
instead of four. Other interactions can be included by letting the indices take
on even larger values, but in our review we have concentrated on the prototype
theory viewed as an extension of general relativity. Klein’s contribution was to
explain the apparently unobserved nature of the extra dimension by assuming
it was rolled up to a small size, and compactiﬁed Kaluza-Klein theory remains
one of three principal approaches to the subject. Another is to use the extra
dimension as an algebraic aid, as in the projective approach. A third version
of Kaluza-Klein theory, on which we have spent considerable time since it is
the newest, regards the ﬁfth dimension as real but not necessarily a simple
length or time. In the space-time-matter theory, it is responsible for mass.

All three versions of Kaluza-Klein theory are viable as judged by experiment
and observation. In particular, they cannot be ruled out by the classical tests
of relativity or results from astrophysics and cosmology. Indeed, it can be dif-
ﬁcult to distinguish between the three main versions of Kaluza-Klein theory
at the present time because their observational consequences are often similar.
To help diﬀerentiate between its variants and bring the whole subject closer
to critical test, we suggest several things: (1) A search for exact solutions of
new types. New Kerr-like solutions, for example, would help to model spin-
ning elementary particles. (2) More work on quantization. This is a perennial
problem, of course, but the richness of Kaluza-Klein theory may oﬀer new
routes to its resolution. (3) An investigation of the physical nature of the ﬁfth
dimension. While it is merely a construct in the projective approach, it is real
and may become large in certain regimes of exact solutions in the compactiﬁed
approach. In the noncompactiﬁed approach, it is not only real but in principle
always observable provided one chooses a coordinate system or gauge that
properly brings it out.

We do not wish to prejudge the issue of which if any version of Kaluza-Klein
gravity will emerge as superior. However, the progress of physics lies in ex-


                                        80
plaining more phenomena on the basis of theories that are constrained by
standards of logic, conciseness and elegance. In this regard, we venture the
opinion that the ﬁfth dimension will be needed.



Acknowledgements


One of us (J. O.) would like to acknowledge the early encouragement of three
inspirational teachers, A. Klassen, H. Janzen and J. Harder. For comments
over the years on higher-dimensional gravity we also thank (in alphabetical
order) A. Billyard, B. J. Carr, A. A. Coley, C. W. F. Everitt, T. Fukui, D.
Kalligas, G. Lessner, P. Lim, H. Liu, B. Mashhoon, D. J. McManus, J. Ponce
de Leon, E. Schmutzer and R. Tavakol. This work was supported ﬁnancially
by the National Science and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) and the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).


References


[1]   T. Kaluza, Zum Unitätsproblem der Physik, Sitz. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Phys.
      Math. K1 (1921) 966. (Eng. trans. in [3], [4] and [7].)

[2]   O. Klein, Quantentheorie und fünfdimensionale Relativitätstheorie, Zeits.
      Phys. 37 (1926) 895. (Eng. trans. in [3], [4] and [7].)

[3]   Uniﬁed ﬁeld theories of more than 4 dimensions, proc. international school
      of cosmology and gravitation (Erice), eds. V. De Sabbata and E. Schmutzer
      (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1983).

[4]   An introduction to Kaluza-Klein theories, proc. Chalk River workshop on
      Kaluza-Klein theories, ed. H. C. Lee (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1984).

[5]   Fifth workshop on grand uniﬁcation, eds. K. Kang, H. Fried and P. Frampton
      (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1984).

[6]   Physics in higher dimensions, proc. 2nd Jerusalem winter school of theoretical
      physics, eds. T. Piran and S. Weinberg (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1986).

[7]   Modern Kaluza-Klein theories, eds. T. Appelquist, A. Chodos and P. G. O.
      Freund (Addison-Wesley, Menlo Park, 1987).

[8]   P. D. B. Collins, A. D. Martin and E. J. Squires, Particle physics and cosmology
      (Wiley, New York, 1989).

[9]   D. J. Toms, Kaluza-Klein theories, in [4] p. 185.

[10] T. Appelquist, Kaluza-Klein theories: problems and prospects, in [5] p. 474.


                                         81
[11] M. J. Duﬀ, Recent results in extra dimensions, in [6] p. 40.
[12] M. J. Duﬀ, B. E. W. Nilsson and C. N. Pope, Kaluza-Klein supergravity, Phys.
     Rep. 130 (1986) 1.

[13] D. Bailin and A. Love, Kaluza-Klein theories, Rep. Prog. Phys. 50 (1987) 1087.
[14] M. J. Duﬀ, Kaluza-Klein theory in perspective, SISSA preprint hep-
     th/9410046 (1994).
[15] G. Lessner, Uniﬁed ﬁeld theory on the basis of the projective theory of
     relativity, Phys. Rev. D25 (1982) 3202; ibid D27 (1982) 1401.

[16] E. Schmutzer, A new 5-dimensional projective uniﬁed ﬁeld theory for
     gravitation, electromagnetism and scalarism, in [3] p. 81.

[17] E. Schmutzer, Present status of projective uniﬁed ﬁeld theory and its physical
     predictions, Astron. Nachr. 311 (1990) 329.
[18] E. Schmutzer, Progress in the 5-dimensional projective uniﬁed theory –
     relationship to the Kaluza-Klein approach, Fortschr. Phys. 43 (1995) 613.
[19] P. S. Wesson, Clariﬁcation of an extended theory of gravity and a reply to
     Grøn and Soleng, Gen. Rel. Grav. 22 (1990) 707.

[20] P. S. Wesson and J. Ponce de Leon, Kaluza-Klein equations, Einstein’s
     equations, and an eﬀective energy-momentum tensor, J. Math. Phys. 33 (1992)
     3883.

[21] J. Ponce de Leon and P. S. Wesson, Exact solutions and the eﬀective equation
     of state in Kaluza-Klein theory, J. Math. Phys. 34 (1993) 4080.
[22] P. S. Wesson, J. Ponce de Leon, P. Lim and H. Liu, Physical properties of
     matter derived from geometry of Kaluza-Klein theory, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D2
     (1993) 163.
[23] P. S. Wesson, Consequences of covariance in Kaluza-Klein theory, Mod. Phys.
     Lett. A10 (1995), 15.
[24] S. Rippl, C. Romero and R. Tavakol, D-dimensional gravity from (D + 1)
     dimensions, Class. Quant. Grav. 12 (1995) 2411.

[25] P. S. Wesson et al., A theory of space, time and matter, Int. J. Mod. Phys.
     A11 (1996) 3247.
[26] B. Mashhoon, P. S. Wesson & H. Liu, Fifth force from ﬁfth dimension, Univ.
     of Missouri preprint (1996).
[27] J. Kepler, Mysterium Cosmographium (The Secret of the Universe), trans. A.
     M. Duncan (Abaris Books, New York, 1981), ch. 2.

[28] J. D. Barrow, Dimensionality, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A310 (1983) 337.
[29] I. V. Volovich, Baby universes and the dimensionality of spacetime, Phys. Lett.
     219B (1989) 66.


                                        82
[30] M. Gasperini, The cosmological constant and the dimensionality of space-time,
     Phys. Lett. 224B (1989) 49.

[31] C. Lämmerzahl and A. Macias, On the dimensionality of space-time, J. Math.
     Phys. 34 (1993) 4540, J. Math. Phys. 36 (1995) 2131.

[32] R. H. Brandenberger, Nonsingular cosmology and Planck scale physics, in proc.
     International Workshop on Planck Scale Physics (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore,
     1995).

[33] F. Embacher, Dimensionality, topology, energy, the cosmological constant and
     signature change, Class. Quant. Grav. 13 (1996) 921.

[34] H. Minkowski, Raum und Zeit, Physik. Zeits. (Leipzig) 10 (1909) 104.

[35] G. Nordström, Über die Möglichkeit, das elektromagnetische Feld und das
     Gravitationsfeld zu vereinigen, Phys. Zeitschr. 15 (1914) 504. (Eng. trans. in
     [7].)

[36] O. Klein, The atomicity of electricity as a quantum theory law, Nature 118
     (1926) 516.

[37] A. Einstein and P. Bergmann, On a generalization of Kaluza’s theory of
     electricity, Ann. Math. 39 (1938) 683.

[38] A. Einstein and W. Pauli, On the non-existence of regular stationary solutions
     of relativistic ﬁeld equations, Ann. Math. 44 (1943) 131.

[39] P. Jordan, Erweiterung der projektiven Relativitätstheorie, Ann. Phys.
     (Leipzig) 1 (1947) 219.

[40] P. Bergmann, Uniﬁed ﬁeld theory with ﬁfteen ﬁeld variables, Ann. Math. 49
     (1948) 255.

[41] Y. Thiry, Les équations de la théorie unitaire de Kaluza, Comptes Rendus
     Acad. Sci. (Paris) 226 (1948) 216. (Eng. trans. in [7].)

[42] J.-M. Souriau, Une axiomatique relativiste pour la microphysique, Comptes
     Rend. Acad. Sci. (Paris) 247 (1958) 1559.

[43] J.-M. Souriau, Five-dimensional relativity, Nuov. Cim. 30 (1963) 565.

[44] B. De Witt, Dynamical theory of groups and ﬁelds, in Relativity, Groups and
     Topology, eds. C. De Witt and B. de Witt (Gordon and Breach, New York,
     1964) p. 725.

[45] J. Rayski, A uniﬁed description of space-time and isospace, Acta Phys. Pol.
     27 (1965) 947; ibid 28 (1965) 87.

[46] R. Kerner, Generalization of the Kaluza-Klein theory for an arbitrary non-
     abelian gauge group, Ann. Inst. Henri Poincaré 9 (1968) 143.

[47] A. Trautman, Fibre bundles associated with space-time, Rep. Math. Phys. 1
     (1970) 29.


                                       83
[48] Y. M. Cho, Higher-dimensional uniﬁcations of gravitation and gauge theories,
     J. Math. Phys. 16 (1975) 2029.

[49] Y. M. Cho and P. G. O. Freund, Non-Abelian gauge ﬁelds as Nambu-Goldstone
     ﬁelds, Phys. Rev. D12 (1975) 1711.

[50] A. Einstein, The meaning of general relativity (Princeton Univ. Press,
     Princeton, 1956) p. 129.

[51] J. A. Wheeler, Einstein’s vision (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1968).

[52] A. Salam, Gauge uniﬁcation of fundamental forces, Rev. Mod. Phys. 52 (1980)
     525.

[53] W. K. Cliﬀord, On the space-theory of matter, Proc. Cambridge. Phil. Soc. 2
     (1876) 157.

[54] J. A. Wheeler, Geometrodynamics (Academic Press, New York, 1962) p. 236.

[55] V. A. Kostelecký and S. Samuel, Experimental constraints on extra
     dimensions, Phys. Lett. 270B (1991) 21.

[56] A. Salam and J. Strathdee, On Kaluza-Klein theory, Ann. Phys. (NY) 141
     (1982) 316.

[57] T. Appelquist and A. Chodos, Quantum eﬀects in Kaluza-Klein theories, Phys.
     Rev. Lett. 50 (1983) 141.

[58] T. Appelquist and A. Chodos, Quantum dynamics of Kaluza-Klein theories,
     Phys. Rev. D28 (1983) 772.

[59] L. Dolan and M. J. Duﬀ, Kac-Moody symmetries of Kaluza-Klein theories,
     Phys. Rev. Lett. 52 (1984) 14.

[60] M. J. Duﬀ, B. E. W. Nilsson, C. N. Pope and N. P. Warner, On the consistency
     of the Kaluza-Klein ansatz, Phys. Lett. 149B (1984) 90.

[61] Y. M. Cho, Internal gravity, Phys. Rev. D35 (1987) 2628.

[62] Y. M. Cho, Dimensional reduction by isometry, Phys. Lett. 186B (1987) 38.

[63] Y. M. Cho and D. S. Kimm, Higher-dimensional uniﬁcation by isometry, J.
     Math. Phys. 30 (1989) 1570.

[64] Y. M. Cho, Uniﬁed cosmology, Phys. Rev. D41 (1990) 2462.

[65] W. Thirring, Five-dimensional theories and CP-violation, Acta Phys.
     Austriaca, Suppl. 9 (1972) 256.

[66] L. N. Chang, K. I. Macrae and F. Mansouri, Geometrical approach to local
     gauge and supergauge invariance: local gauge theories and supersymmetric
     strings, Phys. Rev. D13 (1976) 235.

[67] G. Domokos and S. Kövesi-Domokos, Gauge ﬁelds on coset spaces, Il Nuovo
     Cim. 44A (1978) 318.


                                        84
[68] C. A. Orzalesi, Multidimensional uniﬁed theories, Fortschr. Phys. 29 (1981)
     413.
[69] C. Wetterich, Spontaneous compactiﬁcation in higher dimensional gravity,
     Phys. Lett. 113B (1982) 377.

[70] E. Cremmer and J. Scherk, Spontaneous compactiﬁcation of space in an
     Einstein-Yang-Mills-Higgs model, Nucl. Phys. B108 (1976) 409.

[71] E. Cremmer and J. Scherk, Spontaneous compactiﬁcation of extra space
     dimensions, Nucl. Phys. B118 (1977) 61.
[72] S. Weinberg, cited in [12].
[73] Z. Horváth, L. Palla, E. Cremmer and J. Scherk, Grand uniﬁed schemes and
     spontaneous compactiﬁcation, Nucl. Phys. B127 (1977) 57.

[74] J. F. Luciani, Space-time geometry and symmetry breaking, Nucl. Phys. B135
     (1978) 111.
[75] Z. Horváth and L. Palla, Spontaneous compactiﬁcation and “monopoles” in
     higher dimensions, Nucl. Phys. B142 (1978) 327.
[76] S. Randjbar-Daemi and R. Percacci, Spontaneous compactiﬁcation of a (4+d)-
     dimensional Kaluza-Klein theory into M4 × G/H for symmetric G/H, Phys.
     Lett. 117B (1982) 41.
[77] S. Randjbar-Daemi, A. Salam and J. Strathdee, Spontaneous compactiﬁcation
     in six-dimensional Einstein-Maxwell theory, Nucl. Phys. B214 (1983) 491.

[78] Y. Tosa, Spontaneous dimensional reduction in Kaluza-Klein theories, Phys.
     Rev. D30 (1984) 339.
[79] S. Weinberg, Charges from extra dimensions, Phys. Lett. 125B (1983) 265.
[80] P. Candelas and S. Weinberg, Calculation of gauge couplings and compact
     circumferences from self-consistent dimensional reduction, Nucl. Phys. B237
     (1984) 397.
[81] D. Z. Freedman, P. van Nieuwenhuizen and S. Ferrara, Progress towards a
     theory of supergravity, Phys. Rev. D13 (1976) 3214.

[82] S. Deser and B. Zumino, Consistent supergravity, Phys. Lett. 62B (1976) 335.
[83] W. Nahm, Supersymmetries and their representations, Nucl. Phys. B135
     (1978) 149.
[84] E. Witten, Search for a realistic Kaluza-Klein theory, Nucl. Phys. B186 (1981)
     412.

[85] E. Cremmer, B. Julia and J. Scherk, Supergravity theory in 11 dimensions,
     Phys. Lett. 76B (1978) 409.
[86] P. G. O. Freund and M. A. Rubin, Dynamics of dimensional reduction, Phys.
     Lett. 97B (1980) 233.


                                       85
[87] K. Pilch, P. Townsend and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Compactiﬁcation of d = 11
     supergravity on S 4 (or 11 = 7 + 4, too), Nucl. Phys. B242 (1984) 377.

[88] P. West, Introduction to supersymmetry and supergravity (World Scientiﬁc,
     Singapore, 1986).

[89] Supergravities in diverse dimensions, eds. A. Salam and E. Sezgin (North-
     Holland, Amsterdam, 1989).

[90] D. Z. Freedman and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, The hidden dimensions of
     spacetime, Sci. Am. 252, 3 (1985) 74.

[91] E. Cremmer and B. Julia, The SO(8) supergravity, Nucl. Phys. B159 (1979)
     141.

[92] C. Wetterich, Dimensional reduction of Weyl, Majorana and Majorana-Weyl
     spinors, Nucl. Phys. B222 (1983) 20.

[93] C. Wetterich, Dimensional reduction of fermions in generalized gravity, Nucl.
     Phys. B242 (1984) 473.

[94] M. Gell-Mann and B. Zwiebach, Curling up two spatial dimensions with
     SU (1, 1)/U (1), Phys. Lett. 147B (1984) 111.

[95] C. Wetterich, The cosmological constant and non-compact internal spaces in
     Kaluza-Klein theories, Nucl. Phys. B255 (1985) 480.

[96] M. Gell-Mann and B. Zwiebach, Dimensional reduction of spacetime induced
     by nonlinear scalar dynamics and noncompact extra dimensions, Nucl. Phys.
     B260 (1985) 569.

[97] B. McInnes, Global aspects of spontaneous compactiﬁcation, Class. Quant.
     Grav. 2 (1985) 661.

[98] S. Randjbar-Daemi and C. Wetterich, Kaluza-Klein solutions with non-
     compact internal spaces, Phys. Lett. 166B (1986) 65.

[99] C. Wetterich, Fermion chirality from higher dimensions and Kaluza-Klein
     theories with non-compact internal space, in [6] p. 206.

[100] S. Weinberg, Generalized theories of gravity and supergravity in higher
      dimensions, in [5] p. 508.

[101] S. Weinberg, Quasi-Riemannian theories of gravitation in more than four
      dimensions, Phys. Lett. 138B (1984) 47.

[102] S. Weinberg, Elementary diﬀerential geometry from a generalized standpoint,
      in [6] p. 160.

[103] L. Alvarez-Gaumé and E. Witten, Gravitational anomalies, Nucl. Phys. B234
      (1984) 269.

[104] M. B. Green and J. H. Schwarz, Anomaly cancellations in supersymmetric
      d = 10 gauge theory and superstring theory, Phys. Lett. 149B (1984) 117.


                                       86
[105] D. J. Gross, J. A. Harvey, E. Martinec and R. Rohm, Heterotic string, Phys.
      Rev. Lett. 54 (1985) 502.
[106] J. Scherk and J. H. Schwarz, Dual models for non-hadrons, Nucl. Phys. B81
      (1974) 118.
[107] M. B. Green and J. H. Schwarz, Supersymmetrical string theories, Phys. Lett.
      109B (1982) 444.
[108] J. Horgan, Particle physics, Sci. Am. 270, 2 (1994) 96.
[109] L. Susskind and J. Uglum, Black hole entropy in canonical quantum gravity
      and superstring theory, Phys. Rev. D50 (1994) 2700.
[110] F. Wilczek, cited in J. Horgan, Universal truths, Sci. Am. 263, 4 (1990) 108.
[111] J. H. Schwarz, Lectures on superstring theory, in [6] p. 94.
[112] M. B. Green, J. H. Schwarz and E. Witten, Superstring theory (Cambridge
      Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1987).
[113] M. B. Green, Superstrings, Sci. Am. 255, 3 (1986) 48.
[114] O. Veblen and B. Hoﬀmann, Projective Relativity, Phys. Rev. 36 (1931) 810.
[115] W. Pauli, Über die Formulierung der Naturgesetze mit fünf homogen
      Koordinaten, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 18 (1933) 337.
[116] A. Pais, The energy momentum tensor in projective relativity theory, Physica
      8 (1941) 1137.
[117] P. Jordan, Über den Riemannschen Krümmungstensor, Zeits. Phys. 124 (1948)
      608.
[118] G. Ludwig, Fortschritte der projectiven Relativitätstheorie (Vieweg und Sohn,
      Braunschweig, 1951).
[119] P. Jordan, Schwerkraft und Weltall (Vieweg und Sohn, Braunschweig, 1955).
[120] E. Schmutzer, Beitrag zur projecktiven Relativitätstheorie, Zeits. Phys. 149
      (1957) 329; ibid 154 (1959) 312.
[121] E. Schmutzer, Relativistische Physik (Teubner-Verlag, Leipzig, 1968).
[122] G. Lessner, The energy tensor of matter in the projective theory of relativity,
      Gen. Rel. Grav. 5 (1974) 699.
[123] G. Lessner, Axially symmetric pp-waves and their interpretation as extended
      massless particles, Gen. Rel. Grav. 18 (1986) 899.
[124] G. Lessner, The general symptotically ﬂat solution of the ﬁve-dimensional
      vacuum equations Rµν = 0 with a light-like symmetry and a space-like axial
      symmetry, Class. Quant. Grav. 4 (1987) 741.
[125] G. Lessner, Einstein-Maxwell null ﬁelds and extended massless particles with
      helicity, Gen. Rel. Grav. 22 (1990) 913.


                                         87
[126] G. Lessner, The mass formula of the spherically symmetric solution of the
      ﬁve-dimensional vacuum equations Rµν = 0, Gen. Rel. Grav. 23 (1991) 897.
[127] E. Schmutzer, Cosmology on the basis of a new ﬁve-dimensional projective
      uniﬁed ﬁeld theory: i. Dust universe in general, Class. Quant. Grav. 5 (1988)
      353, 1215.
[128] E. Schmutzer Sketch of a new 5-dimensional projective uniﬁed ﬁeld theory —
      physical predictions and applications, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 45 (1988) 578.
[129] E. Schmutzer, Homogeneous isotropic cosmology on the basis of a new 5-
      dimensional projective uniﬁed ﬁeld theory, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 47 (1990)
      219.
[130] D. W. Joseph, Coordinate covariance and the particle spectrum, Phys. Rev.
      126 (1962) 319.
[131] V. A. Rubakov and M. E. Shaposhnikov, Do we live inside a domain wall?,
      Phys. Lett. 125B (1983) 136.
[132] M. Visser, An exotic class of Kaluza-Klein models, Phys. Lett. 159B (1985)
      22.
[133] P. Laguna-Castillo and R. A. Matzner, Surfaces of discontinuity in ﬁve-
      dimensional Kaluza-Klein cosmologies, Nucl. Phys. B282 (1987) 542.
[134] G. W. Gibbons and D. L. Wiltshire, Spacetime as a membrane in higher
      dimensions, Nucl. Phys. B287 (1987) 717.
[135] P. S. Wesson, A new approach to scale-invariant gravity, Astron. Astrophys.
      119 (1983) 145.
[136] P. S. Wesson, An embedding for general relativity with variable rest mass,
      Gen. Rel. Grav. 16 (1984) 193.
[137] P. S. Wesson, Relations for a Kaluza-Klein cosmology with variable rest mass,
      Astron. Astrophys. 143 (1985) 233.
[138] P. S. Wesson, Astrophysical data and cosmological solutions of a Kaluza-Klein
      theory of gravity, Astron. Astrophys. 166 (1986) 1.
[139] P. S. Wesson, Comments on a possible change with cosmological time in the
      rest masses of particles, Astron. Astrophys. 189 (1988) 4.
[140] S. Chatterjee, Homogeneous cosmological model for a Kaluza-Klein type
      metric, Gen. Rel. Grav. 18 (1986) 1073.
[141] S. Chatterjee, De Sitter-type of cosmological model in a ﬁve-dimensional
      theory of gravity with variable rest mass, Astron. Astrophys. 179 (1987) 1.
[142] S. Chatterjee, Static spherically symmetric solution in a Kaluza-Klein type of
      metric, Astron. Astrophys. 230 (1990) 1.
[143] S. Chatterjee and B. Bhui, Viscuous ﬂuid in a Kaluza-Klein metric, Astrophys.
      Sp. Sci. 167 (1990) 61.


                                        88
[144] A. Banerjee, B. K. Bhui and S. Chatterjee, Five-dimensional cosmological
      models with viscous ﬂuid in Wesson’s theory, Astron. Astrophys. 232 (1990)
      305.

[145] J. Ponce de Leon, Cosmological models in a Kaluza-Klein theory with variable
      rest mass, Gen. Rel. Grav. 20 (1988) 539.

[146] Ø. Grøn and H. H. Soleng, On the physical interpretation of Wesson’s
      gravitational theory, Gen. Rel. Grav. 20 (1988) 1115.

[147] Ø. Grøn, Inﬂationary cosmology according to Wesson’s gravitational theory,
      Astron. Astrophys. 193 (1988) 1.

[148] H. Baofa and W. Jingchang, Several consequences of 5D Einstein-Wesson
      gravitational theory, Acta Astrophys. Sinica 9 (1989) 305.

[149] G.-W. Ma, Friedmann-type cosmological solutions in Wesson’s 5D space-time-
      mass theory of gravity, Phys. Lett. 143A (1990) 183.

[150] G.-W. Ma, Wesson’s gravity and Mach’s principle, Phys. Lett. 146A (1990)
      375.

[151] G.-W. Ma, The source term of the ﬁeld equation in the 5D STM theory of
      gravitation, Astrophys. Sp. Sci. 181 (1991) 331.

[152] A. A. Coley, Helium formation in a Kaluza-Klein-type theory, Astron.
      Astrophys. 233 (1990) 305.

[153] L. K. Chi, New cosmological models in the ﬁve-dimensional space-time-mass
      gravity theory, Gen. Rel. Grav. 22 (1990) 1347.

[154] W. L. Roque and W. M. Seiler, Anisotropic solutions in the 5D space-time-
      mass theory, Gen. Rel. Grav. 23 (1991) 1151.

[155] J. C. Carvalho and J. A. S. Lima, Uniform Newtonian models with variable
      mass, Gen. Rel. Grav. 23 (1991) 455.

[156] J. C. Carvalho and J. A. S. Lima, The relation between the relativistic 5D
      Wesson theory and the Newtonian variable mass theory, Gen. Rel. Grav. 24
      (1992) 171.

[157] I. Waga, The existence of Newtonian analogs of a class of 5D Wesson’s
      cosmological models, Gen. Rel. Grav. 24 (1992) 783.

[158] A. Macías, G. J. Fuentes y Martínez and O. Obregón, The Dirac equation in
      5-dimensional Wesson gravity, Gen. Rel. Grav. 25 (1993) 549.

[159] T. Fukui, A cosmological solution of a 5D space-time-mass gravity in vacuum,
      Gen. Rel. Grav. 19 (1987) 43.

[160] T. Fukui, The motion of a test particle in the Kaluza-Klein-type of
      gravitational theory with variable rest mass, Astrophys. Sp. Sci. 141 (1988)
      407.


                                       89
[161] T. Fukui, 5D space-time-mass gravity theory with oﬀ-diagonal components in
      the metric tensor, Astrophys. Sp. Sci. 146 (1988) 13.

[162] T. Fukui, Eﬀects of Wesson’s 5D-STM theory of gravity on the 4D universe
      model, Astron. Astrophys. 253 (1992) 1.

[163] T. Fukui, 5D geometrical property and 4D property of matter, Gen. Rel. Grav.
      25 (1993) 931.

[164] T. Fukui, Fundamental constants and higher-dimensional universe, Gen. Rel.
      Grav. 20 (1988) 1037.

[165] T. Fukui, Vacuum cosmological solution in a 6D universe, Gen. Rel. Grav. 24
      (1992) 389.

[166] M. Yoshimura, Classiﬁcation of the static vacuum metric with Ricci-ﬂat
      compactiﬁcation, Phys. Rev. D34 (1986) 1021.

[167] P. S. Wesson, The properties of matter in Kaluza-Klein cosmology, Mod. Phys.
      Lett. A7 (1992) 921.

[168] P. S. Wesson, A physical interpretation of Kaluza-Klein cosmology, Astrophys.
      J. 394 (1992) 19.

[169] P. S. Wesson, An embedding for the big bang, Astrophys. J. 436 (1994) 547.

[170] P. S. Wesson and H. Liu, Fully covariant cosmology and its astrophysical
      implications, Astrophys. J. 440 (1995) 1.

[171] A. Billyard and P. S. Wesson, Waves in ﬁve-dimensional relativity theory, Gen.
      Rel. Grav. 28 (1996) 129.

[172] P. S. Wesson and J. Ponce de Leon, The equations of motion in Kaluza-Klein
      cosmology and its implications for astrophysics, Astron. Astrophys. 294 (1995)
      1.

[173] H. Liu and P. S. Wesson, Cosmological solutions and their eﬀective properties
      of matter in Kaluza-Klein theory, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D3 (1994) 627.

[174] D. J. McManus, Five-dimensional cosmological models in induced matter
      theory, J. Math. Phys. 35 (1994) 4889.

[175] A. A. Coley, Higher-dimensional vacuum cosmologies, Astrophys. J. 427 (1994)
      585.

[176] A. A. Coley and D. J. McManus, A family of cosmological solutions in higher-
      dimensional Einstein gravity, J. Math. Phys. 36 (1995) 335.

[177] P. S. Wesson and J. Ponce de Leon, Kaluza-Klein theory and Machian
      cosmology, Gen. Rel. Grav. 26 (1994) 555.

[178] B. Mashhoon, H. Liu and P. S. Wesson, Particle masses and the cosmological
      constant in Kaluza-Klein theory, Phys. Lett. 331B (1994) 305.


                                        90
[179] H. Liu and B. Mashhoon, A Machian interpretation of the cosmological
      constant, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 4 (1995) 565.
[180] P. S. Wesson, The eﬀective properties of matter of Kaluza-Klein solitons, Phys.
      Lett. 276B (1992) 299.
[181] H. Liu and P. S. Wesson, Exact solutions of general relativity derived from
      5-D “black hole” solutions of Kaluza-Klein theory, J. Math. Phys. 33 (1992)
      3888.
[182] P. S. Wesson and J. Ponce de Leon, The physical properties of Kaluza-Klein
      solitons, Class. Quant. Grav. 11 (1994) 1341.
[183] H. Liu and P. S. Wesson, The motion of a spinning object in a higher-
      dimensional spacetime, Class. Quant. Grav. 13 (1996) 2311.
[184] P. W. Wesson and P. Lim, Astrophysical implications of a solution in Kaluza-
      Klein gravity, Astron. Astrophys. 261 (1992) 373.
[185] P. S. Wesson, A new dark matter candidate: Kaluza-Klein solitons, Astrophys.
      J. 420 (1994) L49.
[186] A. Billyard and P. S. Wesson, A class of exact solutions in 5D gravity and its
      physical properties, Phys. Rev. D53 (1996) 731.
[187] P. H. Lim and P. S. Wesson, The perihelion problem in Kaluza-Klein gravity,
      Astrophys. J. 397 (1992) L91.
[188] D. Kalligas, P. S. Wesson and C. W. F. Everitt, The classical tests in Kaluza-
      Klein gravity, Astrophys. J. 439 (1995) 548.
[189] P. H. Lim, J. M. Overduin and P. S. Wesson, Light deﬂection in Kaluza-Klein
      gravity, J. Math. Phys. 36 (1995) 6907.
[190] P. S. Wesson, Possible violations of the equivalence principle in Kaluza-Klein
      theories, in proc. Symposium on Satellite Test of the Equivalence Principle,
      ed. R. Reinhard (E.S.A., 1997), in press.
[191] P. S. Wesson, H. Liu and P. Lim, Time-dependent Kaluza-Klein solitons and
      their eﬀective properties of matter, Phys. Lett. 298B (1993) 69.
[192] H. Liu, P. Wesson and J. Ponce de Leon, Time-dependent Kaluza-Klein soliton
      solutions, J. Math. Phys. 34 (1993) 4070.
[193] H. Liu & P. S. Wesson, A class of Kaluza-Klein soliton solutions, Phys. Lett.
      381B (1996) 420.
[194] H. Liu & P. S. Wesson, The physical properties of charged 5D black holes,
      Univ. of Waterloo preprint (1996).
[195] P. G. Bergmann, Introduction to the theory of relativity, 2nd ed. (Dover, New
      York, 1976), § xvii.
[196] C. Brans and R. H. Dicke, Mach’s principle and a relativistic theory of
      gravitation, Phys. Rev. 124 (1961) 925.


                                        91
[197] C. M. Will, Theory and experiment in gravitational physics (Cambridge Univ.
      Press, Cambridge, 1981).

[198] D. La, P. J. Steinhardt and E. W. Bertschinger, Prescription for successful
      extended inﬂation, Phys. Lett. 231B (1989) 231.

[199] C. Wetterich, Cosmologies with variable Newton’s “constant” Nucl. Phys.
      B302 (1988) 645.

[200] H. H. Soleng, Trapping the Kaluza-Klein scalar, Gen. Rel. Grav. 23 (1991)
      313.

[201] P. J. Steinhardt and F. S. Accetta, Hyperextended inﬂation, Phys. Rev. Lett.
      64 (1990) 2740.

[202] J. McDonald, Can a Brans-Dicke scalar account for dark matter in extended
      inﬂation models?, Phys. Rev. D48 (1993) 2462.

[203] R. M. Wald, General relativity (Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1984).

[204] M. S. Madsen, Scalar ﬁelds in curved spacetimes, Class. Quant. Grav. 5 (1988)
      627.

[205] L. M. Sokolowski, Uniqueness of the metric line element in dimensionally
      reduced theories, Class. Quant. Grav. 6 (1989) 59.

[206] T. Damour, G. W. Gibbons and C. Gundlach, Dark matter, time-varying G,
      and a dilaton ﬁeld, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 (1990) 123.

[207] Y. M. Cho, Reinterpretation of Jordan-Brans-Dicke theory and Kaluza-Klein
      cosmology, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68 (1992) 3133.

[208] A. H. Chamseddine, N = 4 supergravity coupled to N = 4 matter and hidden
      symmetries, Nucl. Phys. B185 (1981) 403.

[209] M. Dine, R. Rohm, N. Seiberg and E. Witten, Gluino condensation in
      superstring models, Phys. Lett. 156B (1985) 55.

[210] G. Kunstatter, H. C. Lee and H. P. Leivo, Gauge invariance of the one-loop
      eﬀective potential in M d × S 1 Kaluza-Klein theory, Phys. Rev. D33 (1986)
      1018.

[211] K. Maeda, Stability and attractor in a higher-dimensional cosmology: ii, Class.
      Quant. Grav. 3 (1986) 651.

[212] K. Maeda, Is the compactiﬁed vacuum semiclassically unstable?, Phys. Lett.
      186B (1987) 33.

[213] L. Bombelli et al., On energy in 5-dimensional gravity and the mass of the
      Kaluza-Klein monopole, Nucl. Phys. B289 (1987) 735.

[214] Y. M. Cho and D. H. Park, Fifth force from Kaluza-Klein uniﬁcation, Gen.
      Rel. Grav. 23 (1991) 741.


                                        92
[215] L. Sokolowski and B. Carr, Can black holes in classical Kaluza-Klein theory
      have scalar hair?, Phys. Lett. 176B (1986) 334.

[216] L. M. Sokolowski and Z. A. Golda, Instability of Kaluza-Klein cosmology,
      Phys. Lett. 195B (1987) 349.

[217] G. W. Gibbons and P. K. Townsend, Cosmological evolution of degenerate
      vacua, Nucl. Phys. B282 (1987) 610.

[218] G. Magnano and L. M. Sokolowski, Phys. Rev. D50 (1994) 5039.

[219] J. L. Friedman, Is physics consistent with closed timelike curves?, Ann. N.Y.
      Acad. Sci. 647 (1991) 620.

[220] R. B. Mann and D. E. Vincent, Radiation and ﬁve-dimensional cosmology,
      Phys. Lett. 107A (1985) 75.

[221] E. Alvarez and M. B. Gavela, Entropy from extra dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett.
      51 (1983) 931.

[222] A. Chodos and S. Detweiler, Where has the ﬁfth dimension gone?, Phys. Rev.
      D21 (1980) 2167.

[223] A. Vilenkin, Creation of universes from nothing, Phys. Lett. 117B (1982) 25.

[224] P. S. Wesson, Avoiding the big bang: matter production from Minkowski space
      and the early universe, Astron. Astrophys. 151 (1985) 276.

[225] R. D. Sorkin, Kaluza-Klein monopole, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51 (1983) 87.

[226] D. J. Gross and M. J. Perry, Magnetic monopoles in Kaluza-Klein theories,
      Nucl. Phys. B226 (1983) 29.

[227] A. Davidson and D. A. Owen, Black holes as windows to extra dimensions,
      Phys. Lett. 155B (1985) 247.

[228] A. Chodos and S. Detweiler, Spherically symmetric solutions in ﬁve-
      dimensional general relativity, Gen. Rel. Grav. 14 (1982) 879.

[229] J. R. Gott iii and M. J. Rees, Astronomical constraints on a string-dominated
      universe, Mon. Not. R. Astr. Soc. 227 (1987) 453.

[230] E. Kolb, A coasting cosmology, Astrophys. J. 344 (1989) 543.

[231] P. S. Wesson, Cosmological constraints on the zero-point electromagnetic ﬁeld,
      Astrophys. J. 378 (1991) 466.

[232] J. Ponce de Leon, Limiting conﬁgurations allowed by the energy conditions,
      Gen. Rel. Grav. 25 (1993) 1123.

[233] R. N. Henriksen and P. S. Wesson, Self-similar space-times, Astrophys. Space
      Sci. 53 (1978) 429; ibid 53 (1978) 445.

[234] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, The classical theory of ﬁelds, trans. M.
      Hamermesh (Pergamon, Oxford, 1975), p. 335.


                                        93
[235] N. A. Bahcall and L. M. Lubin, Resolving the beta-discrepancy for clusters of
      galaxies, Astrophys. J. 426 (1994) 513.
[236] M. M. Crone, A. E. Evrard and D. O. Richstone, The cosmological dependence
      of cluster density proﬁles, Astrophys. J. 434 (1994) 402.

[237] M. Girardi et al., Optical radii of galaxy clusters, Astrophys. J. 438 (1995)
      527.

[238] E. Leibowitz and N. Rosen, Five-dimensional relativity theory, Gen. Rel. Grav.
      4 (1973) 449.
[239] J. Gegenberg and G. Kunstatter, The motion of charged particles in Kaluza-
      Klein space-time, Phys. Lett. 106A (1984) 410.
[240] J. A. Ferrari, On an approximate solution for a charged object and the
      experimental evidence for the Kaluza-Klein theory, Gen. Rel. Grav. 21 (1989)
      683.

[241] R. Brout, F. Englert and E. Gunzig, The creation of the universe as a quantum
      phenomenon, Ann. Phys. (NY) 115 (1978), 78.

[242] R. H. Dicke, Mach’s principle and invariance under transformation of units,
      Phys. Rev. 125 (1962) 2163.
[243] P. A. M. Dirac, Long range forces and broken symmetries, Proc. R. Soc.
      (London) A333 (1973) 403.
[244] P. A. M. Dirac, Cosmological models and the large numbers hypothesis, Proc.
      R. Soc. (London) A338 (1974) 439.

[245] F. Hoyle and J. V. Narlikar, Action at a distance in physics and cosmology
      (Freeman, New York, 1974).
[246] V. Canuto, P. J. Adams, S.-H. Hsieh and E. Tsiang, Scale-covariant theory of
      gravitation and astrophysical applications, Phys. Rev. D16 (1977) 1643.
[247] V. Canuto, S.-H. Hsieh and P. J. Adams, Scale-covariant theory of gravitation
      and astrophysical applications, Phys. Rev. Lett. 39 (1977) 429.
[248] P. S. Wesson, Geophysics and cosmology (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 1978).

[249] J. D. Bekenstein, Astronomical consequences and tests of relativistic theories
      of variable rest masses, Comments Astrophys. 8 (1979) 89.
[250] P. S. Wesson, Constants of cosmology: the nature and origin of fundamental
      constants in astrophysics and particle physics, Sp. Sci. Rev. 59 (1992) 365.
[251] D. W. Sciama, On the origin of inertia, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 113 (1953)
      34.

[252] Mach’s principle: from Newton’s bucket to quantum gravity, eds. J. Barbour
      and H. Pﬁster (Birkhäuser, Boston, 1995).

[253] P. G. O. Freund, Kaluza-Klein cosmologies, Nucl. Phys. B209 (1982) 146.


                                        94
[254] A. Davidson, J. Sonnenschein and A. H. Vozmediano, Cosmological
      compactiﬁcation, Phys. Rev. D32 (1985) 1330.

[255] H. Ishihara, Cosmological solutions of the extended Einstein gravity with the
      Gauss-Bonnet term, Phys. Lett. 179B (1986) 217.

[256] M. Gleiser, S. Rajpoot and J. G. Taylor, Higher dimensional cosmologies, Ann.
      Phys. (NY) 160 (1985) 299.

[257] M. Gleiser and J. A. Stein-Schabes, Classical cosmologies from ten-dimensional
      supergravity, Phys. Rev. 34 (1986) 1739.

[258] D. L. Wiltshire, Global properties of Kaluza-Klein cosmologies, Phys. Rev.
      D36 (1987) 1634.

[259] K. Maeda, Is cosmological dimensional reduction possible?, Phys. Lett. 138B
      (1984) 269.

[260] S. Randjbar-Daemi, A. Salam and J. Strathdee, On Kaluza-Klein cosmology,
      Phys. Lett. 135B (1984) 388.

[261] A. Tomimatsu and H. Ishihara, Dimensional reduction in an oscillatory
      Kaluza-Klein cosmology, Gen. Rel. Grav. 18 (1986) 161.

[262] M. Szydlowski, Dimensional reduction and the stability problem in
      multidimensional homogeneous cosmology, Gen. Rel. Grav. 20 (1988) 1219.

[263] M. Demiański, M. Szydlowski and J. Szczȩsny, Dynamical dimensional
      reduction, Gen. Rel. Grav. 22 (1990) 1217.

[264] H. Makaruk, Dynamical reduction in multidimensional cosmological models,
      Gen. Rel. Grav. 23 (1991) 1205.

[265] A. B. Henriques, Higher-dimensional cosmological solutions with generalized
      Einstein equations, Nucl. Phys. B277 (1986) 621.

[266] M. Rosenbaum, M. Ryan, L. Urrutia and R. Matzner, Singularities in Kaluza-
      Klein-Friedmann cosmological models, Phys. Rev. D36 (1987) 1032.

[267] B. Chakraborty and R. Parthasarathy, Dynamical compactiﬁcation in Kaluza-
      Klein cosmology, Phys. Lett. 142A (1989) 75.

[268] M. Yoshimura, Eﬀective action and cosmological evolution of scale factors in
      higher-dimensional curved spacetime, Phys. Rev. D30 (1984) 344.

[269] H. Sato, Dynamics of higher dimensional universe models, Prog. Theor. Phys.
      72 (1984) 98.

[270] K. Shiraishi, The Friedmann universe and compact internal spaces in higher-
      dimensional gravity theories, Prog. Theor. Phys. 76 (1986) 321.

[271] N. Deruelle, On the approach to the cosmological singularity in quadratic
      theories of gravity: the Kasner regimes, Nucl. Phys. B327 (1989) 253.


                                        95
[272] R. R. Metsaev and A. A. Tseytlin, Curvature cubed terms in string theory
      eﬀective actions, Phys. Lett. 185B (1987) 52.

[273] J. Demaret, Y. De Rop, P. Tombal and A. Moussiaux, Qualitative analysis
      of ten-dimensional Lovelock cosmological models, Gen. Rel. Grav. 24 (1992)
      1169.

[274] B. C. Paul and S. Mukherjee, Higher-dimensional cosmology with Gauss-
      Bonnet terms and the cosmological-constant problem, Phys. Rev. D42 (1990)
      2595.

[275] M. Demiański, Z. Golda and W. Puszkarz, Dynamics of the D-dimensional
      FRW-cosmological models within the superstring-generated gravity model,
      Gen. Rel. Grav. 23 (1991) 917.

[276] J. Madore, Cosmological applications of the Lanczos Lagrangian, Class. Quant.
      Grav. 3 (1986) 361.

[277] N. Deruelle and L. Fariña-Busto, Lovelock gravitational ﬁeld equations in
      cosmology, Phys. Rev. D41 (1990) 3696.

[278] M. Arik and T. Dereli, Euler-Poincaré Lagrangians and Kaluza-Klein theory,
      Phys. Lett. 189B (1987) 96.

[279] F. Müller-Hoissen, Dimensionally continued Euler forms: Kaluza-Klein
      cosmology and dimensional reduction, Class. Quant. Grav. 3 (1986) 665.

[280] M. Arik, The analogue potential of Kaluza-Klein cosmology with Euler form
      actions, Nucl. Phys. B328 (1989) 308.

[281] R. Kerner and J. Martin, Change of signature and topology in a ﬁve-
      dimensional cosmological model, Class. Quant. Grav. 10 (1993) 2111.

[282] D. Sahdev, Towards a realistic Kaluza-Klein cosmology, Phys. Lett. 137B
      (1984) 155.

[283] R. B. Abbott, S. M. Barr and S. D. Ellis, Kaluza-Klein cosmologies and
      inﬂation, Phys. Rev. D30 (1984) 720.

[284] T. Dereli and R. W. Tucker, Dynamical reduction of internal dimensions in
      the early universe, Phys. Lett. 125B (1983) 133.

[285] Q. Shaﬁ and C. Wetterich, Cosmology from higher-dimensional gravity, Phys.
      Lett. 129B (1983) 387.

[286] K. A. Olive, Inﬂation, Phys. Rep. 190 (1990) 307.

[287] A. Linde, Particle physics and inﬂationary cosmology, trans. M. Damashek
      (Harwood Academic, New York, 1990).

[288] H. Ishihara, Kaluza-Klein inﬂation, Prog. Theor. Phys. 72 (1984) 376.

[289] J. H. Yoon and D. R. Brill, Inﬂation from extra dimensions, Class. Quant.
      Grav. 7 (1990) 1253.


                                       96
[290] K. Sunahara, M. Kasai and T. Futamase, Kaluza-Klein inﬂation with non-
      minimally coupled scalar ﬁeld, Prog. Theor. Phys. 83 (1990) 353.

[291] M. Szydlowski and M. Biesiada, Inﬂation as a dynamical eﬀect of higher
      dimensions, Phys. Rev. D41 (1990) 2487.

[292] A. Beloborodov, P. Ivanov and A. Polnarev, Physical constraints on multi-
      dimensional cosmological models, Class. Quant. Grav. 11 (1994) 665.

[293] L. Burakovsky and L. P. Horwitz, 5D generalized inﬂationary cosmology, Gen.
      Rel. Grav. 27 (1995) 1043.

[294] Q. Shaﬁ and C. Wetterich, Inﬂation with higher dimensional gravity, Phys.
      Lett. 152B (1985) 51.

[295] Q. Shaﬁ and C. Wetterich, Inﬂation from higher dimensions, Nucl. Phys. B289
      (1987) 787.

[296] Y. Ezawa, T. Watanabe and T. Yano, Finite probability of inﬂation from
      higher dimensions, Prog. Theor. Phys. 86 (1991) 89.

[297] E. Carugno, M. Litterio and G. Pollifrone, Inﬂation in multidimensional
      quantum cosmology, Phys. Rev. D53 (1996) 6863.

[298] S. Chatterjee and A. Sil, Extended inﬂation in higher-dimensional spacetime
      with a Brans-Dicke scalar ﬁeld, Gen. Rel. Grav. 25 (1993) 307.

[299] J. C. Fabris and J. Martin, Growth of scalar perturbations in Kaluza-Klein
      theories, Phys. Lett. 316B (1993) 476.

[300] V. Faraoni, F. I. Cooperstock and J. M. Overduin, COBE constraints on
      Kaluza-Klein cosmologies, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D4 (1995), 387.

[301] M. C. Bento and O. Bertolami, Constraints on supergravity chaotic
      inﬂationary models, Phys. Lett. 365B (1996) 59.

[302] Y. Kubyshin and J. Martin, Limits on Kaluza-Klein models from COBE
      results, Cambridge preprint DAMTP R95/35 (1995).

[303] W. J. Marciano, Time variation of the fundamental “constants” and Kaluza-
      Klein theories, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52 (1984) 489.

[304] E. W. Kolb, M. J. Perry and T. P. Walker, Time variation of fundamental
      constants, primordial nucleosynthesis, and the size of extra dimensions, Phys.
      Rev. D33 (1986) 869.

[305] J. D. Barrow, Observational limits on the time evolution of extra spatial
      dimensions, Phys. Rev. D35 (1987) 1805.

[306] M. Biesiada, Primordial gravitational waves and multidimensional theories,
      Class. Quant. Grav. 11 (1994) 2589.

[307] E. W. Kolb and R. Slansky, Dimensional reduction in the early universe: where
      have the massive particles gone?, Phys. Lett. 135B (1984) 378.


                                        97
[308] J. A. Harvey, E. W. Kolb and M. J. Perry, Cosmological production of Kaluza-
      Klein monopoles, Phys. Lett. 149B (1984) 465.

[309] V. A. Kostelecký and S. Samuel, Phenomenological gravitational constraints
      on strings and higher-dimensional theories, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 (1989) 224.

[310] P. F. González-Dı́az, Perdurance of higher-dimensional de Sitter space, Phys.
      Rev. D36 (1987) 3651.

[311] M. Szydlowski, J. Szczȩsny and M. Biesiada, Is the space-time dimension 11
      distinguished in cosmology?, Gen. Rel. Grav. 19 (1987) 1181.

[312] M. A. R. Osorio and M. A. Vázquez-Mozo, Variations on Kaluza-Klein
      cosmology, Mod. Phys. Lett. A8 (1993) 3111.

[313] S. Chatterjee, D. Panigrahi and A. Banerjee, Inhomogeneous Kaluza-Klein
      cosmology, Class. Quant. Grav. 11 (1994) 371.

[314] W. B. Bonnor, Negative mass in general relativity, Gen. Rel. Grav. 21 (1989)
      1143.

[315] P. B. Stetson et al., CCD photometry of the anomalous globular cluster
      Palomar 12, Astron. J. 97 (1989) 1360.

[316] M. Bolte, The age of the globular cluster NGC 288, the formation of the
      galactic halo, and the second parameter, Astron. J. 97 (1989) 1688.

[317] D. A. Vandenberg, M. Bolte and P. B. Stetson, Measuring age diﬀerences
      among globular clusters having similar metallicities: a new method and ﬁrst
      results, Astron. J. 100 (1990) 445.

[318] A. Dressler et al., Spectroscopy and photometry of elliptical galaxies: a large-
      scale streaming motion in the local universe, Astrophys. J. 313 (1987) L37.

[319] D. Lynden-Bell et al., Spectroscopy and photometry of elliptical galaxies.
      v. Galaxy streaming toward the new supergalactic center, Astrophys. J. 326
      (1988) 19.

[320] J. R. Lucey and D. Carter, Distances to ﬁve nearby southern galaxy clusters
      and the absolute motion of the Local Group, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 235
      (1988) 1177.

[321] D. Calzetti and M. Giavalisco, Peculiar velocities and galaxy clustering: do
      bulk and shell motions have the same origin?, Astrophys. J. 406 (1993) 388.

[322] J. R. Mould et al., The velocity ﬁeld of clusters of galaxies within 100
      megaparsecs. ii. Northern clusters, Astrophys. J. 409 (1993) 14.

[323] L. J. Goicoechea, The motion of the Local Group with respect to the microwave
      background frame: local anomaly and eﬀect of clusters at distances > 40h−1
      Mpc, Astron. Astrophys. 269 (1993) L9.

[324] G. W. Gibbons, Antigravitating black hole solitons with scalar hair in N = 4
      supergravity, Nucl. Phys. B207 (1982) 337.


                                         98
[325] T. Matos, Solitons in ﬁve-dimensional gravity, Gen. Rel. Grav. 19 (1987) 481.

[326] L. D. Faddeev and L. A. Takhtajan, Hamiltonian Methods in the Theory of
      Solitons, trans. A. G. Reyman (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1987) p. 128.

[327] O. Heckmann, P. Jordan and W. Fricke, Zur erweiterten Gravitationstheorie.
      i., Zeits. Astrophys. 28 (1951) 113.

[328] A. Kühnel and E. Schmutzer, Exakte Lösung der Feldgleichungen einer
      einfachen Variante der projektiven Relativitätstheorie für eine geladene
      Punktsingularität, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 7 (1961) 243.

[329] F. R. Tangherlini, Schwarzschild ﬁeld in n dimensions and the dimensionality
      of space problem, Il Nuovo Cim. 27 (1963) 636.

[330] J. A. Casas, C. P. Martin and A. H. Vozmediano, Experimental tests of extra
      dimensions, Phys. Lett. 186B (1987) 29.

[331] P. Dobiasch and D. Maison, Stationary, spherically symmetric solutions of
      Jordan’s uniﬁed theory of gravity and electromagnetism, Gen. Rel. Grav. 14
      (1982) 231.

[332] D. Pollard, Antigravity and classical solutions of ﬁve-dimensional Kaluza-Klein
      theory, J. Phys. A16 (1983) 565.

[333] T. Dereli, Comments on windows to extra dimensions, Phys. Lett. 161B (1985)
      307.

[334] G. W. Gibbons and D. L. Wiltshire, Black holes in Kaluza-Klein theory, Ann.
      Phys. (NY) 167 (1986) 201.

[335] R. C. Myers and M. J. Perry, Black holes in higher dimensional space-time,
      Ann. Phys. (NY) 172 (1986) 304.

[336] F. S. Accetta and M. Gleiser, Thermodynamics of higher-dimensional black
      holes, Ann. Phys. (NY) 176 (1987) 278.

[337] R. C. Myers, Higher-dimensional black holes in compactiﬁed space-times,
      Phys. Rev. D35 (1987) 455.

[338] A. Tomimatsu, Stability of spherically symmetric solutions in ﬁve-dimensional
      general relativity, Prog. Theor. Phys. 74 (1985) 630.

[339] R. Gregory and R. Laﬂamme, Hypercylindrical black holes, Phys. Rev. D37
      (1988) 305.

[340] M. Azreg-Ainou and G. Clément, Stability of the Kaluza-Klein wormhole
      soliton, Gen. Rel. Grav. 25 (1993) 881.

[341] A. Iwazaki, Magnetic monopoles and duality in Kaluza-Klein theory, Prog.
      Theor. Phys. 72 (1984) 834.

[342] P. van Baal, F. A. Bais and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Local compactiﬁcation and
      black holes in d = 11 supergravity, Nucl. Phys. B233 (1984) 477.


                                        99
[343] M. J. Perry, Non-Abelian Kaluza-Klein monopoles, Phys. Lett. 137B (1984)
      171.

[344] I. G. Angus, Magnetic monopoles in Nonabelian Kaluza-Klein theories, Nucl.
      Phys. B264 (1986) 337.

[345] T. Koikawa and M. Yoshimura, Dilaton ﬁelds and event horizon, Phys. Lett.
      189B (1987) 29.

[346] G. W. Gibbons and K. Maeda, Black holes and membranes in higher-
      dimensional theories with dilaton ﬁelds, Nucl. Phys. B298 (1988) 741.

[347] A. R. Liddle, R. G. Moorhouse and A. B. Henriques, Neutron stars and extra
      dimensions, Class. Quant. Grav. 7 (1990) 1009.

[348] H. Liu, Five-dimensional Kaluza-Klein black holes coupled to massive scalar
      particles, Gen. Rel. Grav. 23 (1991) 759.

[349] K. D. Krori, P. Borgohain, N. K. Deka and C. R. Mahanta, Black holes coupled
      to scalar ﬁelds in higher-dimensional Kaluza-Klein theory, Gen. Rel. Grav. 26
      (1994) 291.

[350] U. Bleyer and V. D. Ivashchuk, Mass bounds for multidimensional charged
      dilatonic black holes, Phys. Lett. 332B (1994) 292.

[351] D. L. Wiltshire, Spherically symmetric solutions of Einstein-Maxwell theory
      with a Gauss-Bonnet term, Phys. Lett. 169B (1986) 36.

[352] D. Wurmser, Vacuum state and Schwarzschild solution in ten-dimensional
      gravity, Phys. Rev. D36 (1987) 2970.

[353] F. A. Bais and P. Batenburg, A new class of higher-dimensional Kaluza-Klein
      monopole and instanton solutions, Nucl. Phys. B253 (1985) 162.

[354] A. I. Janis, E. T. Newman and J. Winicour, Reality of the Schwarzschild
      singularity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 20 (1968) 878.

[355] A. I. Janis, D. C. Robinson and J. Winicour, Comments on Einstein scalar
      solutions, Phys. Rev. 186 (1969) 1729.

[356] J. D. Bekenstein, Exact solutions of Einstein-conformal scalar equations, Ann.
      Phys. (NY) 82 (1974) 535.

[357] S. Chatterjee, A class of multidimensional cosmological models and its possible
      astrophysical consequences, Ann. Phys. (NY) 218 (1992) 121.

[358] J. M. Overduin and P. S. Wesson, Constraints on dark matter from
      intergalactic radiation, Vistas Astron. 35 (1992) 439.

[359] P. J. E. Peebles, Principles of physical cosmology (Princeton Univ. Press,
      Princeton, 1993).

[360] R. Adler, M. Bazin and M. Schiﬀer, Introduction to general relativity, 2d ed.
      (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1975).


                                        100
[361] S. Deser and M. Soldate, Gravitational energy in spaces with compactiﬁed
      dimensions, Nucl. Phys. B311 (1988) 739.

[362] T. G. Breimer and R. H. Sanders, Gravitational imaging by elliptical galaxies:
      the eﬀects of dark halos, Astron. Astrophys. 274 (1993) 96.

[363] A. Loeb and S. Mao, Evidence from gravitational lensing for a nonthermal
      pressure support in the cluster of galaxies Abell 2218, Astrophys. J. 435 (1994)
      L109.

[364] X.-P. Wu, Determining gravitational masses of galaxy clusters with virial
      equilibrium and arclike images, Astrophys. J. 436 (1994) L115.

[365] G. Fahlman, N. Kaiser, G. Squires and D. Woods, Dark matter in ms 1224
      from distortion of background galaxies, Astrophys. J. 437 (1994) 56.

[366] R. G. Carlberg, H. K. C. Yee and E. Ellingson, Lensing from the light-traces-
      mass map of ms 1224+20, Astrophys. J. 437 (1994) 63.

[367] M. A. Walker and P. M. Ireland, Rich cluster microlensing, Mon. Not. R.
      Astron. Soc. 275 (1995) L41.

[368] E. F. Guinan and F. P. Maloney, The apsidal motion of the eccentric eclipsing
      binary DI Herculis – an apparent discrepancy with general relativity, Astron.
      J. 90 (1985) 1519.

[369] F. P. Maloney and E. F. Guinan, Eclipsing binary stars as tests of gravity
      theories: the apsidal motion of AS Camelopardalis, Astron. J. 98 (1989) 1800.

[370] J. H. Taylor and J. M. Weisberg, Further experimental tests of relativistic
      gravity using the binary pulsar PSR 1913+16, Astrophys. J. 345 (1989) 434.

[371] N. E. White, X-ray binaries, Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 1 (1989) 85.

[372] A. Wolszczan and D. A. Frail, A planetary system around the millisecond
      pulsar PSR 1257+12, Nature 355 (1992) 145.

[373] S. E. Thorsett and J. A. Phillips, Rocks around the clock: limits on pulsar
      planetary systems, Astrophys. J. 387 (1992) L69.

[374] J. P. Turneaure et al., The Gravity-Probe-B relativity gyroscope experiment:
      approach to a ﬂight mission, in proc. Fourth Marcel Grossman meeting on
      general relativity, ed. R. Ruﬃni (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1986).

[375] R. Reinhard, Y. Jafry & R. Laurance, STEP – A satellite test of the equivalence
      principle, ESA J. 17 (1993) 251.

[376] E. Witten, String theory dynamics in various dimensions, Nucl. Phys. B443
      (1995) 85.

[377] J. H. Schwarz, The power of M theory, Phys. Lett. B367 (1996) 97.

[378] M. J. Duﬀ, M-theory (the theory formerly known as strings), SISSA preprint
      hep-th/9608117 (1996).


                                        101
[379] J. H. Schwarz, Lectures on superstring and M-theory dualities, SISSA preprint
      hep-th/9607201 (1996).




                                       102
