                                                                                                                       PUPT-2399




                                                     Constraining conformal field theories




arXiv:1112.1016v1 [hep-th] 5 Dec 2011
                                                              with a higher spin symmetry


                                                                     Juan Maldacenaa and Alexander Zhiboedovb

                                                        a
                                                            School of Natural Sciences, Institute for Advanced Study
                                                                                Princeton, NJ, USA
                                                                 b
                                                                     Department of Physics, Princeton University
                                                                                Princeton, NJ, USA


                                            We study the constraints imposed by the existence of a single higher spin conserved
                                        current on a three dimensional conformal field theory. A single higher spin conserved
                                        current implies the existence of an infinite number of higher spin conserved currents. The
                                        correlation functions of the stress tensor and the conserved currents are then shown to be
                                        equal to those of a free field theory. Namely a theory of N free bosons or free fermions.
                                        This is an extension of the Coleman-Mandula theorem to CFT’s, which do not have a
                                        conventional S matrix. We also briefly discuss the case where the higher spin symmetries
                                        are “slightly” broken.
                                           Contents

1. Introduction     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           . .    2
  1.1. Organization of the paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            . .    4
2. Generalities about higher spin currents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          . .    5
3. Removing operators in the twist gap, 21 < τ < 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          . .    7
  3.1. Action of the charges on twist one fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        . .    9
4. Basic facts about three point functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          . .   10
  4.1. General expression for three point functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         . .   11
5. Argument using bilocal operators       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       . .   12
  5.1. Light cone limits of correlators of conserved currents . . . . . . . . . . . .       . .   12
  5.2. Getting an infinite number of currents      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      . .   15
  5.3. Definition of bilocal operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          . .   17
  5.4. Constraining the action of the higher spin charges . . . . . . . . . . . . .         . .   19
  5.5. Quantization of Ñ : the case of bosons     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      . .   24
  5.6. Fermionic-like bilocal operators     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       . .   25
  5.7. Quantization of Ñ : the case of fermions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        . .   26
6. Arguments based on more generic three and four point functions . . . . . . . .           . .   27
  6.1. Basic operations in the space of charge conservation identities . . . . . . . .      . .   28
  6.2. From spin three to spin four . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           . .   29
  6.3. Analysis of three point functions using the spin four current.  . . . . . . . .      . .   30
  6.4. Constraining the four point function of j0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         . .   31
  6.5. No parity odd piece      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         . .   33
  6.6. Case of fermions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             . .   33
7. Higher spin symmetries broken at order N1       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      . .   35
8. Case of two conserved spin two currents      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       . .   38
  8.1. Adding higher spin conserved currents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            . .   40
9. Conclusions and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             . .   40
Appendix A. Argument for [Qs , j2 ] = ∂js + · · ·    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      . .   43
Appendix B. An integral expression for the odd three point functions      . . . . . . .     . .   44
  B.1. Light cone limit for the odd three point function . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        . .   46
Appendix C. No odd piece from the one point energy correlator . . . . . . . . . .           . .   47
Appendix D. Half-integer higher spin currents implies even spin higher spin currents .      . .   48
Appendix E. Functions that are annihilated by all charges      . . . . . . . . . . . .      . .   49
  E.1. Proof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              . .   49
  E.2. Functions with Fourier Transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             . .   50
Appendix F. Current conservation equation in terms of cross ratios . . . . . . . . .        . .   50
Appendix G. Four point function of scalar operators in the fermion-like theory . . . .      . .   51
Appendix H. Conformal blocks for free scalar       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      . .   52
Appendix I. Fixing correlators in the light-like limit   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      . .   53
  I.1. Fermions     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           . .   54
  I.2. General operators      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         . .   54
Appendix J. More explicit solutions to the charge conservation identities of section five     .   55
  J.1. Expression for the currents in the free theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         . .   55
  J.2. Analyzing the charge conservation identity      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      . .   57

                                                1
1. Introduction

      The classic Coleman-Mandula result [1], and its supersymmetric extension [2], states
that the maximum spacetime symmetry of a theory with an S-matrix is the super-Poincare
group1 . Interacting conformal field theories are interesting theories that do not have an
S-matrix obeying the assumptions of [1,2]. In this paper we would like to address the
question of whether a CFT can have a spacetime symmetry beyond the conformal group.
We show that if a CFT has a conserved higher spin current, s > 2, then the theory is
essentially free. Namely, all the correlators of the conserved currents are those of a free
theory. In particular, this implies that the energy correlation function observables [3] of
“conformal collider physics” [4] are the same as those of a free theory.
      Let us clearly state the assumptions and the conclusions.
      Assumptions :
 a) The theory is conformal and it obeys all the usual CFT axioms/properties, such as
      the operator product expansion, existence of a stress tensor, cluster decomposition, a
      finite number of primaries with dimensions less than some number, etc.
a’) The two point function of the stress tensor is finite.
 b) The theory is unitary.
 c) The theory contains a conserved current js of spin higher than two s > 2.
 d) We are in three spacetime dimensions.
 e) The theory contains unique conserved current of spin two which is the stress tensor.
      The theorem, or conclusion :
      There is an infinite number of even spin conserved currents that appear in the operator
product expansion of two stress tensor. All correlation function of these currents have two
possible structures. One is identical to that obtained in a theory of N free bosons, with
currents built as O(N ) invariant bilinears of the free bosons. The other is identical to
those of a theory of N free fermions, again with currents given by O(N ) invariant bilinears
in the fermions.
      Let us discuss the assumptions and conclusions in more detail.
      We spelled out a′ ) explicitly, to rule out theories with an infinite number of degrees of
freedom, as in the N = ∞ limit of O(N ) vector models, for example. Unitarity is a very
important assumptions since it allows us to put bounds on the dimensions of operators,
  1
      [2] also mentions the conformal group in the case of massless particles. However, [2] assumed
that these massless particles are free in the IR, so that an S-matrix exists.

                                                 2
etc. We assumed the existence of a higher spin current. One might wonder if one could
have a symmetry which is not generated by a local current. Presumably, a continuous
symmetry implies the existence of an associated current, but, to our knowledge, this has
not been proven2 . Assumption d) should hopefully be replaced by d ≥ 3. Some of the
methods in this paper have a simple extension to higher dimensions, and it should be
straightforward to extend the arguments to all dimensions d ≥ 3. In two dimensions, d = 2,
we expect a richer structure. In fact, the Coleman-Mandula theorem in two dimensions
allows integrable theories [5]. Also there are interesting current algebras in two dimensions
which contain higher spin primaries beyond the stress tensor. An example are the WN
symmetry algebras [6]. The assumption of a unique stress tensor can also be relaxed, at the
expense of making the conclusions a bit more complicated to state. It is really a technical
assumption that simplifies the analysis. In fact, we actually generalize the discussion to
the case that we have exactly two spin two conserved currents. In that case we have a kind
of factorization into two subsectors and one, or both, could have higher spin currents. We
expect something similar for a larger number of spin two currents, but we did not prove
it. A simple theory when there are two spin two conserved currents is the product of a
free theory with a non-trivial interacting theory. In this case all the higher spin currents
live in the free subsector.
      Now, regarding the conclusions, note that we did not prove the existence of a free
field operator φ, in the CFT. The reason why we could not do it is easily appreciated by
considering a theory of N scalar fields where we restrict the operators to be O(N ) singlets.
This is sometimes called “the free O(N ) model”. This theory obeys all the assumptions of
our theorem (as well as the conclusions!) but it does not have a free field in the spectrum.
Short of establishing the existence of free fields, we will show that the theory contains
“bilocal” operators B(x1 , x2 ) and F− (x1 , x2 ) whose correlators are the same as those of
                        PN                            PN
the free field operators i=1 : φi (x1 )φi (x2 ) : and i=1 : ψ−  i       i
                                                                  (x1 )ψ− (x2 ) : in a theory of
free fields. Our statements also concern the infinite number of even spin conserved currents
that appear in the operator product expansion of two stress tensors. We are not making
any statement regarding other possible odd spin conserved currents, or spin two currents
  2
      Of course, if we have a theory given in terms of a Lagrangian, then Noether’s theorem implies
the existence of a current. Also if we assume we can generalize the action of the symmetry to the
case that the parameter has some spacetime dependence, ǫ(x), then the usual argument implies
the existence of an associated current, jµ = δ∂δµ ǫ , where the derivative is acting on the partition
function, or the generating functional of correlation functions.

                                                 3
that do not appear the operator product of two stress tensors. Such currents, if present,
are probably also highly constrained but we leave that to the future.
    Notice that we start from the assumption of certain symmetries. By imposing the
charge conservation identities we obtained the explicit form of the correlators. Thus, we
can view this as a simple example of a realization of the bootstrap program. Namely, we
never used “the Lagrangian”, we derived everything from physical correlation functions
and physical consistency conditions. Of course, the result turned out to be rather trivial
since we get free theory correlation functions. We can also view this as an exercise in
current algebra, now for currents of higher spin.
    Recently, there have been some studies regarding the duality between various O(N )
models in three dimensions and Vasiliev-type theories [7,8,9] in AdS4 [10,11,12] (and dS4
[13]). If one considers a Vasiliev theory with boundary conditions (at the AdS4 boundary)
which preserve the higher spin symmetry, then the theory obeys the assumptions of our
theorem. Thus, our theorem implies that the theory is equivalent to a free theory of scalars
or fermions. This was conjectured in [10] (see references therein for previous work), and
tested in [11,12,14], see also [15,16] . In this context the quantization of N implies that
the coupling constant of a unitary Vasiliev’s theory is quantized, if we preserve the higher
spin symmetry at the AdS boundary.
    It is also interesting to consider the same Vasiliev theory but with boundary conditions
that do not preserve the higher spin charge. An example was proposed in [10] by imposing
a boundary condition for the scalar that produced the “interacting” O(N ) theory, see also
[14]. In such O(N ) models, the higher spin currents acquire an anomalous dimension of
order 1/N . Then the conclusions of our theorem do not apply. However, there are still
interesting constraints on the correlators and we discuss some of them, as an example. It
is likely that this method would give a way to compute correlators in this theory, but we
will leave that for the future.
    There is a large literature on higher spin symmetry, and we refer the reader to the
review [17], which is also available in the arXiv [18,19,20,21,22,23].

1.1. Organization of the paper

    In section two we discuss some generalities about higher spin currents.
    In order to make the discussion clear, we will first present an argument that rules out
theories with operators with low anomalous dimensions. This serves as a simple warm up

                                              4
example to the arguments presented later in the paper for the more general case. This is
done in section three.
     In section four we discuss some general properties of three point functions of currents,
which will be necessary later.
     We then present two slightly different approaches for showing the main conclusion.
The first, in section five, requires a slightly more elaborate construction but it is compu-
tationally more straightforward. The other, in section six, is conceptually more straight-
forward, but it required us to use Mathematica a lot. We have presented both methods,
since they could be useful for other purposes (useful spinoffs). These two sections can be
read almost independently, and the reader should feel free to choose which one to read or
skip first.
     In section seven we discuss the case of slightly broken higher spin symmetry. We just
discuss a couple of simple points, leaving a more general analysis to the future.
     In section eight we discuss the case of exactly two spin two conserved currents.
     In section nine we present some conclusions and discussion.
     We also included several appendices with some more technical results, which could
also be useful for other purposes.



2. Generalities about higher spin currents

     We consider higher spin local operators Jµ1 ···µs that transform in the representation
of spin s of the rotation group. More specifically, if we consider the operator inserted at
the origin, then it transforms in the spin s representation. It is convenient to define the
twist, τ = ∆ − s, where ∆ is the scaling dimension of the operator. In three dimensions,
the unitarity bound restricts the twist of a primary operator to [24]

                                     1                        1
                                 τ≥    ,     for     s = 0,
                                     2                        2                         (2.1)
                                 τ ≥ 1,       for    s ≥ 1.

     The equality in the first line corresponds to free fields: bosons and fermions. While
in the second line it corresponds to conserved currents ∂µ J µ µ2 ···µs = 0.
     From these conserved currents we can build conserved charges by contracting the
current of spin s with an s − 1 index conformal Killing tensor ζ µ1 ···µs−1 , which obeys
∂(µ ζµ1 ···µs−1 ) = 0, where the parenthesis denote the symmetric and traceless part. This

                                               5
condition ensures that Jˆµ = Jµµ1 ···µs−1 ζ µ1 ···µs−1 is a conserved current so that the associ-
                    ∗Jˆ is conserved. A simple way to construct a conformal Killing tensor
                 R
ated charge Q =    Σ
is to take a product of conformal Killing vectors [25]. In a CFT these charges annihilate
the conformal invariant vacuum. These charges are conserved in the sense that their value
does not depend on the hypersurface where we integrate the current. However, they might
not commute with the Hamiltonian, since the Killing vectors can depend explicitly on the
coordinates. This is a familiar phenomenon and it happens already with the ordinary con-
formal generators. These conserved currents lead to identities when they are inserted in
correlation functions of other operators. Namely, imagine we consider an n point function
of operators Oi . Then we will get a “charge conservation identity” of the form
                                  X
                          0=          hO1 (x1 ) · · · [Q, Oi (xi )] · · · On (xn )i        (2.2)
                                  i


If we know the action of Q on each operator this leads to certain equations which we call
“charge conservation identities”.
      In this paper, we will focus exclusively on only one very particular charge that arises
from a Killing tensor with only minus components. Namely, only ζ −···− is nonzero, and
the rest of the components are zero. Here x− is a light cone coordinate. We think of the
three coordinates as3 ds2 = dx+ dx− + dy 2 . We denote the charge associated to the spin s
current by                    Z
                       Qs =                 dx− dy js ,               js ≡ Js,−···−        (2.3)
                                x+ =const

We have also defined js to be the current with all minus indices. Also from now on we will
denote by ∂ ≡ ∂x− .
      From now on we will consider the twist operator τ defined so that it is the anomalous
dimension minus the spin in the ± directions (or boost generator in the ± direction). Note
that Qs has spin s − 1. One can check that it has twist zero. This is a very important
property of this particular Qs charge which we will heavily use.
      One more general property that we will need is the following. The fact that Qs has a
non-trivial dimension (s − 1) under the dilatation operator implies that

                              [Qs , j2 ] ∝ ∂js + · · · ,                s>1                (2.4)

  3
      Throughout the paper we consider x± as independent variables.

                                                      6
(recall that ∂ = ∂− ). This is indicating that the current js , from which we formed the
charge Qs is appearing in the right hand side of the commutator (2.4). Here j2 is the stress
tensor of the theory. This is shown in more detail in appendix A. This fact is also related
to the following. For any operator O, the three point function hOOj2 i is nonzero, where j2
is the stress tensor. This should be non-zero because the stress tensor generates conformal
transformations. In particular, the stress tensor should always be present in the OPE of
two identical operators. Here we are using that the two point function of the stress tensor
is finite. (The stress tensor comes with a natural normalization so that it makes sense to
talk about the coefficient in its two point function).
    Note that two point functions of conserved currents are proportional to

                                                         (x+
                                                           12 )
                                                                2s
                                 hjs (x1 )js (x2 )i ∝                                   (2.5)
                                                        |x12 |4s+2

(Recall that our definition of js (2.3) contains only the minus components.)



3. Removing operators in the twist gap, 21 < τ < 1

    Notice that all operators with spin s ≥ 1 should have twist bigger or equal to one.
However, operators with spin s = 0, 12 can have twists less than one. If τ = 1/2, we have
a free field which can be factored out of the theory. In this section we show that it is very
easy to eliminate operators with twists in the range 12 < τ < 1. We call this range the
“twist gap”. This will serve as a warm up exercise for the rest of the paper.
    To keep the discussion simple, let us assume that we have a conserved current of spin
four, j4 . (We will show in the next section that a current of spin four is always present
as soon as we have any higher spin current). Let us see how this current could act on a
scalar operator of spin zero φ and twist in the twist gap, 12 < τ < 1. The action of the
charge Q4 , [Q4 , φ], preserves the twist. Q4 cannot annihilate φ since the operator product
expansion of φφ contains the stress tensor (the unique spin two conserved current), and
Q4 cannot annihilate the stress tensor due to (2.4). The right hand side of [Q4 , φ] should
be a combination of local operators and derivatives. We cannot have explicit functions of
the coordinates since that would imply that Q4 does not commute with translations. The
fact that Q4 commutes with translations can be seen from its integral expression (2.3) and
the conservation of the current. The operator that appears in the right hand side has to
have the same twist as φ. Thus, it should be a scalar. The only derivative that does not

                                                7
change the twist is ∂ = ∂− . This derivative should be present three times due to spin
conservation. In conclusion, we have that

                                                       3
                                           [Q4 , φ] = ∂− φ                               (3.1)

If we had many scalar operators of the same twist we would get [Q4 , φa ] = cab ∂ 3 φb , where
cab is symmetric due to the charge conservation identities for Q4 acting on hφa φb i ∝ δab .
Thus, we can diagonalize cab and we return to (3.1).
      As the next step we can write the charge conservation identity for the action of Q4
on the four point functions of these fields. It is convenient to do it in momentum space.
Then we have
                            4
                            X
                           [ (ki− )3 ]hφ(k1 )φ(k2 )φ(k3 )φ(k4 )i = 0                     (3.2)
                               i=1

Using momentum conservation, and writing ki = ki− for the minus component of the
momentum, we find
                        4
                        X
                               ki3 = −3(k1 + k2 )(k1 + k3 )(k2 + k3 ) = 0.               (3.3)
                         i=1

when it acts on the four point function. Thus, the four point function is proportional
to δ(ki1 + ki2 )δ(ki3 + ki4 ) and other two terms obtained by permutations. Together with
rotational invariance and conformal invariance, this means that the four point function is
a sum of two point functions

            hφ(x1 )φ(x2 )φ(x3 )φ(x4 )i = hφ(x1 )φ(x2 )ihφ(x3 )φ(x4 )i + permutations     (3.4)

Now we will show that the only operators that can obey (3.4) are free fields (see [26]).
For that purpose we perform the ordinary operator product expansion as |x12 | → 0. The
first term in (3.4) gives the contribution of the identity operator. The other two terms are
analytic around x12 = 0. Thus, they correspond to operators with twists τint = 2τ + n,
with n ≥ 0, where τ is the twist of φ. If this twist is τ > 1/2, then the stress tensor, which
has twist one, would not appear in this operator product expansion. But the stress tensor
should always appear in the OPE of two identical currents. Thus, the only possible value
is τ = 1/2 and we have a free field. Such a free field will decouple from the rest of the
theory.
      Actually, by a similar argument we can eliminate spin 1/2 operators in the twist gap,
1
2   < τ < 1. We repeat the above arguments for the particular component ψ = ψ− (the

                                                 8
spin 1/2 component as opposed to the spin -1/2). All the arguments go through with no
change up to (3.3). That equation restricts the x− dependence only. However, conformal
symmetry and rotational invariance allow us to compute the four point function for any
component ψα , and we find an answer that factorizes. Which then implies again τ = 1/2
and a free fermion.
      Note also that the analysis leading to (3.1) also constrains how all higher spin charges
act on free fields, [Qs , φ] = ∂ s−1 φ, and similarly for fermions (we can show it easily for the
ψ− component and then the Dirac equation ensures that it acts in the same way on both
components ψα 4 ).
      At this point we should mention a qualitative argument for the reason that we get
free fields. If we form wavepackets for the fields φ centered around some momentum and
somewhat localized in space, then the action of the charge Q4 will displace them by an
amount which is proportional to the square of their momenta. Thus, if the wavepackets
were colliding in some region, then these displacements would make them miss. Here we
use that d ≥ 3.
      The results of this section can be very simply extended to d ≥ 3. There the twist gap
exists in the region d−2
                      2 ≤ τ < d − 2, with the lower bound corresponding to free fields.
      Returning to d = 3, in what follows, we will mostly consider the twist one operators
that correspond to conserved currents. The idea will be similar, we first constrain the action
of the higher spin charges and then determine the correlation functions of the operators.
      We will present two independent ways of doing this. The first involves the notion
of light cone operator product expansions and it is a bit more direct. It is presented in
section five. The second involves a more explicit analysis of three point functions and it is
conceptually easier, but computationally more complicated (needs use of Mathematica).
It is presented in section six. The reader can choose which one to read and/or skip. But
first some further generalities.

3.1. Action of the charges on twist one fields

      Before jumping to those sections, let us make some preliminary statements on the
action of charges Qs on twist one operators. Since Qs has twist zero, the only things we
can have in the right hand side are other twist one fields. These include other (or the same)
twist one fields. Even if we had fields in the twist gap ( 21 < τ < 1), they cannot appear in

  4
      Here we again use that [Qs , Pµ ] = 0.

                                               9
the right hand side of a twist one current transformation, due to twist conservation and
the fact that derivatives can change the twist, at most by integer amounts. Thus, we have
the general transformation law

                                           s′ X
                                              +s−1
                                                                        ′        ′′
                      [Qs , js′ ] =                         αs,s′ ,s′′ ∂ s +s−1−s js′′           (3.5)
                                      s′′ =max[s′ −s+1,0]


(the limits of the sum are explained below). Here we wrote explicitly arbitrary constants
αs,s′ ,s′′ appearing in front of each term, below we will assume them implicitly. We will also
sometimes omit the derivatives. The sum (3.5) can involve twist one and s = 0, 1/2 fields,
which are not conserved currents, but we still denote them by j0 , j1/2 . Here everything
has minus indices which we have not indicated. The derivatives are also minus derivatives.
The number of derivatives is easily fixed by matching the spin on both sides.
    One easy property we can prove is the following, if current jy appears in the right
hand side of [Qs , jx ], then we should have that current jx appears in the right hand side
of [Qs , jy ]. This follows by considering the action of Qs on the hjx jy i two point function
and (2.5). In summary,

              [Qs , jx ] = ∂ s+x−y−1 jy + · · · ⇒            [Qs , jy ] = ∂ s+y−x−1 jx + · · ·   (3.6)

This has a simple consequence which is the fact that the spread of spins s′′ in (3.5) is
as indicated in (3.5). The upper limit in (3.5) is obvious. The lower limit in (3.5) arises
from the fact that the current js′ should appear in the right hand side of [Qs , js′′ ], and the
upper limit in this commutator, results in the lower limit in (3.5).



4. Basic facts about three point functions

    For our analysis it is important to understand the structure of the three point functions
of conserved currents and other operators in d = 3.
    This problem was analyzed in [27] (see also [28]). Unfortunately, it is not clear to us
what was proven and what was the result of a case by case analysis with a later extrap-
olation (a “physics” proof). Thus, in appendix I we prove the results that will be crucial
for section five. These only involve certain light-like limits of the correlators. For section
six we need some particular cases with low spin, where the statements in [27,28] can be
explicitly checked.

                                                     10
       Nevertheless, let us summarize the results of [27]. The three point function of the
conserved currents has, generically, three distinct pieces

               hjs1 js2 js3 i = hjs1 js2 js3 iboson + hjs1 js2 js3 if ermion + hjs1 js2 js3 iodd .   (4.1)

       Here the piece hjs1 js2 js3 iboson is generated by the theory of free bosons. The piece
hjs1 js2 js3 if ermion is generated by the theory of free fermion and the piece hjs1 js2 js3 iodd
is not generated by free theories. The boson and fermion pieces are known in closed form
while the odd piece can be computed in each particular case explicitly by imposing the
conservation of the currents. By considering particular examples it was observed that the
odd piece is non-zero whenever the triangle rule is satisfied

                                             si ≤ si+1 + si+2 .                                      (4.2)

In appendix B we derive an integral expression for these odd correlators that naturally
incorporates this triangle rule. We start with free higher spin conformal fields in four
dimensions, introduce a conformal invariant perturbation, and look at correlators on a
three dimensional slice. The correlators automatically obey the conservation condition
and are conformal invariant. See appendix B for more details.
       Another property of three point functions which we found useful is that any three
point function of the two identical5 currents with the third one that has an odd spin is
zero
                                    hjs js js′ i = 0          for s′ odd                             (4.3)

This is easy to check for the explicit expressions for the boson and fermion solutions. It is
also can be seen from the integral representation for the odd piece.

4.1. General expression for three point functions

       The space of three point functions of conserved currents is conveniently split into two
parts according to their transformation under the parity. Practically, we call “even” ones
the three point functions that do not contain the three dimensional epsilon tensor and
“odd” the ones that do.
       The parity even correlation functions are generated by
                                    1
                       Feven = e 2 (Q1 +Q2 +Q3 ) eP1 +P2 (b cosh P3 + f sinh P3 )                    (4.4)
  5
       We need literally the same current. It is not enough that they have the same spin.

                                                       11
where the piece proportional to b stands for correlation functions in the theory of free
bosons and the one proportional to f for the ones in the free fermion theory6 . The Pi and
Qi are some cross ratios whose form can be found in [27]. For currents which have indices
only along the minus direction we can find the simple expressions

                                                                                          x+
              Qi = ℓ2i (x̂+         +
                          i,i+1 − x̂i,i−1 ) ,        Pi = ℓi+1 ℓi−1 x̂+
                                                                      i−1,i+1 ,   x̂+ =             (4.5)
                                                                                          x2

where ℓi are the parameters in the generating function. In other words the term with ℓ2s
                                                                                      1
                                                                                         1


gives us the current js1 (x1 ), etc.
      When spins of the currents are integer (4.4) reproduces the results given in [27], but
(4.4) also gives the answer for half integer spin currents7 .
      Due to the different behavior under P3 → −P3 the bosonic and fermionic parts never
mix inside the charge conservation identities for three point functions that we will consider.
Thus, whenever we can solve the charge conservation identities they are satisfied separately
for f = 0 and b = 0 parts.


5. Argument using bilocal operators

      Here we present an argument for the main conclusion.

5.1. Light cone limits of correlators of conserved currents

      We consider the light cone OPE limit of two conserved currents js (x)js′ (0). All indices
are minus. We will consider the twist one contribution to the OPE8 . This can be cleanly
separated from the lower twist contribution which can only arise from the identity or spin
  6
      An equivalent, but symmetric version of (4.4) is given by

                                                                 b − f −2P1
                      1 (Q +Q +Q )
                                                                                               
                                         (P1 +P2 +P3 )
          Feven = e   2   1  2  3
                                     e                   × b+f +      [e    + e−2P2 + e−2P3 ]
                                                                   3


  7
      Note that for half integer spins the labels b and f just give two different possible structures,
since, of course we need both bosons and fermions to have half integer spins
  8
      Here we consider the contribution of twist exactly one. This should not be confused with
discussions in weakly coupled theories where one is interested in the whole tower of operators
which have twists close to one (or in four dimensions twist close to two). Such operators appear
in discussions of deep inelastic scattering and parton distribution functions.

                                                           12
s = 0, 21 operators. This clean separation is possible because there is a finite number of
operators in the twist gap, 12 < τ < 1. To extract the twist one contribution of a given spin,
we can consider the three point functions hjs (x1 )js′ (x2 )js′′ (x3 )i. We can also consider the
contribution of all spins together by taking the following light-like limits.
     We take the limit x+
                        12 → 0 first. Then we take the limit y12 → 0. By twist conservation,
the correlator could behave only like 1/|y12 | or like 1/y12 , in this limit. The fermion piece
vanishes when we take x+
                       12 → 0. One can see that the 1/y12 behavior can be produced
only by a parity odd piece. This follows from the fact that we can put the third current
at y3 = 0, but at generic x±
                           3 . This still allows us to extract any possible twist one current
that appears in the OPE limit. However, the parity transformation y → −y would change
the sign of the correlator only if we have a 1/y12 term in the OPE. Below, the part that
contains the 1/|y12 | behavior is called the “boson” piece. It comes from the boson piece of
the three point functions.
     Similarly, we can look at the piece that goes like x+                     +
                                                         12 in the limit that x12 goes to zero.
                                                  x+
Then we extract the piece going like |y1212|3 .
     More explicitly, these limits are defined by
                                     
    js js ′ b =       lim + lim           |y12 | lim js (x1 )js′ (x2 ) − (lower)
                  y12 →0+   y12 →0−            x+
                                                12 →0
                                                                                                            (5.1)
                                                 |y12 |3
                                                                                                     
                                                                                1
   js js ′ f =        lim + lim            lim            js (x1 )js′ (x2 ) −        js js′ b − (lower)
                  y12 →0+   y12 →0−       x+
                                           12 →0
                                                  x+12                        |y12 |

where we have indicated by an underline the fact that we take the light-like limit (and the
subindex on the line reminds us which of the two limits we took). We will also indicate by
an underline points that are light-like separated along x− . In the fermion like limit (5.1),
we have indicated that we extracted the boson piece. However, in practice we will only
use it when the boson piece vanishes. Thus, there is no ambiguity in extracting the limit.
We also extract any possible twist less than one operators that could appear. There is a
finite list of them. Thus, there is no problem in extracting the lower twist operators. In
section three we have eliminated these lower twist operators by making the assumption
of the existence of Q4 . Here we have not yet derived the existence of Q4 , so we had to
argue that these lower twist operators do not affect the definition of the limits and the
extraction of the twist one contribution to the OPE. In fact, from now on, these lower
twist contribution play no role. After we show the existence of Q4 , we can then remove

                                                         13
them using section three. We could define also a limit that extracts the odd piece, but we
will not need it.
       The three point functions simplify dramatically in this limit. For the boson part we
have                                  
                     lim + lim              lim |x12 |hjs1 js2 js3 ib ∝ ∂1s1 ∂2s2 hφφ∗ js3 if ree ;
                 y12 →0+     y12 →0−       x+
                                            12 →0
                                                                                                        s3   (5.2)
                                                          ∗                  1               1      1
                                                      hφφ js3 if ree ∝ √                        −
                                                                           x̂13 x̂23       x̂13   x̂23
             ∗
where hφφ js3 if ree stands for the correlation function of a free complex boson. The un-
derline reminds us that the points are light-like separated, but there is no limit involved.
The reason we take a complex boson is to allow for non-zero values when s is odd. We
have displayed only the x−           9
                         i dependence and we have defined a slightly shifted version of
the coordinates
                                                                                              2
                                                                                             y13
                           x̂1 = x−
                                  1 ,            x̂2 = x−
                                                        2 ,             x̂3 = x−
                                                                               3 −                             (5.3)
                                                                                             x+
                                                                                              13

We should emphasize that in (5.2) the expression hφφ∗ js3 if ree denotes a correlator in a
theory of a free complex boson. In particular, js3 is not the original current in the unknown
theory, but the current of the free boson theory.
     For a free boson theory, it is easy to see why (5.2) is true. For a free boson the currents
                                  ∂ φ∂ φ . When we take the limit x+
                              P i s−i ∗
are given by expressions like                                              12 → 0 only one term
survives from the two sums associated to js1 and js2 (recall that ∂ = ∂− ). The reason is
that we need a contraction of the scalar with no derivatives in order not to bring down a
factor x+
        12 in the numerator. That single term contains all the derivatives on the φ fields
that are contracted with js3 .
       Actually, without assuming the explicit forms given in [27], one can prove that (5.2)
follows, in the light cone limit, from conformal symmetry and current conservation for the
third current. Since this is a crucial point for our arguments, we provide an explicit proof
of (5.2) in appendix I.
      Using the same reasoning for the fermion part we obtain (see appendix I)

                              |x12 |3
                      
                                                      s1 −1 s2 −1
          lim + lim      lim     + hjs1 js2 js3 if ∝ ∂1      ∂2 hψψ ∗ js3 if ree ;
        y12 →0+ y12 →0− x+ →0 x12
                         12
                                                                                s3 −1                        (5.4)
                                        ∗                   1          1      1
                                    hψψ js3 if ree ∝                      −
                                                     (x̂13 x̂23 )3/2 x̂13   x̂23
  9                                 1           1
       There is also a factor of           =         in the right hand side of (5.2).
                                   x+
                                    13
                                               x+
                                                23


                                                              14
where ψ stands for a free complex fermion. If s = 0, then hψψ ∗ j0 if ree = 0, and the limit
in the first line of (5.4) vanishes. This is simply the statement that in a free fermion theory
we do not have a twist one spin zero operator.
     As an aside, for the odd piece one can obtain a similar expression, given in appendix
B. This will not be necessary here, since the higher spin symmetry will eliminate the odd
piece and we will not need to know its explicit form.

5.2. Getting an infinite number of currents

     Imagine we have a current of spin s. From (2.4) we know that [Qs , j2 ] = ∂js + · · ·.
Then (3.6) implies that
                                         [Qs , js ] = ∂ 2s−3 j2 + · · ·                                   (5.5)

Let us first
                                      assume that hj2 j2 j2 i|b 6= 0                                      (5.6)

We now consider the charge conservation identity for Qs acting on hj2 j2 b js i, where we
mean a charge conservation identity that results from acting with Qs on hj2 j2 js i and then
taking the light cone limit for the first two variables. In other words, we get

                         0 = h[Qs , j2 ]j2 js i + hj2 [Qs , j2 ]js i + hj2 j2 [Qs , js ]i                 (5.7)

In the first two terms we first expand the commutator using (3.5) and then take the light
cone limit using (5.2). We will consider first the case of integer s. Then the first two terms
in (5.7), produce

               h[Qs , j2 ]j2 js i + hj2 [Qs , j2 ]js i = ∂12 ∂22 γ∂1s−1 + δ∂2s−1 hφφ∗ js if ree
                                                                               
                                                                                                          (5.8)

Here the symmetry under x1 ↔ x2 implies that γ = (−1)s δ, due to the symmetries of
(5.2). In the third term in (5.7), when Qs acts on js , we generate many possible operators
through (3.5). Each of those currents might or might not have an overlap with j2 j2 b . Thus,
combining this with (5.8) we conclude that the charge conservation identity that results
from acting with Qs on hj2 j2 b js i is

                                                                 2s−1
                   "                                                                                  #
                                                                 X
     0 = ∂12 ∂22   γ(∂1s−1 + (−1)s ∂2s−1 )hφφ∗ js if ree +              α̃k ∂32s−1−k hφφ∗ jk if ree       (5.9)
                                                                  k=1

where α̃k is the product of the constants in (3.5) and the actual value of the boson part of
the three point function. The overall derivatives can be removed since the right hand side

                                                       15
is a sum of terms of the form xa 1xb where a and b are half integer, so if a term was non-
                                   13   23
zero before the derivative acted it would be non-zero afterwards, and terms with different
powers cannot cancel each other. Notice that (5.9) involves the explicit functions defined
in (5.2). An important property of these functions is that hφφ∗ jk if ree has a zero of order
k when x−
        12 → 0, and the ∂3 derivative does not change the order of this zero. This implies
that all the terms in the last sum in (5.9) are independent. Thus, all the α̃k are fixed. We
know that α̃2 is nonzero due to (5.5) and (5.6). Here we used that the spin two current is
unique so that there is no other contribution that could cancel the j2 contribution. Given
that this term is non-zero, then γ is nonzero. The α̃k for odd k are set to zero by the
x1 ↔ x2 symmetry of the whole original equation, (5.7). The rest of the α̃k are fixed, and
are equal to what we would obtain in a free theory, which is the unique solution of (5.9).
It is then possible to check that all α̃k , with k = 2, 4, · · · , 2s − 2 are non-zero. The explicit
proof of this statement is given in appendix J.
     In particular, this implies that the current j4 is in the spectrum, and it is in the right
hand side of the j2 j2 b OPE. This is true regardless of whether the original s is even or odd.
Now we can go back to section three and remove the operators in the twist gap, 21 < τ < 1.
     Since s > 2, we find that 2s − 2 > s, so that we are also finding currents with spins
bigger than the original one. Thus, repeating the argument we find an infinite number of
conserved currents.
     We now show that a twist one scalar j0 is present in the spectrum, and in the right
hand side of j2 j2 b . This can be shown by considering the Q4 charge conservation identity
acting on hj2 j2 b j2 i. This leads to an expression very similar to (5.9), but with different
limits in the sum (see (3.5)), such that now a non-zero α̃4 implies the existence of j0 . Now,
considering the ward identity from Q4 on hj2 j2 b j0 i we show that j2 is in the right hand
side of
                                   [Q4 , j0 ] = ∂ 3 j0 + ∂j2 + · · ·                          (5.10)

where the dots denote other twist one operators that have no overlap with j2 j2 b which could
possibly appear. Let us now show that the fermion components are zero. We consider the
charge conservation identity from Q4 on hj2 j2 f j0 i. Notice that hj2 j2 f j0 i = 0, see (5.4).
Thus, this charge conservation identity implies that hj2 j2 j2 if = 0. Here we have used that
there is a unique stress tensor since we assumed that the j2 appearing at various places is
always the same. Thus, if hj2 j2 j2 ib 6= 0, then hj2 j2 j2 if = 0. Conversely, if hj2 j2 j2 if 6= 0,
then hj2 j2 j2 ib = 0, and the discussion after (5.9) implies that also hj2 j2 b js i = 0 for all s.

                                                  16
      In the case that hj2 j2 j2 if is nonzero, we can start with a ward identity similar to (5.9),
but for hj2 j2 f js i. We find an identical conclusion, an infinite set of even spin currents in
the right hand side of j2 j2 f . (See appendix J for an explicit demonstration). In conclusion,
due to the uniqueness of the stress tensor we have only one of two cases:
                                                                       ∞
                                                                       X
                  hj2 j2 j2 ib 6=0 , ⇒ hj2 j2 j2 if = 0 , j2 j2 b =          [j2k ] , j2 j2 f = 0
                                                                       k=0
                                                                        ∞
                                                                                                    (5.11)
                                                                       X
                  hj2 j2 j2 if 6=0 , ⇒ hj2 j2 j2 ib = 0 , j2 j2 f =          [j2k ] , j2 j2 b = 0
                                                                       k=1


where the brackets denote currents and their derivatives. In other words, the brackets are
the contribution of the conformal block of the current js to the twist one part of the OPE.
      It is also possible to start with a half integer s, higher spin conserved current js and to
obtain a charge conservation identity similar to (5.9) (we describe it in detail in appendix
D). This again shows that currents with even spins k = 2, 4, · · · 2s − 1 appear in the right
hand side of j2 j2 b or j2 j2 f . Again, if s ≥ 5/2 we get higher spin conserved currents with
even spins and we return to the previous case.10
      In the next two subsections we consider the first case in (5.11) and then the second.

5.3. Definition of bilocal operators

      In the light-like limit we encountered a correlator which was essentially given by a
product of free fields (5.2). Here we will argue that we can “integrate” the derivatives
and define a bilocal operator B(x1 , x2 ) with x1 and x2 separated only along the minus
direction.
      Now, let us make a comment on light cone OPE’s. The light cone OPE of two currents
js js′ b , contains only twist one fields of various spins. The overlap with each individual
current is computed by (5.2). In particular, all such limits will contain a common factor of
      ′
∂1s ∂2s . We can “integrate” such derivatives and define a quasi-bilocal operator B̂(x1 , x2 )
such that
                                                           ′
                                         js js′ b = ∂1s ∂2s B̂(x1 , x2 )                            (5.12)

 10
          If we have a half integer higher spin current, we will also have a supercurrent, a spin 3/2
current. This then requires that both hj2 js j2 ib and hj2 j2 j2 if are nonzero. Since we had the
dichotomy (5.11), we should have more than one spin two conserved current if there is any half
integer higher spin current.

                                                      17
The underline reminds us that x1 and x2 are null separated (along the x− direction). Here
the right hand side is simply a superposition of twist one fields and their derivatives. They
are defined such that

                                                           ′
                           hjs js′ b js′′ (x3 )i = ∂1s ∂2s hB̂(x1 , x2 )js′′ (x3 )i        (5.13)


Of course, we also see that hB̂(x1 , x2 )js (x3 )i ∝ hφ(x1 )φ∗ (x2 )js3 (x3 )if ree . This implies
that B̂ transforms as two weight 1/2 fields under conformal transformations.
       A particular one we will focus on is the quasi-bilocal that we get from the stress tensor,
defined by

                                       j2 j2 b = ∂12 ∂22 B(x1 , x2 )                       (5.14)

These are reminiscent of the (Fourier transform along x− of the) operators whose matrix
elements define parton distribution functions. One very important difference is that here
we are constructing B only from the operators that have twist exactly equal to one.
       We can define similar operators in the case of fermions

                                                       ′
                                  js js′ f = ∂1s−1 ∂2s −1 F̂− (x1 , x2 ),
                                                                                           (5.15)
                                   j2 j2 f = ∂1 ∂2 F− (x1 , x2 )

Here F− transforms as the product of two free fermions with minus polarizations :
ψ− (x1 )ψ− (x2 ) :. It is defined again through (5.4), by “integrating” the derivatives. It
is the superposition of all the (even spin) currents that appear in the right hand side of
j2 j2 f .
       We call these operators “quasi-bilocals” because they transform under conformal
transformations as a product of two elementary fields. This does not mean that they
are honest local operators, in the sense that their correlators have the properties of prod-
ucts of fields, with singularities only at the insertion of other operators. This is illustrated
in appendix H. Our task will be to show that in a theory with higher spin symmetry, they
become true bilocal operators, with correlators equal to the free field ones. The first step
is to constrain the action of Qs on B and F− in (5.14), (5.15).

                                                     18
5.4. Constraining the action of the higher spin charges

    Here we will show that

                            [Qs , B(x1 , x2 )] = (∂1s−1 + ∂2s−1 )B(x1 , x2 )                       (5.16)

Then we will show that this implies that their correlators have the free field form. Let
us first assume that hj2 j2 j2 ib is nonzero. In (5.16) we consider charges Qs with s even
constructed out of the currents js that appear in the right hand side of j2 j2 b . As we saw
before, there is an infinite number of such currents.
    We would like to compute [Qs , B(x1 , x2 )]. We can compute [Qs , j2 , j2 b ] = [Q, j2 ]j2 +
                                                                                                     b
j2 [Q, j2 ] . In other words, the action of Qs commutes with the limit. This follows from
        b
the charge conservation identity of Qs on hj2 j2 jk i and taking the light cone limit, which
gives
              h[Qs , j2 ]j2 jk i + hj2 [Qs , j2 ]jk i = −hj2 j2 [Qs , jk ]i = h[Qs , j2 j2 ]jk i   (5.17)

So, we can write [Q, j2 ] in terms of currents and derivatives (with indices and derivatives
all along the minus directions). Thus, in the end we can use the formula (5.13) to write

        [Qs , B(x1 , x2 )] = (∂1s−1 + ∂2s−1 )B̃(x1 , x2 ) + (∂1s−1 − ∂2s−1 )B ′ (x1 , x2 )         (5.18)

B̃ contains all the even currents and it is symmetric under the interchange of x1 and x2
and B ′ contains the odd currents and it is antisymmetric under the interchange. Of course,
the full expression is symmetric under this interchange.
    Let us first show that B ′ is zero. Since B ′ is odd, it includes only odd currents js′
with s′ odd. Imagine that B ′ contains a particular odd current js′ . Then, if s′ > 1, we
consider the charge conservation identity coming from the action of Qs′ on hB ′ j2 i

                    0 =h[Qs′ , B ′ ]j2 i + hB ′ [Qs′ , j2 ]i
                                                                ′
                                                               sX +1                               (5.19)
                              ′          ′                                  ′
                    0 =γ(∂ s −1 − ∂ s −1 )hφφ∗ j2 i +                  α̃k ∂3s +1−k hφφ∗ jk i
                                                               k=0

This charge conservation identity is very similar, in structure, to the one we considered
in (5.9). Namely, the last term contains a sum over various currents which give rise to
different functional forms. Therefore all α̃k ’s are fixed. α̃s′ is nonzero because [Qs′ , j2 ]
contains js′ , (2.4). The rest of the terms are fixed to the same coefficients that we would
have if we were considering the same charge conservation identity in a free theory of a

                                                     19
complex boson11 . In particular, as shown in appendix J, [Qs′ , j2 ] produce a j1 whose
overlap with B ′ is nonzero. Once we have shown that j1 appears in B ′ , we can consider
the charge conservation identity for Qs on hBj1 i.

                     0 = h[Qs , Bj1 ]i = (∂1s−1 − ∂2s−1 )hB ′ j1 i + hB[Qs , j1 ]i            (5.20)

Here the first term is non-zero. Analyzing this charge conservation identity, one can show
that it can be obeyed, for a non-zero first term, only if [Qs , j1 ] contains a js in the right
hand side. The analysis of this charge conservation identity is somewhat similar to the
previous ones and it is discussed in more detail in appendix J. Here we have used that Qs
is a current that appears in the right hand side of j2 j2 b . In other words, Qs is built out
of the same current js that appears in the right hand side of [Qs , j1 ]. This implies that
hjs js j1 i would need to be non-zero12 . However all such three point functions are zero when
the two js currents are identical (4.3). Since we reached a contradiction, we conclude that
B ′ is zero.
      We would like now to show that B̃ is the same as B. We know that B̃ is non-zero
because we can consider the charge conservation identity for Qs on hBj2 i, and use that js
appears in the right hand side of [Qs , j2 ]. This implies that hB̃j2 i is nonzero. In fact, we
can normalize it in such a way that j2 appears in the same way on B and B̃. Then we
can consider B − B̃. This does not contain a j2 . Here we are using that there is a unique
j2 in the theory. Say that js′ , with s′ even and s′ > 2, is a candidate current to appear
in the right hand side of B − B̃. We can consider the Qs′ charge conservation identity for
h(B − B̃)j2 i. This charge conservation identity has a form similar to (5.19),
                                                          ′
                                                         sX +1
                             ′        ′                               ′
                    0 = γ(∂1s −1 + ∂2s −1 )hφφ∗ j2 i +           α̃k ∂3s +1−k hφφ∗ jk i       (5.21)
                                                         k=0


Here we are assuming that α̃s′ is non-zero. However, this equation would also show that
α̃2 is non-zero which is now in contradiction with the fact that B − B̃ does not contain j2
(see appendix J). So we have shown that B − B̃ cannot have any current of spin s′ > 0.

 11
      In (5.19) all αk with even k are set to zero.
 12
    Let’s emphasize again we consider js that appears in the OPE of j2 j2 ∼ js . Then, in principle,
we can have [Qs , j1 ] = αjs + β j˜s + .... The charge conservation identity (5.20) implies that α is
non-zero. This implies that hjs js j1 i must be non-zero.

                                                  20
     Let us now focus on a possible spin zero operator j0′ . We put a prime to distinguish
it from j0 which is the one that appears in B. j0′ might or might not be equal to j0 .
If hj0 j0′ i 6= 0, then we can consider the charge conservation identity for Q4 acting on
h(B − B̃)j0 i. Using (5.10) we get a non-zero term when Q4 acts on j0 producing j0 .
However, this charge conservation identity cannot be obeyed if we are setting the term
involving j2 to zero. Thus, hj0 j0′ i = 0. Then there is some even current in the j2 j2 b , call it
s′′ , such that [Qs , js′′ ] ∼ j0′ +· · ·. From (3.5) this implies that s′′ < s. Then we consider the
action of Qs on h(B − B̃)js′′ i. This action produces (up to derivatives) both h(B − B̃)j0′ i
and h(B − B̃)j2 i. But given that the second is zero, then the first is also zero. This charge
conservation identity is very similar to the others we have been discussing (see appendix
J). Here it is important that s′′ < s, so that we get a constraint on h(B − B̃)j0′ i. So we
conclude that there cannot be any j0′ in B − B̃.
     In conclusion, we have shown that (5.16) holds when x1 and x2 are null separated
along the minus direction.
     Now, once we argued that (5.16) is true, then we can consider any n point function
of bilinears hB(x1 , x2 ) · · · B(x2n−1 , x2n )i. We have an infinite number of constraints from
all the conserved charges (5.16). These constraints take the form
               2n
               X
                     ∂is−1 hB(x1 , x2 ) · · · B(x2n−1 , x2n )i = 0 ,   s = 2, 4, 6, · · ·     (5.22)
               i=1


where ∂i = ∂x− . This constrains the x−
                                      i dependence of this correlator. We show in
                 i

appendix E that this constrains the correlator to be a sum of functions of differences
x−     −   −     −                         −
 i − xj , xl − xk . More explicitly, the xi dependence is such that the correlator is a
                                             −               −          −
sum of functions of the form σ gσ (x−
                            P
                                     σ(1) − xσ(2) , · · · , xσ(2n−1) − xσ(2n) ), where σ are the
various permutations of 2n elements. In principle, these functions, gσ are all different.
     In addition, we know that the correlator should respect conformal symmetry and
rotational invariance. Thus, it should be a function of conformal dimension 1/2 at each
                                                                  −
location and a function of distances dik . Of course, d2ij = x+                  2
                                                              ij xij + (yi − yj ) . Thus, we
can now write the function in terms of distances. Let us explain this point a bit more.
We have defined the bilocals in terms of an operator product expansion. But we have
also noticed that we can also view these bilocals as special conformal block like objects
written in terms of currents. From that perspective, the transformation properties under
conformal transformations are identical to those of a product of bosonic fields. This is
                                                                           −
what we are using at this point. Thus, for each function gσ , say g(x−
                                                                     13 , x24 , · · ·) we can now


                                                     21
write ĝ(d13 , d24 , · · ·). But in addition, under conformal transformations, the function has
to have weight one half with respect to each variable. Thus, it can only be a function of
the form
                                                          1 1
                               ĝ(d13 , d24 , · · ·) =           × (· · ·)              (5.23)
                                                         d13 d24
where the product runs over n distinct pairs of distances and each point i appears in
one and only one of the terms. A distance between two points in the same bilocal is
zero and cannot appear. So such terms are not present. In addition, the permutation
symmetry under exchanges of B’s and also of the two arguments of B imply that the
overall coefficients of all terms are the same, up to disconnected terms, which are given
by lower point functions of B’s by cluster decomposition. For example, for a two point
function of B’s we have
                                                                                 
                                                                 1         1
                       hB(x1 , x2 )B(x3 , x4 )i = Ñ                  +                 (5.24)
                                                              d13 d24   d14 d23

The overall coefficients of the connected n point function of B’s can be determined from the
one in the n −1 point function by expanding one of the B’s and looking at the stress tensor
contribution, which is fixed by the stress tensor charge conservation identity. Therefore,
all n point functions of B’s are fixed up to a single constant, the constant in the two point
function of the stress tensor, which is (up to a numerical factor) the same as Ñ in (5.24).
     We can consider a theory of N free bosons, with

                                                N
                                                X
                               B(x1 , x2 ) =           : φi (x1 )φi (x2 ) :             (5.25)
                                                 i=1

where the :: imply that we do not allow contractions between these two φ fields. This
theory has a higher spin symmetry and we also get the same correlators, except that the
constant in front of the stress tensor and (5.24) is Ñ = N . Another way to state the result
is that all the correlators of the currents are the same as the ones we have in a theory of
N bosons with N analytically continued, N → Ñ . However, as we argue below Ñ should
be an integer.
     We did not show that the operators for the elementary fields (or partons) are present
as good operators in the theory. It is clear that one cannot show that by looking purely
at correlators on the plane, since one can project them out by imposing an SO(N ) sin-
glet condition which would leave all remaining correlators obeying the crossing symmetry
relations, etc.

                                                   22
    Let us discuss further lessons. First, we observe that the expansion of B’s contains
the currents with minus indices js . Thus, the three point function of B’s contain the three
point functions of currents with minus indices. All of these are the same as those of the
free boson theory. Note that the possibility of odd three point functions has disappeared.
Thus, we never needed to know much about the nature of the odd structures for the three
point functions. From the OPE of two currents with minus indices we can get currents with
arbitrary indices. Thus, from the six point function of B’s we get the three point function
of the currents for arbitrary indices, which coincides with the free boson answer. Similarly
from a 2n point function of B’s we get an n point function of currents with arbitrary indices
which is equal to the free boson one for a theory of N bosons. By further performing OPE’s
we get other operators such as “double trace” or “double sum” operators. In conclusion,
we have fixed all the correlation functions of the stress tensor, and also all the correlation
function for all the higher spin conserved currents that appear in the j2 j2 operator product
expansion. These are currents that have even spins. In addition, we have also fixed the
correlators of all other operators that appear in the operator product expansion of these
operators. All such correlators are given by the corresponding correlators in a theory of
N free bosons restricted to the O(N ) invariant subsector.
    We should remark that, though we made statements regarding currents that can
be written as O(N ) invariant bilinears, this does not mean that the theory is the “free
O(N )” model. The theory can contain additional conserved currents (and still only one
stress tensor). For example, for N = 2M , we can consider M complex fields and restrict
to the U (M ) invariant sector. This theory obeys all the assumptions of our theorem.
In particular, it still has a single conserved spin two current. However, we also have
additional currents of odd spin. Of course, the currents with even spin that appear in the
j2 j2 OPE are still given by an O(2M ) invariant combination of the fields and have the
same correlators that we discussed above. Probably a little more work would show that if
we had odd spin currents, they should also behave like those of free fields. Presumably one
would construct a bilocal operator from the odd currents and argue as we did above. One
could also wonder about other even spin currents which do not appear in the j2 j2 OPE.
Probably there cannot be such currents (with a single conserved spin two current), but we
did not prove it.
    Note that the correlation functions of stress tensors are all equal to the ones in the
free theory. In particular, if we created a state with an insertion of the stress tensor at
the origin we could compute the energy correlation functions that would be measured by

                                             23
idealized detectors (or calorimeters) at infinity. These are the energy correlation functions
considered, for example in [3,4], and are computed by particular limits and integrals of cor-
relation functions of the stress tensor. The n point energy correlator for a state created by
the stress tensor is schematically h0|T † (q)ǫ(θ1 ) · · · ǫ(θn )T (q)|0i, where T (q) is the insertion
of a stress tensor operator of four momentum (roughly) q at the origin and ǫ(θ) are the en-
ergies per unit angle collected at ideal calorimeters sitting at infinity at the angle θ. These
will give the same result as in the free theory. Namely, that the energy is deposited in two
localized points, corresponding to the two partons hitting the calorimeters. This result
is qualitatively similar to the Coleman-Mandula result for the triviality of the S-matrix.
These energy correlation functions are infrared safe (or well-defined) observables which
are, conceptually, rather close to the S-matrix. Here we see that these energy distributions
are trivial.

5.5. Quantization of Ñ : the case of bosons

     The basic idea for showing that Ñ is quantized uses the fact that the N = ∞ theory
and the finite N theory have a different operator spectrum. The finite N spectrum is a
truncation of the infinite N spectrum. This point was also emphasized recently in [29].
     In order to prove the quantization of Ñ we argue as follows. In the theory of N bosons
we consider the operator

                        [i ,···,i ]
               Oq = δ[j11 ,···,jqq ] (φi1 ∂φi2 ∂ 2 φi3 · · · ∂ q−1 φiq )(φj1 ∂φj2 ∂ 2 φj3 · · · ∂ q−1 φjq )   (5.26)

where the δ function is the totally antisymmetric delta function of q indices. It is the
object that arises we consider a contraction of two ǫ tensors of the from

                                 [i ,···,i ]
                                δ[j11 ,···,jqq ] ∝ ǫi1 ,...,iq ,iq+1 ,···,iN ǫj1 ,···,jq ,iq+1 ···iN          (5.27)

This operator, (5.26), can be rewritten as sum of products of q bilinear operators. Once
we have written it as a particular combination of bilinear operators we can consider any
value of N and we can imagine doing analytic continuation in N → Ñ , with q fixed.
     In particular, we can consider the norm of this state. We are interested in the Ñ
dependence of the norm of this state. We can show that

                             hOq Oq i = Ñ (Ñ − 1)(Ñ − 2) · · · (Ñ − (q − 1))                              (5.28)

                                                                24
where we only indicated the Ñ dependence. Since we have q bilinears, the series expansion
in 1/Ñ has only q terms. In addition, the result should vanish for Ñ = 1, 2, · · · , q − 1, and
the leading power should be Ñ q .
     Now, imagine that Ñ was not integer. Then we could consider this operator for
q = [Ñ ] + 2, where [Ñ ] is the integer part of Ñ . Then we find that (5.28) is

                          hO[Ñ]+2 O[Ñ ]+2 i = (positive)(Ñ − [Ñ ] − 1)                 (5.29)

where we only wrote the last term in (5.28), which is the only negative one. Thus, we
have a negative norm state unless Ñ is an integer. Therefore, unitarity forces Ñ to be
integer. Here we have phrased the argument in terms of the norm of a particular state,
which might be changed by choosing a different normalization constant. However, we can
get the same argument by consider the contribution to the OPE of a state like Oq . If the
norm is negative, then we will get a negative contribution to the OPE in the channel that
is selecting this particular Oq .

5.6. Fermionic-like bilocal operators

     We now return to the second case in (5.11), where we have to use (5.15). We can now
repeat the operations we did for the bosonic case in order to argue that

                         [Qs , F− (x1 , x2 )] = (∂1s−1 + ∂2s−1 )F− (x1 , x2 )              (5.30)

The arguments are completely similar to the case of the boson. One needs to apply the
same charge conservation identities. All the arguments are very similar, except that we
now take the fermion like limit (5.1) and use the functions in (5.4). One can run over
all the arguments presented for the boson-like limit and one can check that all the charge
conservation identities have the same implications for the fermion-like case. This is shown
in appendix J.
     Once we show (5.30), we can now constrain the form of any correlator of the form
hF− (x1 , y1 ) · · · F− (xn , yn )i. Again it involves functions of differences of x−
                                                                                    ij with each i
appearing only in one argument of the function. In addition, we know that they should be
rotational invariant and conformal covariant. However, as opposed to the bosonic case, in
this case the conformal transformations of F− are those of a product of fermions. We can
take into account these transformations by using factors of fermion propagators, x+    3
                                                                                  ij /dij .


                                                 25
Together with permutation (anti) symmetry these constraints imply that the correlators
are those of free fermions. For example, for the four point function we get
                                                       + +
                                                       x13 x24    x+   + 
                                                                   14 x23
                    hF− (x1 , x2 )F− (x3 , x4 )i = Ñ            − 3 3                (5.31)
                                                       d313 d324  d14 d23

Similarly we can use the symmetries to fix all n point functions of F in terms of the single
parameter Ñ that appears in (5.31), or in the two point function of the stress tensor. For
Ñ = N , these n point functions agree with the ones we would obtain in a theory of N
Majorana fermions with
                                              N
                                              X
                                                       i       i
                            F− (x1 , x2 ) =         : ψ− (x1 )ψ− (x2 ) :              (5.32)
                                              i=1

    The expansion of F− contains all currents of twist one with minus indices. The
further OPE of such currents contains twist one currents with other indices and also a
scalar operator of twist two. In a theory of free fermions this is
                                               N
                                               X
                                                      i i
                                       j̃0 =         ψ+ ψ−                            (5.33)
                                               i=1

Thus, all the correlators of currents of even spin, plus the twist two scalar operator are
fixed by the higher spin symmetry to be the same as in the theory of N free fermions.

5.7. Quantization of Ñ : the case of fermions

    One can wonder whether there exists any theory Ñ is non-integer. Since Ñ appears
in the two point function of the stress tensor, we know that Ñ > 0. We now argue for the
quantization of Ñ . The argument follows from considering the operator

                                        Oq ≡: (j̃0 )q :                               (5.34)

For general Ñ , this operator is defined by looking at the appropriate term in the operator
product expansion of q j̃0 operators that are coming together. And j̃0 is itself also defined
via a suitable operator product expansion of the original bilocals F− . We can now compute
the two point function of such operators, (5.34). More precisely, since the two point
function is arbitrarily defined, we can look at the contribution to the OPE of the exchange
of the operator Oq . By the way, notice that the correlation function of any of the current
bilinears or any product of such bilinears, is given by making an analytic continuation

                                                26
in N → Ñ of the free fermion results. It is important that when we make this analytic
continuation, the number of currents in a correlator should be independent of N .
     A crucial observation is that in a free fermion theory with N fermions we have that
(5.34) is zero for q = N + 1. This means that such a contribution should not be present in
the OPE.
     Now, let us fix q and compute the two point function of Oq for general Ñ . (More pre-
cisely, we are talking about the contribution of this operator to the OPE). The expression
has a 1/Ñ expansion with precisely q terms, since that is the number of terms we get in a
free fermion theory. We argue below that it should have the following Ñ dependence


                        hOq Oq̃ i = Ñ (Ñ − 1)(Ñ − 2) · · · (Ñ − (q − 1))               (5.35)


First, we see that (5.35) has precisely q terms. Second, notice that it should vanish for
Ñ = 1, 2, · · · , q − 1, since for such integer values, we have correlators identical to those of
the free fermion theory where Oq vanishes.
     If Ñ was not an integer, then we could set q = [Ñ ] + 2, where [Ñ ] is the integer part
of Ñ . Then the norm (5.35) would be equal to


                         hO[Ñ]+2 O[Ñ ]+2 i = (positive)(Ñ − [Ñ ] − 1)                  (5.36)


where we only wrote the last factor in (5.35). The rest of the factors are positive. However,
this last factor is negative if Ñ is not an integer. Thus, we see that unitarity forces Ñ to
be an integer and we get precisely the same values as in the free fermion theory.



6.   Arguments based on more generic three and four point functions

     In this section we derive some of the above results in a conceptually more straight-
forward fashion, which ends up being more computationally intensive. We checked the
statements below by using Mathematica. Of course, if we were to take light-like lim-
its some of the computations simplify, and we go back to the discussion in the previous
section.

                                                27
6.1. Basic operations in the space of charge conservation identities

    The presence of higher spin symmetries leads to charge conservation identities for three
point functions which relate three point functions of conserved currents of different spins.
Namely, we start from a three point function and demand that it is annihilated by Qs . This
imposes interesting constraints for the following reason. The three point functions have a
very special form due to conformal symmetry and current conservation. The action of the
higher spin charge (3.5) gives a linear combination of these three point functions and their
derivatives. These derivatives do not commute with the action of the conformal group,
so this single equation is equivalent to larger set of equations constraining the coefficients
of the various three point functions. In other words, since conformal symmetry restricts
the functional form of the three point functions, the single equation that results from Qs
charge conservation is typically enough to fix all the relative coefficients of the various
three point functions that appear after we act with Qs on each of the currents.
    Let us first describe some operations that we can use over and over again to constrain
the action of the symmetries.
    Imagine that we are trying to constrain the action of Qs on a current jx and we would
like to know whether current jy is present or not in the transformation law

                                       [Q4 , jx ] = jy + ...                                (6.1)

(generically, with some derivatives acting on jy ). Recall that through (3.6), then [Q4 , jy ] =
jx + · · ·. Now the basic charge conservation identity we can use is the one resulting from
the action of Q4 on hj2 jx jy i. First of all, notice that from the variation of j2 we will
necessarily get (see (2.4)) the term hj4 jx jy i which must be non-zero if the jx and jy
appear in each other transformations under Q4 . The simplest possibility would be to find
that the only solutions of the charge conservation identity are such that hj4 jx jy i = 0.
Thus, our assumption about the presence of jy in the variation of jx was wrong. This is
the basic operation of the elimination of jy from [Q4 , jx ].
    If we can find that solutions of the charge conservation identity with hj4 jx jy i 6= 0 exist,
this is consistent with the presence of jy in the variation of jx but does not necessarily
imply it.
    Another basic charge conservation identity operation can be used to the check that jy
is definitely present in the transformation of jx . This is done via the charge conservation

                                                28
identity resulting from the action of Q4 on hj4 jx jx i 13 . Notice that from the transformation
of j4 we will necessarily (see (2.4), (3.6)) get the term hj2 jx jx i which must be non-zero due
to the fact that j2 generates conformal transformations. Now imagine that for the solution
of the charge conservation identity to exist the term hj4 jx jy i should be necessarily non-zero.
This means that jy is necessarily present in the transformation of jx .
      Very often using these two operations allow us to fix completely which operators do
appear in the transformation of the given conserved current.

6.2. From spin three to spin four

      In this section we show that in any theory that contains a conserved current of spin
three then the conserved spin four current is necessarily present.
      Let us first consider the most general CFT that has spin three current. We have that
the most general transformation has the form

                      [Q3 , j2 ] = α0 ∂ 4 j0 + α1 ∂ 3 j1 + α2 ∂ 2 j2 + α3 ∂j3 + α4 j ′ 4 ,
                                                                                                  (6.2)
                      [Q3 , j3 ] = β1 ∂ 4 j ′ 1 + β2 ∂ 3 j2 + β3 ∂ 2 j ′ 3 + β4 ∂j4 + β5 j5 .

      Let’s make several comments on this expression. Primes stand for the fact that the
same or a different current of the same spin can, in principle, appear in the right hand
side. Notice that α4 = 0 since otherwise Q3 is not translation invariant. Integrating both
sides we would get [Q3 , P− ] = Q4 , which would mean that Q3 is not translation invariant,
in contradiction with (2.3) and current conservation. From (2.4), α3 should be non-zero,
and so is β2 .
      As the next step we consider the charge conservation identity obtained by Q3 acting
on hj2 j2 j3 i
                                   0 = h[Q3 , j2 (x1 )j2 (x2 )j3 (x3 )]i = 0                      (6.3)

This is essentially the same charge conservation identity we considered in section five. The
solution exists only for β4 6= 0. In other words, the spin four current is necessary present
in the theory.
      Another feature of this exercise that is worth mentioning is that the general solution
of the charge conservation identities involves three distinct pieces

                            hjjji = hjjjiboson + hjjjif ermion + hjjjiodd                         (6.4)

 13
      In practice, we first check that [Q4 , j2 ] ∼ ∂ 3 j2 + · · · and then we use hj2 jx jx i.

                                                        29
the first two pieces correspond to the free boson and free fermion three point functions
respectively. We expect these solutions to be present in the theory of complex boson and
fermion. The odd piece does not come from any of free theories and is parity violating
14
     . We will elaborate the nature of the odd piece later. But we should emphasize that at
the level of three point functions one can find three independent solutions of higher spin
charge conservation identities 15 .
       After an illustration of this particular example we can formulate the general recipe.
Assume that the theory has a conserved current js of spin s 6= 4 and s > 2. We again
consider the charge conservation identity obtained by Qs acting on hj2 j2 js i and arrive at
the conclusion that j4 must be present in the spectrum. This type of charge conservation
identity is especially simple to analyze using the light cone limit described in the previous
section.
       So that we take it as a given that we always have a spin four current.

6.3. Analysis of three point functions using the spin four current.

       In this section we look in detail at the action of the Q4 charge. Again we present only
the results of the computations which are straightforward but tedious. We can argue that

                                     [Q4 , j2 ] = ∂ 5 j0 + ∂ 3 j2 + ∂j4                      (6.5)

We have eliminated j1 and j3 by considering the charge conservation identity corresponding
to the action of Q4 on hj2 j2 j1 i and hj2 j2 j3 i. We used general transformation laws for j1 ,
j3 (3.5). Then we consider the action of Q4 at hj2 j2 j2 i and use that we have already shown
that hj2 j2 j4 i is nonzero. The stress tensor three point function can have three different
pieces
                     hj2 j2 j2 i = hj2 j2 j2 iboson + hj2 j2 j2 if ermion + hj2 j2 j2 iodd   (6.6)

The charge conservation identity gives three different solutions involving other spins cor-
responding to these three different pieces. In other words, the charge conservation identity
equations for the boson, fermion and odd pieces do not mix. However, if the boson or odd
pieces in (6.6) are non-zero then the charge conservation identity implies that the current
j0 exists and appears as in (6.5). The fermion solution does not require a j0 .
 14
       Since it gives odd contribution to the three point function of stress tensors.
 15
       We will show below that the odd solutions appear in the theories with higher spin symmetry
broken at N1 order .

                                                      30
      If the stress tensor is unique, then the fact that j0 exists, implies that hj2 j2 j2 if = 0.
This is done by considering the Q4 charge conservation Identity for hj0 j2 j2 i. Q4 on j0
gives j2 due to (3.6) and (6.5). The non-zero fermion part of these three point functions
is not compatible with this charge conservation identity.
      Then the problem separates into two problems. First we consider the case where
hj2 j2 j2 if = 0 and then the case when hj2 j2 j2 ib = 0. Both cannot be zero due the fact
that j2 generates conformal transformations for j2 , and the fact that the odd piece does
not contribute to the action of conserved charges16 . The odd piece can be eliminated at
this point by an energy correlation argument, as shown in appendix C. But the reader
not familiar with that technique can wait a little longer until we eliminate it in a more
straightforward way.


6.4. Constraining the four point function of j0

      First we can constrain the action of Q4 on j0 . By a method very similar to the one
we used for the stress tensor we can prove that


                                         [Q4 , j0 ] = ∂ 3 j0 + γ∂j2                             (6.7)


where we wrote the constant γ appearing in the transformation explicitly. Again we
eliminate j1 and j3 by considering the Q4 charge conservation identities on hj2 j1 j0 i and
hj2 j3 j0 i. The other two terms can be found from the charge conservation identity for Q4
acting on hj0 j2 j2 i, and using (6.5) and the fact that hj0 j0 j2 i is nonzero.
      Now we consider Q4 acting on the four point function hj0 j0 j0 j0 i. This gives


                 ∂13 hj0 j0 j0 j0 i + γ∂1 hj2 j0 j0 j0 i + [1 ↔ 2] + [1 ↔ 3] + [1 ↔ 4] = 0      (6.8)


In order to solve this we first need to write the most general four point function with one
insertion of the stress tensor and three scalars, hj2 j0 j0 j0 i. This can be done using the
techniques described in [27,28] . There are two possible forms, one is parity even and the
other is parity odd. The equation (6.8) splits into two one for the parity even and the

 16
                     dx− dyhjs1 (x)js2 (x2 )js3 (x3 )iodd with y2 = y3 = 0 then under y → −y the inte-
                 R
      Consider
grand is odd and, thus, the integral vanishes.

                                                    31
other for the parity odd piece. The general form for the parity even piece involves certain
conformal invariants Qijk constructed out of the positions and the polarization tensors

                                              Q2123 g(u, v) + Q2124 g(v, u) + Q2134 g̃(u, v)
            hj2 (x1 )j0 (x2 )j0 (x3 )j0 (x4 )i =
                                                                 x212 x234
                                                                                                (6.9)
                                              1 v 1
                                    g̃(u, v) = g( , )
                                              u u u

where the relevant conformal invariants simplify to

                           x+
                            i,j x+
                                 i,k                       x213 x224          x214 x223
                     Qijk = 2 − 2 ,                   u=             ,   v=                    (6.10)
                           xi,j xi,k                       x212 x234          x212 x234

because we consider only the minus polarization. We define f (u, v) via

                                                      f (u, v)
                                   hj0 j0 j0 j0 i =
                                                      x212 x234
                                                                                               (6.11)
                                                           1 u 1
                                      f (u, v) = f (v, u) = f ( , )
                                                           v v v

Inserting (6.11) and (6.9) into (6.8), we get an equation which depends both on the cross
ratios and the explicit points xi . By applying conformal transformations, and a lot of
algebra, we can get a set of equations purely in terms f , g (and u and v). There is a
solution where g = 0, which has a factorized dependence of the coordinates. There is also
a solution with both g and f . The sum of these two solutions is

                                              1  1        1   1   1
                          f (u, v) =α(1 +       + ) + β( √ + √ + √ ),
                                              u v          u   v  uv
                                                                                               (6.12)
                                         9
                        γg(u, v) =β      √ .
                                       20 u

By taking OPE of hj0 j0 j0 j0 i we can extract, for example, the hj0 j0 j0 i structure constant.
We can fix γ then by considering the j2 charge conservation identity. In other words,
integrating j2 to get the action of P− on hj0 j0 j0 i, for example.
     These are the free field theory correlators. The term proportional to α is the discon-
nected contraction and the one involving β is the connected one. In a theory of N free
scalars we can set α = 1 by a choice of normalization for the operators. Then β ∼ 1/N .
Notice that we were able to fix two four point functions using just one charge conservation
identity.

                                                        32
6.5. No parity odd piece

     While it is clear that we cannot write an odd piece for the four point function of
scalars we can do it for hj2 j0 j0 j0 i. The unique structure in this case takes the following
form in the embedding formalism (see [28] for conventions)

                                                          ǫ(Z1 , P1 , P2 , P3 , P4 )
        hj2 (x1 )j0 (x2 )j0 (x3 )j0 (x4 )i ∼
                                               (P1 P2 )2 (P1 P3 )3/2 (P1 P4 )3/2 (P3 P4 )1/2         (6.13)
                                         [Q123 g1 (u, v) + Q134 g2 (u, v) + Q142 g3 (u, v)]
                                                                        P
Inserting this in the charge conservation identity (6.8),                   ∂hj2 j0 j0 j0 i = 0 we find that
there is no solution.
     By taking the OPE of hj2 j0 j0 j0 i we can concentrate on the twist one channel where the
stress tensor is propagating. The relevant three point functions are hj2 j0 j2 i and hj2 j0 j0 i.
     Both of them are non-zero. The function hj2 j0 j0 i is non-zero because stress tensor
generates conformal transformation and hj2 j0 j2 i is non-zero because of the Q4 charge
conservation identity for hj2 j2 j2 i.
     Due to the triangle inequality (4.2) the hj2 j0 j2 i is the only odd three point function
that is non-zero in the twist one sector OPE expansion of hj2 j0 j0 j0 i.
     The fact that the four point function does not have the odd piece forces us to set the
odd piece of hj2 j0 j2 i to zero. Then through the higher spin charge conservation identities
we will set the odd part of the whole tower of conserved currents three point functions to
zero. Thus, while the odd pieces of three point functions respect higher spin symmetry,
at the level of four point functions they are eliminated in the theories where higher spin
symmetry is exact.

6.6. Case of fermions

     The above discussion can be repeated for the case that hj2 j2 j2 if 6= 0. In this case we
do not expect a twist one, spin zero field. Here we can show that

                                          [Q4 , j2 ] = ∂ 3 j2 + ∂j4                                  (6.14)

In principle, we could act with Q4 on the four point function hj2 j2 j2 j2 i and use (6.14) to
fix it completely. Though this probably works, we have not managed to do it due to the
large number of conformal structures that are possible.

                                                       33
    Instead, one can take a longer route by first showing that a certain twist two scalar
operator j̃0 exists, finding its transformation laws under Q4 and then showing that its four
point function is the same as that of j̃0 = ǫαβ ψα ψβ in a theory of free fermions.
    In this section we consider not just the minus component of the currents but also the
third, or perpendicular component. For the charge Q4 we continue to focus on the all
minus component.
    We consider the charge conservation identity from the action of Q4 on hj2 j2 j2−⊥ i.
    The new ingredient is the variation [Q4 , j−⊥ ] which should have twist two operators
in the right hand side. We write the most general form of this variation denoting by j̃s a
twist two operator of spin s (and without tilde for the twist one ones)

                                            4
                                            X
                            [Q4 , j2⊥ ] =         ∂ 4−i (j̃i + ∂⊥ ji + j(i+1)⊥ )                 (6.15)
                                            i=0

where all implicit tensor indices are minus.
    Now as we are having in mind the Q4 charge conservation identity for hj2 j2 j2⊥ i we
can ignore all the odd spin twist one current due to (4.3). Moreover, we can fix j̃4− to zero
using the translation invariance argument. Also we know that for the fermion solution j0
term is absent. And here we are interested in the fermion part of the solution for hj2 j2 j2 i.
One can be confused by the lack of perpendicular index in the twist two sector. It comes
from an ǫ tensor as ǫ−⊥µ ∂ µ = ǫ−⊥+ ∂− , so that with more general indices we have

                                          2
                          [Q4 , j2µν ] = ∂− [∂µ ǫ−νσ + ∂ν ǫ−µσ ]∂ σ j̃0 + ...                    (6.16)

This epsilon tensor implies that in the charge conservation identity hj2 j2 j2−⊥ ieven should
cancel the odd contribution hj2 j2 j̃0 iodd . The relevant terms that we need for the charge
conservation identity are

                           [Q4 , j2⊥ ] = ∂ 4 j̃0 + ∂ 2 j̃2 + ∂ 2 ∂⊥ j2 + ∂⊥ j4
                                                                                                 (6.17)
                                       + ∂ 3 j2⊥ + ∂j4⊥ + ...

The dots denote terms that do not have any overlap with j2 j2 . So we end up with the
following charge conservation identity to be checked. Here we think about all even parts
as being generated by fermion three point functions

              h[∂ 3 j2 ]j2 j2⊥ ieven + h[∂j4 ]j2 j2⊥ ieven + [1 ↔ 2] = hj2 j2 [∂ 4 j̃0 ]iodd
                                                                                                 (6.18)
              + hj2 j2 [∂ 2 j̃2 ]iodd + hj2 j2 [∂ 2 ∂(− j2⊥) ]ieven + hj2 j2 [∂(− j4⊥) ]ieven.

                                                      34
      The only new three point functions involved are hj2 j2 j̃0 iodd and hj2 j2 j̃2 iodd . Both
are fixed by conformal symmetry, and current conservation for j2 , up to a constant. The
charge conservation identity implies that the twist two scalar j̃0 needs to exist and it needs
to appear in the right hand side of

                               [Q4 , j2⊥ ] = ∂ 4 j̃0 + ∂ 3 j2⊥ + ∂j4⊥ + ...                        (6.19)

      By performing an analysis similar to what was done for the bosonic case one can show
that nothing else can appear in the right hand side of (6.19). In addition, one can then
constrain the action of Q4 on j̃0 and find

                                     [Q4 , j̃0 ] = ∂ 3 j̃0 + ∂∂[− j2⊥]                             (6.20)

This again requires looking at many charge conservation identities to eliminate all the
other possible terms that could appear. Again, notice that the second term involves an ǫ
tensor.
      After this, one can look at the charge conservation identity for the four point function
hj̃0 j̃0 j̃0 j̃0 i. We will need hJ2µν j̃0 j̃0 j̃0 i, actually, the parity odd version of this correlator,
which has a structure similar to (6.13) except for the different conformal dimension of j̃0
(now two). After a lot of algebra one can show that this four point function has the form
of free fermions (see Appendix G).


7. Higher spin symmetries broken at order N1

      So far we considered the case where the symmetries are exactly conserved. There
are some interesting theories, mainly large N O(N ), Sp(N ), U (N ) vector models where
the symmetries are “almost” conserved. By this we mean that the anomalous dimensions
of the currents are of order 1/N . Furthermore the correlators of the theory have 1/N
expansion. We will make now some remarks about this case here.
      To explain this imagine a situation when the higher spin currents have anomalous
dimension ∆ = s + 1 + O( N1 ). The operators have a single “trace” vs. a multitrace
structure, and to leading order in N the correlators of multitrace operators factorize17 .
      Rather than giving a general discussion, here we will focus on one specific case that
will illustrate the method, leaving a more general discussion for the future.
 17
      We should rather speak of a “single sum” vs. a “multi-sum” structure.

                                                    35
      We can illustrate the method by considering a large N SO(N ) Chern-Simons matter
theory with an SO(N ) level k Chern-Simons action coupled to N Majorana fermions. This
theory was considered recently in [30]18 . In this theory, in addition, we have a coupling
λ ∼ N/k which is very small when the Chern-Simons level is very large, k ≫ N . So we
now have this second expansion parameter which we will also use.
      In the limit that λ = 0 we have the theory of free fermions. The “single trace” opera-
tors in this theory are spanned by the twist one currents js and the twist two pseudoscalar
operator j̃0 . Let us normalize them so that their two point functions are one. Let us
consider the most general form of the divergence of the J4 current in this theory

                                           1 
                             ∂µ J µ −−− = √
                                                                          
                                               a1 ∂− j̃0 j2 + a2 j̃0 ∂− j2 .                (7.1)
                                            N

The divergence should be twist three operator with spin three. The terms in the right hand
side are all the operators we can write down in this theory. Note that there are no single
trace primaries that can appear. Notice that at this point we do not use any information
about the microscopic theory except the spectrum at N = ∞.
      We can now consider partially broken charge conservation identities, by integrating
an insertion of (7.1) in a correlation function
                    Z                                   XZ
                        d xh∂µ J µ−−− O1 · · · On i =
                         3
                                                                 hj n −−− O1 · · · On i     (7.2)
                                                        i   Si


Here we have used Stoke’s theorem to integrate the divergence on a region which is the full
R3 minus little spheres around the insertion of each operator. The surface terms have the
usual expression for the charges in terms of the currents. Except that now they are not
conserved. However, since the non-conservation is a small correction, we can act on each
of the operators by the charges, up to 1/N corrections. In the left hand side we can insert
the expression (7.1) and use the leading N , factorized correlator. In our normalization
                                       √
the action of the “charges” , have a 1/ N , so that left hand side and right hand side of
(7.2)are of the same order.
      As a first example, consider the case where the operators are simply O1 O2 = j̃0 j2 .
In this case, the charges, to leading order annihilate the correlator in a trivial way, using

 18
      Actually, they considered a U (N ) gauge group, but the story is very similar. For a similar
theory with scalars see [31].

                                                   36
(6.20), (6.14). All that remains is the integral of the right hand side of (7.1). In order for
this to vanish, we need that
                                                     2
                                               a2 = − a1 .                                                 (7.3)
                                                     5
So this relative coefficient is fixed in this simple way, for all λ, to leading order in 1/N .
This is a somewhat trivial result since it also follows from demanding that the special
conformal generator K − annihilates the right hand side of (7.1). We have spelled it out in
order to illustrate the use of the broken symmetry.
      As a less trivial example, consider the insertion of the same broken charge conservation
identity in the three point function of the stress tensor. We will do this to leading order
in λ. We get

                                           a1                    2
  XZ                                           Z
           n
         hj−−− j2 (x1 )j2 (x2 )j2 (x3 )i ∼ √     d3 xh[∂ j̃0 j2 − j̃0 ∂j2 ](x)j2 (x1 )j2 (x2 )j2 (x3 )i.
   i  Si                                     N                   5
                                                                                                   (7.4)
      Now let’s take the large N limit in this equation. In the left hand side we can substitute
the action of the charges on each of the operators. This gives

                              1
                                 h∂ 3 j2 j2 j2 i + h∂j4 j2 j2 i + action on the other j2 ′ s
                                                                                            
        h[Q4 , j2 j2 j2 ]i ∼ √                                                                             (7.5)
                               N

Notice that this is of order N1 .
      In the right hand side of (7.4) the order N1 terms come from

                                                                             1
  Z                                                           Z
      d x(∂hj2 (x)j2 (x1 )i)hj̃0 (x)j2 (x2 )j2 (x3 )i ∼ ∂15
       3
                                                                  d3 x            hj̃0 (x)j2 (x2 )j2 (x3 )i (7.6)
                                                                         |x1 − x|

where we have integrated by parts and used that all indices are minus (∂1 = ∂x− ).
                                                                                                     1

      Now the final result of the integral in the right hand side of (7.6) is the same as
the three point function hj0 j2 j2 i. Namely, the three point function involving a twist one
scalar, as opposed to the twist two scalar j̃0 that we started with. This can be seen by
the fact that the integral in (7.6) (before taking the ∂15 derivative) has the same conformal
properties as hj0 j2 j2 i.
      If the current were exactly conserved, we would set (7.5) to zero. In that case, the only
solution is the one corresponding to the free fermion structure in the three point functions.
The reason is that the free boson, or odd solutions of this charge conservation identity
require a twist one operator, j0 . Recall that we had said in section six that these three
point function ward identities have three independent solutions involving only the fermion,

                                                    37
or only the boson or only the odd structures. However, in (7.4) something remarkable has
happened. The right hand side, which comes from the lack of conservation of the current,
is mocking up perfectly the contribution we would have had in a theory with a twist one
scalar. This allows for more nontrivial solutions which can be the superposition of all three
structures for the three point functions.
       Notice that if we consider now the charge conservation identity expanded in the ’t
Hooft parameter λ, then the λ0 term will satisfy free fermion result. At the λ1 the integral
in (7.6) generates a result equal to the odd structure for hj0 j2 j2 i. Thus, at order λ1 , the
odd structure for hj2 j2 j2 i is generated.
       We expect that further analysis along the lines explained above should fix all the
leading N three point functions, exactly in λ.
       We expect to be able to apply a similar ideas to the interacting fixed point of O(N )
model. In this case the spectrum of leading N theory is the same, except that the twist
two operator is parity even.
       Finally, let us comment on the case of weakly coupled gauge theories with matter
in the adjoint. In this case we will typically have single trace operators that can, and
will, appear in the right hand side of the divergence of the currents, once we turn on the
coupling. In this case, we also expect to be able to use the broken charge conservation
identities to analyze the theory, though it is not clear whether this will be any simpler
than applying usual perturbation theory. One feature is that we will be dealing purely in
terms of observables, without ever discussing things like “gauge fixing”, etc.


8. Case of two conserved spin two currents

       In this section we relax the assumption of a single stress tensor and we generalize the
discussion to the case of two stress tensors. Presumably something similar will hold for
more than two, but we have not studied it in detail.
       We now consider a CFT that has exactly two symmetric traceless conserved spin two
currents. One of them generates conformal transformations and we denote it by j2 . The
usual minus generator built out of it is translation along the minus direction Q2 = P− .
Another current we denote as ĵ2 and the correspondent charge would be Q̂2 = P̂− . We
assume that these two currents are orthogonal and we normalize their two point functions
as
                                                          (x+ )4
     hj2− (x1 )j2− (x2 )i = hĵ2− (x1 )ĵ2− (x2 )i = c            ,   hj2− (x1 )ĵ2− (x2 )i = 0   (8.1)
                                                         (x2 )d+2

                                                         38
here we used the freedom to rescale ĵ2 .
      The most general form of the transformation consistent with the conformal properties
of generators, two point function charge conservation identities and non-zero three point
functions is
                                     [P− , j2 ] = ∂− j2 ,        [P− , ĵ2 ] = ∂− ĵ2
                                     [P̂− , j2 ] = a ∂ 2 j1 + ∂ ĵ2                                           (8.2)
                                     [P̂− , ĵ2 ] = ∂j2 + b ∂ ĵ2
We then consider the h[P̂− , j2 j2 ĵ2 ]i = 0 charge conservation identity, which sets a = 0.
    Now, for any b we can introduce a new basis
                                              
                              1           b                 1
                        J2 =      1+ √           j2 − √            ĵ2
                              2          2
                                        b +4               2
                                                          b +4
                                                                                                            (8.3)
                        ˆ     1           b                 1
                        J2 =      1− √           j2 + √            ĵ2
                              2         b2 + 4            b2 + 4
such that the commutation relations take the form
                          [QJ , J2 ] = ∂J2 , [Q ˆ , Jˆ2 ] = ∂ Jˆ2 ,
                                         2                          J2
                                                                                                              (8.4)
                                    [QJˆ2 , J2 ] = 0,       [QJ , Jˆ2 ] = 0.

In this new basis there are two orthogonal hJ2 Jˆ2 i = 0 conserved spin two currents such
that each of them generates translation for itself and leaves intact the other one.
    We can now consider the correlation function with J2 ’s, Jˆ2 ’s and an insertion of eiQJ2 a
   hJˆ2 (y1 )...Jˆ2 (yn )J2 (x1 )...J2 (xn )i =heiQJ2 a Jˆ2 (y1 )...Jˆ2 (yn )J2 (x1 )...J2 (xn )e−iQJ2 a i
                                                                                                              (8.5)
                                              =hJˆ2 (y1 )...Jˆ2 (yn )eiQJ2 a J2 (x1 )...J2 (xn )e−iQJ2 a i
where we used the fact that [QJˆ2 , J2 ] = 0. Then using the fact that [QJ2 , P− ] = 0 and also
the fact that [QJ2 , J2 ] = [P− , J2 ] we can rewrite (8.5) as
      hJˆ2 (y1 )...Jˆ2 (yn )J2 (x1 )...J2 (xn )i =hJˆ2 (y1 )...Jˆ2 (yn )eiP− a J2 (x1 )...J2 (xn )e−iP− a i
                                                                                                              (8.6)
                                               =hJˆ2 (y1 )...Jˆ2 (yn )J2 (x1 + a− )...J2 (xn + a− )i.
where all J2 ’s are translated along the minus direction. By the cluster decomposition
assumption we get19

              hJˆ2 (y1 )...Jˆ2 (yn )J2 (x1 )...J2 (xn )i = hJˆ2 (y1 )...Jˆ2 (yn )ihJ2 (x1 )...J2 (xn )i.      (8.7)
 19
     Let us make this more clear. We first choose the xi and yj to be spacelike separated and such
that as a → +∞ the distances between any xi and any yj grow. One can check that such a choice
of points is possible, and it still allows us to move all the points in a small neighborhood without
violating this property. Once we establish the decoupling for such points, we can analytically
continue the result for all points.

                                                            39
Thus, these correlators are completely decoupled. Notice that, in particular, if we consider
collider physics observables like energy correlation functions for the “energies” defined from
J2 or Jˆ2 , we would obtain completely decoupled answers. However, we cannot conclude at
this point that we have two decoupled theories, since we could still consider two theories
that share a global symmetry and impose a singlet constraint on the operators. However,
it is clear that in some sense, the two theories are dynamically decoupled. All that we have
said so far is valid for any theory with two spin two conserved currents, independently of
whether we have any higher spin generator.

8.1. Adding higher spin conserved currents

    Now we consider a theory with a conserved higher spin current, js , and exactly two
stress tensors. We know that [Qs , j2 ] ∼ js , which implies that [Qs , js ] = j2 + · · ·. Thus,
the right hand side of [Qs , js ] has either J2 or Jˆ2 , or both. Let us first assume that it
has J2 . Then the Qs ward identity on hJ2 J2 js i implies that there is an infinite number of
currents in J2 J2 b or in J2 J2 f . Now, nothing that appears in the right hand side of these
light cone limits can have any non-zero correlator with Jˆ2 , due to (8.7). Thus, from this
point onwards, the analysis is effectively the same as if we had only one stress tensor. Of
course, the same holds if Jˆ2 appears in the right hand side of [Qs , js ].
    One simple example with two conserved spin two currents is a free N = 1 supersym-
metric theory with N bosons and N fermions, with an O(N ) singlet constraint. The two
conserved spin two currents are the stress tensor of the boson and the one of the fermions.
    The situation is more subtle when we have more than two spin two conserved currents.
For example, in a theory with two free bosons, φ1 , φ2 , we have three conserved spin two
conserved currents, schematically ∂φ1 ∂φ1 , ∂φ1 ∂φ2 and ∂φ2 ∂φ2 . Clearly in this case the
theory decouples into two theories, and not into three!



9. Conclusions and discussion

    In this article we have studied theories with exactly conserved higher spin currents,
with spin s > 2. We have shown that all correlators of the currents and the stress tensor
are those of a free theory. More precisely, we have made the technical assumption of a
single spin two current. Under this assumption, the only two cases are those of a free
scalar or a free fermion. More precisely, we proved that the correlators of the currents are

                                              40
the same as in the theory of free bosons or free fermions, but we did not demonstrate the
existence of a free scalar or a free fermion operator.
     This is in the same spirit as the Coleman-Mandula theorem, [1,2], extended here to
theories without an S-matrix.
     It can also be viewed as a simple exercise in the bootstrap approach to field theories.
One simply starts with the currents, constructs the symmetries, and one ends up fixing all
the correlation functions. One never needs to say what the Lagrangian is. Of course, the
answer is very simple, because we end up getting free theories!
     In this paper we considered correlators of stress tensors and currents but not of other
operators that the theory can have. In two dimensions, one can find explicitly the correla-
tors of stress tensors, but that does not mean that the theory is free. On the other hand, in
three dimensions we expect that the simple form of correlators that we obtained will imply
that the theory is indeed free. In fact, one can consider the conformal collider physics
observables that come from looking at energies collected by “detectors” at infinity for a
state created by the stress tensor [3,4]. The n point energy correlator for a state created
by the stress tensor is schematically h0|T † (q)ǫ(θ1 ) · · · ǫ(θn )T (q)|0i, where T (q) is the stress
tensor insertion with four momentum (roughly) q at the origin and ǫ(θ) are the energies
per unit angle collected at ideal calorimeters sitting at infinity situated at the angle θ.
These can be computed by considering n + 2 correlation functions of stress tensors. Since
these agree with the ones in the free theory, we expect that the theory is free. Notice also
that these infrared safe observables are conceptually rather close to the S-matrix, since
they are measured at infinity in Minkowski space. Nevertheless, one would like to be able
to understand directly the constrains of the higher spin symmetry on other operators and
their correlators. For example, it is natural to conjecture that their dimensions are integer
or half integer (if the stress tensor is unique). As an example of a theory that contains
an extra operator, we can consider N fermions with an SO(N ) singlet constraint and the
                      i1        iN
operator ǫi1 ,···,iN ψ−  · · · ψ−  . This can certainly not be produced from the currents when
N is odd. For N odd this has a half integer dimension.
     It should be simple to extend these results to four dimensional field theories. In fact,
our approach that uses the light-like limits in section five is expected to work with few
modifications. We expect that we will need light-like limits that pick out the free boson,
free fermion and free Maxwell fields. In higher dimensions we can have other free fields,
such as the self dual tensor in six dimensions.

                                                 41
    Recently there have been many studies of a four dimensional higher spin gravity theory
proposed by Vasiliev ([8] and references therein) . These theories have higher spin gauge
symmetry in the bulk. They also have an AdS4 vacuum solution. If one chooses AdS
boundary conditions that preserve the higher spin symmetry, then our methods show that
the theory is essentially the same as a free theory on the boundary. Thus, we have proven
the conjecture in [10] for the free case. More concretely it is the theory of N free bosons
or free fermions with an O(N ) singlet constraint. Given that the free case works, then
[14] showed that the conjecture followed for the interacting case. Other arguments were
presented in [15,16]. If the boundary conditions break the higher symmetry in a slight
way, then one can also use the symmetries to constrain the results. Notice also that our
results for the quantization of Ñ show that the coupling constant in a unitary Vasiliev
theory with higher spin symmetric boundary condition is quantized.
    It is also interesting that theories with almost conserved higher spin currents can be
analyzed in this spirit. We discussed some simple computations in the case of large N vector
models (recently studied in [30],[31]). Here one can use the slightly broken symmetries to
get interesting results about the correlators. Of course, our previous analysis of the exact
case is the backbone of the analysis for the slightly broken one. We suspect that correlators
in these theories can be completely fixed by these considerations alone, and it would be
nice to carry this out explicitly.
    Notice that for any weakly coupled theory we have a slightly broken higher spin sym-
metry. In general, the breaking of the higher spin symmetry can occur at the single trace
level. This occurs, for example, in gauge theories with adjoint fields. One might be able
to perform perturbative computations using the higher spin currents and the pattern of
symmetry breaking. Of course, one would recover the results of standard perturbation the-
ory. However, the fact that we work exclusively with gauge invariant physical observables
might lead to important simplifications, particularly in the case of gauge theories. Notice,
by the way, that the bilocal operators that we have introduced in (5.12) (5.30) are simply
the (Fourier transform) of the operators whose matrix elements are the parton distribution
functions. In an interacting theory, these operators also have a Wilson line connecting the
two “partons”.
    More ambitiously, one would like to understand large N limits of theories with adjoints,
such as N = 4 super Yang Mills, in the ’t Hooft limit. In general, the single trace
higher spin currents can have large anomalous dimensions compared to one. However, the
anomalous dimensions are still small compared to N . It is natural to wonder whether

                                             42
they continue to impose interesting constraints. This is closely related to the possible
emergence of a useful higher spin symmetry in string theory at high energies (see e.g. [32]
and references therein).
    Interestingly, one expects that the absence of single trace higher spin states in the
low energy spectrum, namely the fact that all single trace higher spin operators have
large anomalous dimensions, should impose an intriguing constraint: The theory has an
AdS dual well approximated by Einstein gravity. For more discussion of this point see
[33,34,26].


    Acknowledgments
    We would like to thank N. Arkani-Hamed, T. Dumitrescu, A. Dymarsky, T. Hartman,
A. Jevicki, G. Pimentel, S. Rychkov, N. Seiberg, X. Yin, E. Witten for discussions.
    This work was supported in part by U.S. Department of Energy grant #DE-FG02-
90ER40542. The work of AZ was supported in part by the US National Science Foundation
under Grant No. PHY-0756966 and by the Department of Energy under Grant No.#DE-
FG02-91ER40671.


Appendix A. Argument for [Qs , j2 ] = ∂js + · · ·
    We now argue that the action of Qs on the stress tensor produces js in the right hand
side, where js is the current we used to construct Qs ,
                           [Qs , j2 ] = ∂js + ... ,            s>1                    (A.1)
This follows from the fact that we know how the charge Qs transforms under the conformal
group.
    The general form of the commutator is
                               [Qs , Tµν ] = c∂− J−−···−µν + ....                     (A.2)
Here we eliminated a possible term like ∂µ Jν−···− by applying ∂µ to both sides of (A.2)
and noticing that the left hand side, as well as the right hand side of (A.2) are zero, but
the extra possible term would not be zero. Now, let us prove that c is not zero. Imagine
it is zero, then contract (A.2) with dilaton Killing vector and integrate over dd−1 x to get
                                  Z
                             [Qζ , dd−1 xT0ν xν ] = [Qζ , D] = 0                       (A.3)

which is inconsistent with the fact that [Qζ , D] = (s − 1)Qζ . Note that for s = 1, the
current does not appear in the right hand side. As usual the stress tensor should be
invariant under global symmetries.

                                                43
Appendix B. An integral expression for the odd three point functions


                                                F̃ F̃ F̃




                                                                             t

                                                                                 t=0
                                    F                 F              F
       Fig. 1: Constructing the three dimensional correlator as arising from a four
       dimensional integral in a CFT. The three dimensional space lies at t = 0.



     In this appendix we provide a “constructive” way to write it and a nice rationale for
its existence. The idea is inspired by the AdS expressions for the odd pieces for spin one
and spin two currents discussed in [35]. However, we will use something even simpler. We
view the three point function as a correlator on a domain wall defect inside a (non-unitary)
four dimensional conformal field theory. We construct it as follows. We start with four
dimensional operators with spins (jl , jr ) = (s, 0), (0, s) at the four dimensional unitarity
bound. We then introduce a quartic bulk interaction that preserves conformal symmetry.
We then consider the correlator of three of these fields on a three dimensional subspace
t = 0, to leading order in the interaction, see fig. 1.
     We denote the four dimensional operators with spins (jl , jr ) = (s, 0), (0, s) by
Fα1 ...α2s , F̃α̇1 ...α̇2s . Of course, these operators are at the four dimensional unitarity bound
and given in terms of free fields. The conformal dimension is [F ] = s + 1 which is the same
as dimension of conserved currents in d = 3 CFT. Their correlators are
                                                                         Q2s
                                                                           i=1 (x12 )αi α̇i
                         hFα1 ...α2s (x1 )F̃α̇1 ...α̇2s (x2 )i =                                 (B.1)
                                                                           (x212 )2s+1

we can contract indices with polarization spinors λα and µ̄α̇ so that we get

                                                           (λ/x12 µ̄)2s               2s 1
                      hF (x1 , λ)F̃ (x2 , µ̄)i =              2
                                                                        = (λ/
                                                                            ∂ x   µ̄)        .   (B.2)
                                                           (x12 )2s+1          12
                                                                                        x212

     Now let’s consider the self dual interaction of the form
                                            Z
                                        g        dtd3 z~χF̃s1 F̃s2 F̃s3                          (B.3)

                                                             44
where all indices are contracted using ǫα̇β̇ . Here χ is a scalar operator of dimension
[χ] = 1 − (s1 + s2 + s3 ). The contraction of indices is possible when the triangle inequality
is satisfied
                                 si ≤ si+1 + si+2 ,          i = 1, 2, 3 mod 3                     (B.4)

This interaction breaks parity in the bulk so that we can expect that it will generate parity
breaking structure for the correlators at t = 0, where t is the fourth coordinate.
      Now imagine we are computing correlation functions of three Fα1 ···α2s inserted at
the boundary t = 0. There is a subset of four dimensional conformal transformations
which map this boundary to itself. They act on this boundary as the three dimensional
conformal transformations. From that point of view the Fα1 ···α2s operators transform
as three dimensional twist one operators of spin s. The contraction with the spinor λα
gives us the same as contracting three dimensional currents with the three dimensional
spinors, as in [27]. In addition, one can see that they are conserved currents from the three
dimensional point of view20 . For this purpose it is enough to show that the propagator
is annihilated by three dimensional divergence operator ∂λ /∂x ∂λ . The structure of (B.2)
shows that it is enough to check it for s = 1. For s = 1 the current is just ji = Fti +ǫijk Fjk .
Then the divergence is zero due to the Maxwell equation and the Bianchi identity.
      We now postulate that χ in (B.3) has expectation value hχi = t−∆χ = ts1 +s2 +s3 −1 .
This expectation value is consistent with the three dimensional conformal invariance, and
can be viewed as arising from a “domain wall defect” at t = 0.
      We can now consider the expression that results from considering the three point
correlator at first order in the interaction (B.3)
                                                             Z ∞
         hFs1 (~x1 , λ1 )Fs2 (~x2 , λ2 )Fs3 (~x3 , λ3 )i ∼         dtd3 ~x0 ts1 +s2 +s3 −1
                                                            0
                          (s1 +s2 −s3 )                 (s1 +s3 −s2 )
                                                                                                   (B.5)
         (λ1 /x10 /x02 λ2 )          (λ1 /x10 /x03 λ3 )           (λ2 /x20 /x03 λ3 )(s2 +s3 −s1)
          (t2 + (~x1 − ~x0 )2 )2s1 +1 (t2 + (~x2 − ~x0 )2 )2s2 +1 (t2 + (~x3 − ~x0 )2 )2s3 +1

The operators in the left hand side are inserted at t = 0. They can be viewed as three
dimensional conserved currents.
      This is a conformal invariant expression for three dimensional correlators of conserved
currents. It contains both even and odd contributions.
 20
      This needs to be checked separately because the interaction (B.3) is not obviously unitary
and, thus, we cannot use the unitarity bound argument.

                                                        45
    Notice that factors in the numerator of (B.5) have the schematic form

                                   (λ1 /xi0 /x0j λ2 ) ∼ t(~n~x12 ) + ǫijk ni xj01 xk02                      (B.6)

where ~n = λα
            1~σαβ λβ2 = λα
                         2~σαβ λβ1 . We see that these two pieces behave differently under
three dimensional parity. Thus, to extract the odd piece we can subtract parity conjugated
integral, which can also be extracted by changing t → −t. In the end one can show that
the parity odd piece is given by extending the range of integration
                                                                Z ∞
        hjs1 (~x1 , λ1 )js2 (~x2 , λ2 )js3 (~x3 , λ3 )iodd ∼          dtd3 ~x0 ts1 +s2 +s3 −1
                                                                −∞
                             (s1 +s2 −s3 )                 (s1 +s3 −s2 )
                                                                                                            (B.7)
        (λ1 /x10 /x02 λ2 )               (λ1 /x10 /x03 λ3 )             (λ2 /x20 /x03 λ3 )(s2 +s3 −s1 )
                                                                                                        .
                                    (x210 )2s1 +1 (x220 )2s2 +1 (x230 )2s3 +1

This formula is valid both for integer and half integer spins. If s1 = s2 = s, then one
can check that under the exchange (λ1 , x1 ) ↔ (λ2 , x2 ) we get a factor of (−1)s3 +2s . This
implies that the correlator for two identical currents hjs js js3 i is zero if s3 is odd. Note
that this is also zero when s is half integer, since in this case we expect an anticommuting
result when we exchange the first two currents.


B.1. Light cone limit for the odd three point function

    For the odd piece the light cone limit give us

                                    hjs1 js2 js3 i = ∂1s1 ∂2s2 Υ(s3 ),         s3 > 0                       (B.8)
                                             o


where
                                                     s−1
                                                      2 ]
                                                s [X                                         k
                           1    x̂12                          s−k−1              1      x̂13 x̂23
                  Υ(s) =                                                                                    (B.9)
                         x̂12 x̂13 x̂23                         k              2k + 1     x̂212
                                                    k=0
                                                                                               
                                                                         n
here [α] means integer part of α and x̂ were defined in (5.3). And            is the usual
                                                                         m
binomial coefficient. Interestingly, in this limit the answer can be written explicitly for
any s. Notice that we do not have any square roots of the xij ’s. Essentially for the same
reason, we will not have a |y12 | as we the limit y12 → 0, we only get 1/y12 . In general, it
can be checked from the expressions in [27] that all square roots disappear from the odd
correlator, even away from the light cone limit.

                                                           46
Appendix C. No odd piece from the one point energy correlator

      Let’s consider the case when hj2 j2 j2 i is the boson piece plus the odd piece. In other
words, hj2 j2 j2 if = 0.
      Consider the one point energy correlator for the state created by a stress tensor at the
origin with energy q 0 and zero spatial momentum. It is characterized by a two dimensional
polarization tensor ǫij Tij . See [4] for more details. The most general O(2) symmetric
structure in this case is given by the following expression
                                   "                          #
                               0                 j j 2
                             q             |ǫij n n |      1
                 hE(~n)i =        1 + t4 (         ∗    − )
                             2π               ǫij ǫij      4
                                   "                                                    #     (C.1)
                             q0      εij (ni nm ǫjm ǫ∗kp nk np + ni nm ǫ∗jm ǫkp nk np )
                           −    d4                                                        ,
                             2π                            2ǫij ǫ∗ij

it’s even part was studied in [36], however, the odd piece was missed in the literature before
as far as we know. The positive energy condition hE(~n)i ≥ 0 becomes
                                                   q
                                            |d4 | ≤ 16 − t24 .                                (C.2)

      For the case of the boson it is easy to check that t4 = 4. Thus, we are forced to set
d4 = 0. We got that in the theory of Majorana fermion t4 = −4.
      More intuitively consider the state created by T11 − T22 . Then the one point energy
correlator is given by

                                         q0
                                                                   
                                                t4        d4
                               hE(~n)i =     1 + cos 4θ +    sin 4θ                           (C.3)
                                         2π     4         4

where θ is the angle between x1 and the detector.
      For a free boson, we have that the energy correlator vanishes at θ = π/4 which forces
t4 = 4 21 . Then near θ = π/4 we would have regions with negative energy correlator if d4
was nonzero.
      Thus, we are forced to conclude that the odd piece is not allowed by the assumption
of the positivity of the energy flow. In the main text we have also excluded the odd piece
in other ways.

 21
      The operator is odd under the exchange of the 1 and 2 axis, but the state of two massless
scalars going back to back along this axis would be even.

                                                     47
       Notice also that the energy correlator that we obtain, after setting the fermion and odd
parts to zero, is such that it vanishes for one particular angle. This is already a suggestion
that the theory is probably free, since in an interacting theory we expect showering so the
energy distribution will never be exactly zero. In other words, showering from a neighboring
angle would make it non-zero. In fact, it is natural to conjecture that if hj2 j2 j2 if = 0 (or
hj2 j2 j2 ib = 0), then the theory is free, without assuming that a higher spin current exist.


Appendix D. Half-integer higher spin currents implies even spin higher spin
currents

       Here we assume that we start from a higher, half-integer spin current js , s ≥ 5/2. We
then argue that we also have even spin currents. Then we can go back to the case treated
in the main text.
       The analysis is completely parallel to what was done in section five for integer spin
currents. We simply need a couple of other formulas. For half integer s and s′ we need
that
                                            s′ −1/2 2
                           hjs′ j2 b js i ∝ ∂1     ∂2 hψφjs if ree ,
                                             s′ −1/2
                           hjs′ j2 f js i ∝ ∂1  ∂2 hφψjs if ree ,
                                                                  s−1/2
                                             1          1       1                             (D.1)
                           hψφjs if ree ∝ 3/2 1/2          −
                                         x̂13 x̂23    x̂13    x̂23
                                                                  s−1/2
                                             1          1       1
                           hφψjs if ree ∝ 1/2 3/2          −
                                         x̂ x̂        x̂13    x̂23
                                                 13   23
It is clear that in a free theory of bosons and fermions these formulas are true. In fact, these
formulas follow from conformal invariance and current conservation of the third current.
This can be shown directly using the methods of appendix I.
       We can now use these expressions to consider the Qs charge conservation identity on
hj2 j2 b js i. [Qs , js ] gives a sum of integer spin currents so that we get a contribution to the
charge conservation identity similar to the second term in (5.9). The action of [Qs , j2 j2 b ]
requires a bit more words. First [Qs , j2 ] gives some other half integer spin currents. Then
we can do the light-like OPE using (D.1) for each term and summing all the terms. After
the dust settles, such terms give us
                                                                                  s− 12
                          2 2    s− 23 1        s− 23 1           1        1      1
     h[Qs , j2 j2 b ]si =∂1 ∂2 γ∂1          + δ∂2            √                −
                                       x̂13           x̂23     x̂12 x̂13 x̂13   x̂23
                                                                                  s− 12   (D.2)
                                 s− 12 1        s− 21 1          1         1      1
     h[Qs , j2 j2 f ]si =∂1 ∂2 γ∂1          + δ∂2            √                −
                                      x̂23           x̂13      x̂12 x̂13 x̂13   x̂23

                                                       48
                                                1
here permutation symmetry fixes δ = (−1)s− 2 γ.
    The analysis of these charge conservation identities is very similar to the one we did
before. Again we can count the number of independent terms in the right hand side and
conclude that we expect a unique solution. This unique solution is the one we get in a
free supersymmetric theory. We conclude that currents jk appear in j2 j2 with even spins
k = 2, 4, · · · , 2s − 1. If s ≥ 5/2, then 2s − 1 ≥ 4 and we have a higher spin current with
integer spin and we can go back to the analysis done in section five.


Appendix E. Functions that are annihilated by all charges
    Suppose that we have a function f (xi ) of n variables that has a Taylor series expansion
and is such that Qs = i (∂xi )s annihilates it for all odd s. We want to prove that the
                        P

function can be written as a sum of functions (not all equal)
                        X
              f (xi ) =   gσ (xσ(1) − xσ(2) , xσ(3) − xσ(4) , ..., xσ(n−1) − xσ(n) )    (E.1)
                         σ
where the sum is over all permutations. Notice that the each function depends on [ n2 ]
variables, compared to the original n xi . If n is odd, then we drop the last variable (the
function is independent of the last variable). Here we will not use conformal symmetry.
Also we assume that the variables xi are ordinary numbers and not vectors, etc.

E.1. Proof
    First if f has a Taylor series expansion, we can organize it in terms of the overall degree
of each term. Say we have a polynomial in xi and we can separate the terms according to
the overall degree of each term. Then Qs should annihilate terms of different degrees. In
other words, there is no mixing between terms of different degrees. Thus, we have to prove
the statement for polynomials of degree k. The statement is obvious for degree k = 0.
Now assume it is valid up to degree k and we want to prove it for degree k + 1.
   If we have a polynomial Pk+1 that is annihilated by the charges, then we can take
∂x1 Pk which is also annihilated and is a polynomial of degree k. Thus, by assumption ∂x1 Pk
can be written as in (E.1). We can now integrate each term in such a way that we preserve
its form. For example if we have a function of the form g(x1 − x2 , · · ·), then we integrate it
                                                                          P
with respect to x12 . After we are done, we would have written Pk+1 = σ gσ +h(x2 , · · · xn ).
In other words, we are left with an integration “constant” which is a function of n − 1
variables. Clearly the first term, the one involving the functions g, is annihilated by the
Qs , so h is also annihilated. Now we can repeat the argument for h, viewing it as a function
of n − 1 variables. In this way we eliminate all variables.
    Thus, we have proven what we wanted to prove.

                                              49
E.2. Functions with Fourier Transform

     Of course, if the function f has a Fourier transform, then it is even easier to prove
the statement. In that case we have Qs = i kis . Now we take s → ∞, then the largest
                                           P

or lowest value of k dominates (depending on whether there is a |k| bigger than one or
not). There must be an even number of largest |ki | otherwise for large s we would violate
the equality. Say there are two, say k1 = −k2 . Thus, the Fourier transform must have
a δ(k1 + k2 ). We can now repeat the same with the second largest, etc, to argue that
     P
f = σ g(kσ(2), kσ(4) , · · · , kσ(n) )δ(kσ(1) + kσ(2) ) · · · δ(kσ(n−1) − kσ(n) ). which is the same
as saying (E.1).
     The reason we proved it for functions that have a Taylor series expansion, rather
than a Fourier expansion, is that our definition of the quasi-bilocal operators, (5.14) and
(5.15), involve the operator product expansion. So these are given in terms of power series
expansions. In principle, we do not know how to continue them beyond their convergence
radius. For this reason we do not know, in principle, whether a Fourier transform exists,
or whether the action of the higher spin charges (5.16) continues to be valid beyond that
region. Of course, the result proved in this appendix, together with conformal symmetry
and analyticity, allows us to extend the bilocals everywhere.



Appendix F. Current conservation equation in terms of cross ratios

     We consider parity even correlation functions of a conserved current with two spinning
operators of general twist

                                                                           1
    hOτ1 ,s1 (x1 )Oτ2 ,s2 (x2 )js3 (x3 )i =                                                            F (Qi , Pi )   (F.1)
                                              |x12   |τ1 +τ2 −1 |x   13   |τ1 +1−τ2 |x       τ +1−τ1
                                                                                         23 | 2


where Qi and Pi are the conformal cross ratios introduced in [27], see also [28]. Here τ2,3
are the twists of the second and third operators. The function F is constrained by current
conservation. Here we give an expression for the condition for current conservation as a
function of the cross ratios. The idea is to write ∂λ3 /∂x3 ∂λ3 , act on (F.1), and then rewrite
the answer in terms of cross ratios. We end up with an equation for F which can be
expressed purely in terms of a differential operator acting on F , D3 F = 0, with

                                                          50
 D3 = − 8(Q2 Q3 − P12 )∂Q2 ∂Q
                            2
                              3
                                + 8(Q1 Q3 − P22 )∂Q1 ∂Q
                                                      2
                                                        3


         − 4Q2 ∂Q2 ∂Q3 + 4Q1 ∂Q1 ∂Q3 − Q1 ∂P2 2 + Q2 ∂P2 1 +
         + 2(−Q1 P1 + P2 P3 )∂P1 ∂P2 2 − 2(−Q2 P2 + P1 P3 )∂P2 ∂P2 1 +
         + 2(−Q1 Q2 + P32 )(∂P2 2 ∂Q2 − ∂P2 1 ∂Q1 )+
         + 2(P22 − Q1 Q3 )∂Q3 ∂P2 2 − 2(P12 − Q2 Q3 )∂Q3 ∂P2 1 +
         + 8(Q1 P1 − P2 P3 )∂Q1 ∂Q3 ∂P1 − 8(Q2 P2 − P1 P3 )∂Q2 ∂Q3 ∂P2 +
         + (τ2 − τ1 ) −4∂Q3 Q3 ∂Q3 − 4∂Q3 (P1 ∂P1 + P2 ∂P2 ) − Q2 ∂P2 1 − Q1 ∂P2 2 − 2P3 ∂P1 ∂P2
                                                                                                

                                                                                             (F.2)
     In principle one could also write a similar expression for odd structures. One can
write the Si in [27], by taking square roots in (2.18) of [27], and then being careful about
the sign of the square root. Doing this, we can still use (F.2), for odd structures.


Appendix G. Four point function of scalar operators in the fermion-like theory
     Using the transformation law for the twist two scalar which we derived in section 6.6
                                      [Q4 , j̃0 ] = ∂ 3 j̃0 + γ(∂−
                                                                 2
                                                                   j2−⊥ − ∂− ∂⊥ j2−− )            (G.1)
we can solve the charge conservation identity h[Q4 , j̃0 j̃0 j̃0 j̃0 ]i = 0. The result is
                          f (u, v)
   hj̃0 j̃0 j̃0 j̃0 i =
                          x412 x434
                          1 u 1
       f (u, v) = f (v, u) =
                           f( , )
                          v v v
                        1   1       1 + u5/2 + v 5/2 − u3/2 (1 + v) − v 3/2 (1 + u) − u − v
       f (u, v) = α(1 + 2 + 2 ) + β
                       u    v                             u3/2 v 3/2
                                                                                         (G.2)
and for hJ2 j̃0 j̃0 j̃0 i we get, using the notation of [28],
                                                    ǫ(Z1 , P1 , P2 , P3 , P4 )
  hJ2 (x1 )j0 (x2 )j0 (x3 )j0 (x4 )i =
                                               (P1 P2 )3 (P1 P3 )(P1 P4 )(P3 P4 )2
                                           [Q123 f1 (u, v) + Q134 f2 (u, v) + Q142 f3 (u, v)] ,
                                               (Z1 Pi )(Pj P1 ) − (Z1 Pj )(Pi P1 )
                                      Q1ij =                                       ,
                                                            (Pi Pj )
                                               9 v 3/2              9 u                  9    1
                               γf1 (u, v) =     β 3/2 , γf2 (u, v) = β 3/2 , γf3 (u, v) = β 3/2 3/2 .
                                               5 u                  5 v                  5 u v
                                                                                                 (G.3)
As in the case of bosons β and γ are fixed as soon as we choose the normalization for the
two-point function of stress tensors.

                                                             51
Appendix H. Conformal blocks for free scalar

     In the main text we introduced the quasi-bilocal operators by taking a particular
light-like limit of stress tensors (5.14). These are the sum of contributions from several
spins. They can be defined in any theory, even in theories that do not have the higher
spin symmetry. In a generic interacting theory we only get the contribution of the stress
tensor. Here we would like to present some explicit formulas showing that the projection
on to a single spin contribution does not define a genuine bilocal operator.
     Let us focus on the contribution with a particular spin s. This is again a quasi-bilocal
operator which can be defined as follows
                                                 X                        x1 + x2
                               bs (x1 , x2 ) =       ci,n (x1 − x2 )i ∂ n js (    ),
                                                                              2               (H.1)
                    hbs (x1 , x2 )js (x3 )i ∼ hφ∗ (x1 )φ(x2 )js (x3 )if ree .

The second line fixes the constants in the first line. We can define it even away from the
light cone limit by this formula. Defined in this way, bs (x1 , x2 ) transforms as a bi-primary
operator with conformal weights (∆x = 21 , ∆y = 21 ) and obeys the Laplace equation for
both points. However, as we emphasized, this is not the product of two free fields!. In
particular, notice that b2 (x1 , x2 ) exists in any CFT.
     To see the quasi-bilocal nature of bs (x1 , x2 ) let us consider the two point function of
bilocals hbs (x1 , x2 )bs (x3 , x4 )i. In d = 3 it is given by the contribution of conserved current
of spin s, Js , into the four point function of free fields. This problem was addressed recently
in [37]. The answer is given by the formula (6.20) in [37] with a = b = 0, λ1 = s + 12 ,
λ2 = 21 , l = s

                                                   1
                  hbs (x1 , x2 )bs (x3 , x4 )i =           Fs (u, v)
                                              |x12 ||x34 |
                                              √ Z π                     √
                                                u           4s X s (1 + 1 − X)−2s
                                  Fs (u, v) =          dθ            √                        (H.2)
                                               π 0                     1−X
                                          X = z cos2 θ + z̄ sin2 θ
                                           u = zz̄,        v = (1 − z)(1 − z̄)
This integral is not known for general s. Fortunately, for s = 0 it is known and we get
                                                                                 z−z̄
                                                             1       2 K(− 1−z )
                         hb0 (x1 , x2 )b0 (x3 , x4 )i =                 √                     (H.3)
                                                        |x13 ||x24 | π    1−z

where K(y) is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind.

                                                      52
    One can check that this solution satisfies the Laplace equation. Also one can check that
it has a singularity at the expected locations. However, the behavior near the singularity
is not the one that is expected for the correlator of local operators. More precisely, in the
limit z → 1, with z̄ fixed but close to one, we get a term log(1 − z). For local operators
the singularities are power-like.


Appendix I. Fixing correlators in the light-like limit

    Here we would like to show how the three point correlators are fixed in the light-like
limit hjs1 js2 js3 i. We use the conventions and notation of Giombi, Prakash and Yin [27].
In the light like limit we have P3 = 0, the rest of the conformal invariants are non-zero.
    The general conformal invariant, without any factor of P3 has the form
                                 1          X
        hjs1 js2 js3 i =                      cab Qa1 Qb2 P22s1 −2a P12s2 −2b Q3s3 −s1 −s2 +a+b .   (I.1)
                         |x12 ||x13 ||x23 |
                                             a,b

We can now use the relation the P ’s and Q’s given in equation (2.14) of [27]. Setting
P3 = 0 we get
                                                                    P12   P22
                      P12 Q1 + P22 Q2 = Q1 Q2 Q3 ,           ⇒ Q3 =     +                           (I.2)
                                                                    Q2    Q1
We can use this relation to solve for Q3 and eliminate it from (I.1). Then we find a simpler
formula
                                                  1
                        hjs1 js2 js3 i =                     f (s1 , s2 , s3 ) ,
                                          |x12 ||x13 ||x23 |
                                           s3                                                       (I.3)
                                                                     2(s −a)
                                          X
                      f (s1 , s2 , s3 ) =     c(a)Qs11 −a P22a P1 3 Qs22 −s3 +a
                                           a=0
    We would like now to impose current conservation on the third current. The corre-
spondent operator of the divergence can be obtained from (F.2) by setting P3 to zero. The
resulting operator is


          D3 = −(1 + 2P1 ∂P1 + 2Q2 ∂Q2 )Q1 ∂P2 2 + (1 + 2P2 ∂P2 + 2Q1 ∂Q1 )Q2 ∂P2 1 .               (I.4)

    By imposing D3 f (s1 , s2 , s3 ) = 0 we find a recursive relation

                      c(a + 1)   (s1 + a + 21 ) (s3 − a − 12 ) (s3 − a)
                               =                                                                    (I.5)
                        c(a)        (a + 12 ) (s3 + s2 − a − 12 ) (a + 1)
    This gives a unique solution, which is the one we considered in the main text (5.2).
Once we know the solution is unique, we can simply use the free boson answer to get (5.2).
But one can check explicitly that (I.5) gives (5.2).

                                                   53
I.1. Fermions

     For fermions we expect a factor of P3 . In whatever multiplies this factor, we can set
P3 = 0 and use (I.2). This means that the conservation condition will act in the same way
on what multiplies P3 as it acted on the boson case. Thus, we get the following structure

                                                       s̃3
                                                                                 2(s̃3 −b)
                                                       X
                         f
                     f (s1 , s2 , s3 ) = P3 P1 P2            c̃(b)Qs̃11 −b P22b P1           Qs̃22 −s̃3 +b       (I.6)
                                                       b=0


where s̃i = si − 1.This looks very similar to (I.3). In fact, we see that

                                                                     1      1
                                    f f (s1 , s2 , s3 ) = P3 fh (s1 − , s2 − , s3 )                              (I.7)
                                                                     2      2

where fh is the same sum as in (I.3) but with a running over half integer values a =
1 3
 , , · · · , s3 − 12 .
2 2
                         Thus, the action of D3 , (I.4), leads to the same recursion relation (I.5),
but now running over half integer values of a.
     This again proves that there is a unique structure, which is (5.4).
     In the same way one can obtain (D.1).

I.2. General operators

     We now explicitly solve the problem of finding the different parity even structures we
can have for the three point function of two operators of the same twist and one conserved
current. The problem is very similar to what we solved above. The main observation is
that P3 does not depend on λ3 or x3 . Then if we have a solution to the current conservation
condition, we can generate a new solution by multiplying by P3 . Then the general even
structures have the form

                                        1              X
     hOs1 Os2 js3 i ∼                                    P32l [hjs1 −l js2 −l js3 ib + hjs1 −l js2 −l js3 if ]   (I.8)
                             |x12 |2τ0 −1 |x23 ||x13 |
                                                        l


The sum runs over the bosonic and fermionic three point functions of three conserved
currents. We can easily check that these are solutions. The fact that these are all the
solutions is obtained by taking light cone limits. To order P30 the solution is constrained
as in (I.5), which is the same as what we get from the l = 0 in (I.8). If we now subtract
the l = 0 term, which is a solution, we can take the light cone limit and focus on the P31
term, etc.

                                                             54
     In (I.8), the sum over the bosonic structures runs over 1 + min[s1 , s2 ] values. The sum
over fermion structures runs over min[s1 , s2 ] values. The total number of structures that
we have is
                                      1 + 2 min[s1 , s2 ]                                (I.9)

These formulas are valid for integer spins. Probably, there is a similar story with half
integer spins.
     It would be interesting to fix also the structures that appear when the twists of the
two operators are not the same. For that we would have to include the last term in (F.2)
when we analyze the constraints.


Appendix J. More explicit solutions to the charge conservation identities of
section five

     Here we discuss further the charge conservation identities of section five and we prove
that they have the properties stated there. To find the explicit solution of (5.9) it is
convenient to restate the problem in a slightly different language. First remember that it
is easy to prove that there is a unique solution of (5.9) which coincides with the free field
one. However, we need to check that for all even k α̃k is non-zero. So we focus on the free
field theory.

J.1. Expression for the currents in the free theory

     The expressions for the conserved currents are bilinear in the fields and contain a
combination of derivatives that makes the field a primary conformal field. These are
computed in multiple places in the literature, (see e.g. [38] [39] and references therein).
We would like to start by providing a derivation for the expression for these currents that
is particularly simple in three dimensions.
     Consider the Fourier space expression for a current contracted with a three dimensional
spinor λ, λ2s .J(q), where q µ is the three-momentum. We can consider the matrix element

                                  F = hp1 , p2 |(λ2s .J(q))|0i                           (J.1)

here p1 and p2 are two massless three dimensional momenta of the two bosons or two
fermions that make up the current. A massless three dimensional momentum can be
written in terms of a three dimensional spinor, πα . In other words, we write pαβ =

                                              55
    µ
pµ σαβ = πα πβ . Since we have two massless momenta we have two such spinors π 1 and π 2 .
Of course, q = p1 + p2 and it is not an independent variable. We can also view (J.1) as the
form factor for the current. It is telling us how the current is made out of the fundamental
fields. Clearly, Lorentz invariance implies that (J.1) is a function F (λ.π 1 , λ.π 2 ). However,
since the current is also conserved, it should obey the equation
                              ∂2                        ∂2           ∂2
                                                                            
                         αβ                      2
                   0=q             F = (π1 .π2 )                +              F           (J.2)
                            ∂λα λβ                   ∂(π 1 .λ)2   ∂(π 2 .λ)2
where we expressed qαβ = πα1 πβ1 + πα2 πβ2 and we acted on the function F (λ.π 1 , λ.π 2 ). We
can now define the variables
                          z = π1 .λ − iπ2 .λ ,                 z̄ = π2 .λ + iπ2 .λ         (J.3)
Then the equation (J.2) becomes
                                               ∂z ∂z̄ F (z, z̄) = 0                        (J.4)
The solutions are purely holomorphic or purely anti-holomorphic functions. Since the
homogeneity degree in λ is fixed to be 2s, we get the two solutions
                                Fb = z 2s + z̄ 2s ,            Ff = z 2s − z̄ 2s           (J.5)
The first corresponds to the expression for the current in the free boson theory and the
second to the expression in the free fermion theory, as we explain below. These expres-
sions contain the same information as the functions hφφ∗ js if ree and hψψ ∗ js if ree that we
discussed in section five.
     In order to translate to the usual expressions in terms of derivatives acting on fields,
without loss of generality, we can choose λ so that it is purely along the direction λ− . In
the boson expression, each π i .λ appears to even powers, say (π 1 .λ)2k (π 2 .λ)2s−2k such a
                         k ∗           2(s−k)
term can be replaced by ∂− φ ∂−                 φ. The Fb gives the expression
                                      s
                                      X                    1
                          jsbos ∼           (−1)k                   ∂ k φ∗ ∂ s−k φ.        (J.6)
                                                    (2k)!(2s − 2k)!
                                      k=0

Similarly, for the fermion case we have odd powers and we replace (π 1 .λ)2k+1 (π 2 .λ)2s−2k−1
    k ∗ s−1−k
by ∂− ψ− ∂ −  ψ− and Ff in (J.5) gives
                                s
                                X                        1
                     jsf er ∼         (−1)k                           ∂ k ψ ∗ ∂ s−k ψ.     (J.7)
                                              (2k + 1)!(2s − 2k − 1)!
                                k=0
where all are minus component.
     Notice that we do not even need to go to Fourier space to think about the z and z̄
variables. We can just think of them as book-keeping devices to summarize the expansions
(J.7) , (J.6) via the simple expressions (J.5).

                                                        56
J.2. Analyzing the charge conservation identity

     Symmetries act on free field as

                              [Qs , φ] = ∂ s−1 φ,       [Qs , φ∗ ] = (−1)s ∂ s−1 φ∗            (J.8)

and a similar expression for the fermions. Expressing this in terms of the z and z̄ variables
we rewrite (J.8) as
                                                                          ′       ′
                    [Qs , js′ ](z, z̄) = (z + z̄)2s−2 − (z − z̄)2s−2 (z 2s ± z̄ 2s ).
                                                                   
                                                                                               (J.9)

where the ± indicate the results in a boson of fermion theory respectively. Then, using
the notation from (5.9), we have
                                            s−1
                                            X
                      [Qs , js ](z, z̄) =         α̃2k z 2s−2k−1 z̄ 2s−2k−1 (z 4k ± z̄ 4k )   (J.10)
                                            k=1

where we used the map ∂3 → zz̄. As in the previous subsection this can be seen by
∂3 = ∂x− → λ2 q and λ2 .q = (λ.π 1 )2 + (λ.π 2 )2 = zz̄. Expanding the left hand side of (J.9)
        3

for s′ = s we get
                                                        2 Γ(2s − 1)
                                          α̃2k =                                              (J.11)
                                                      Γ(2k)Γ(2s − 2k)
which are all non-zero. Thus, this solves the problem of showing that α̃k are non-zero for
the free theories. This works equally simply for the boson-like and the fermion-like light
like limits.
     We can also do a similar expansion for the action of [Qs , js′ ] and find which terms
appear in the right hand side
                                ′
                            s+s
                             X−2                  ′
  [Qs , js′ ] =(2s − 2)!                α̃r ∂ s+s −r−1 jr
                           r=−s′ −s+2
                              ′
              [1 + (−1)s+s +r ]
                                                                                               
                                                     1                           1
        α̃r =                                                      ±                              .
                     2                  Γ(r + s − s′ )Γ(s + s′ − r) Γ(r + s + s′ )Γ(s − s′ − r)
                                                                                              (J.12)
The ± indicates the boson/fermion case.
     This is how all the other charge conservation identities we discussed in section five
can be analyzed. Namely, in section five we argued that all solutions are unique. And by
computing for free theories as in this appendix we check which coefficients are non-zero.
This works in the same way for the boson-like and fermion-like light like limits.

                                                         57
     We can go over the charge conservation identities and the properties we used.
     (5.19): We used that if s is odd, s > 1, and s′ = 2, then both j1 and js appear in the
right hand side. This simply amounts to checking that for s′ = 2, r = 1, s, the coefficient
in (J.12) is non-zero for any odd s. We can also check that we get a js in the right hand
side. This is the case both for the boson and fermion case.
     (5.21): We used that if s is even and s′ = 2, then we get both a j2 and a js in the
right hand side of (J.12).
     (5.20): Here we used a slightly different property. The reason is that (5.20) does not
correspond to the transformation of any free field, since an s even charge in free theories
acts with + signs in front of the ∂ s−1 . In order to analyze (5.20), it is convenient to view
the functions in (5.20) in Fourier space, as we have done here. Then we can rewrite (5.20)
as
                                                           s
                                                           X
               2s−2            2s−2
                                                             β̃r (zz̄)s−r (z 2r ± z̄ 2r )
                                    2     2
      (z + z̄)      + (z − z̄)       (z ± z̄ ) = (2s − 2)!                                  (J.13)
                                                            r=−s


Then one can find that

           [1 + (−1)s+r ]
                                                                                      
                                           1                        1
     β̃r =                                              ±                                   (J.14)
                 2              Γ(r + s − 1)Γ(s − r + 1) Γ(r + s + 1)Γ(s − r − 1)

which is the same expression as before, in (J.12), for s′ = 1, except for the (−1) dependent
prefactor which now implies that now the sum over r runs from r = −s, −s + 2, · · · , s. Now
the important point is that β̃s is non-zero. We used this in (5.20).
     In the discussion of elimination of j0′ , for the boson-like case, we used that [Qs , js′ ]
produces both j0 and j2 in the boson theory and for s, s′ even, with s > s′ . This can also
be checked from (J.12), by setting r = 0, 2. Note that in (J.12) α̃0 = 0 in fermion theory
(the minus sign in (J.12)), as expected.




                                                 58
                                          References

 [1]   S. R. Coleman, J. Mandula, Phys. Rev. 159, 1251-1256 (1967).
 [2]   R. Haag, J. T. Lopuszanski, M. Sohnius, Nucl. Phys. B88, 257 (1975).
 [3]   C. L. Basham, L. S. Brown, S. D. Ellis and S. T. Love, Phys. Rev. D 17, 2298 (1978).
 [4]   D. M. Hofman, J. Maldacena, JHEP 0805, 012 (2008). [arXiv:0803.1467 [hep-th]].
 [5]   A. B. Zamolodchikov, A. B. Zamolodchikov, Annals Phys. 120, 253-291 (1979).
 [6]   V. A. Fateev, S. L. Lukyanov, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A3, 507 (1988).
 [7]   E. S. Fradkin and M. A. Vasiliev, Nucl. Phys. B 291, 141 (1987).
 [8]   M. A. Vasiliev, In *Shifman, M.A. (ed.): The many faces of the superworld* 533-610.
       [hep-th/9910096].
 [9]   E. Sezgin and P. Sundell, Nucl. Phys. B 644, 303 (2002), [Erratum-ibid. B 660, 403
       (2003)]. [hep-th/0205131].
[10]   I. R. Klebanov, A. M. Polyakov, Phys. Lett. B550, 213-219 (2002). [hep-th/0210114].
[11]   S. Giombi, X. Yin, JHEP 1009, 115 (2010). [arXiv:0912.3462 [hep-th]].
[12]   S. Giombi and X. Yin, JHEP 1104, 086 (2011). [arXiv:1004.3736 [hep-th]].
[13]   D. Anninos, T. Hartman, A. Strominger, [arXiv:1108.5735 [hep-th]].
[14]   S. Giombi and X. Yin, [arXiv:1105.4011 [hep-th]].
[15]   R. d. M. Koch, A. Jevicki, K. Jin and J. P. Rodrigues, Phys. Rev. D 83, 025006 (2011).
       [arXiv:1008.0633 [hep-th]].
[16]   M. R. Douglas, L. Mazzucato and S. S. Razamat, Phys. Rev. D 83, 071701 (2011).
       [arXiv:1011.4926 [hep-th]].
[17]   Solvay workshop proceedings , http://www.ulb.ac.be/sciences/ptm/pmif/HSGT.htm
[18]   M. Bianchi and V. Didenko, [hep-th/0502220].
[19]   D. Francia and C. M. Hull, [hep-th/0501236].
[20]   S. de Buyl and A. Kleinschmidt, [hep-th/0410274].
[21]   A. C. Petkou, [hep-th/0410116].
[22]   N. Bouatta, G. Compere and A. Sagnotti, [hep-th/0409068].
[23]   X. Bekaert, S. Cnockaert, C. Iazeolla and M. A. Vasiliev, [hep-th/0503128].
[24]   N.T.Evans, J.Math.Phys. 8 (1967) 170-185.
[25]   M. G. Eastwood, Annals Math. 161, 1645 (2005). [hep-th/0206233].
[26]   S. El-Showk, K. Papadodimas, [arXiv:1101.4163 [hep-th]].
[27]   S. Giombi, S. Prakash, X. Yin, [arXiv:1104.4317 [hep-th]].
[28]   M. S. Costa, J. Penedones, D. Poland, S. Rychkov, [arXiv:1107.3554 [hep-th]].
[29]   S. H. Shenker and X. Yin, [arXiv:1109.3519 [hep-th]].
[30]   S. Giombi, S. Minwalla, S. Prakash, S. P. Trivedi, S. R. Wadia, X. Yin, [arXiv:1110.4386
       [hep-th]].
[31]   O. Aharony, G. Gur-Ari, R. Yacoby, [arXiv:1110.4382 [hep-th]].

                                               59
[32] A. Sagnotti and M. Taronna, Nucl. Phys. B 842, 299 (2011). [arXiv:1006.5242 [hep-
     th]].
[33] I. Heemskerk, J. Penedones, J. Polchinski and J. Sully, JHEP 0910, 079 (2009)
     [arXiv:0907.0151 [hep-th]].
[34] A. L. Fitzpatrick, E. Katz, D. Poland and D. Simmons-Duffin, JHEP 1107, 023 (2011).
     [arXiv:1007.2412 [hep-th]].
[35] J. M. Maldacena, G. L. Pimentel, JHEP 1109, 045 (2011). [arXiv:1104.2846 [hep-th]].
[36] A. Buchel, J. Escobedo, R. C. Myers, M. F. Paulos, A. Sinha and M. Smolkin, JHEP
     1003, 111 (2010). [arXiv:0911.4257 [hep-th]].
[37] F. A. Dolan and H. Osborn, [arXiv:1108.6194 [hep-th]].
[38] A. Mikhailov, [hep-th/0201019].
[39] S. E. Konstein, M. A. Vasiliev and V. N. Zaikin, JHEP 0012, 018 (2000). [hep-
     th/0010239].




                                           60
