                                                                                                                        PUPT-2410




                                                      Constraining conformal field theories




arXiv:1204.3882v1 [hep-th] 17 Apr 2012
                                               with a slightly broken higher spin symmetry


                                                                     Juan Maldacenaa and Alexander Zhiboedovb

                                                         a
                                                             School of Natural Sciences, Institute for Advanced Study
                                                                                Princeton, NJ, USA
                                                                 b
                                                                     Department of Physics, Princeton University
                                                                                Princeton, NJ, USA


                                             We consider three dimensional conformal field theories that have a higher spin sym-
                                         metry that is slightly broken. The theories have a large N limit, in the sense that the
                                         operators separate into single trace and multitrace and obey the usual large N factoriza-
                                         tion properties. We assume that the spectrum of single trace operators is similar to the
                                         one that one gets in the Vasiliev theories. Namely, the only single trace operators are the
                                         higher spin currents plus an additional scalar. The anomalous dimensions of the higher
                                         spin currents are of order 1/N . Using the slightly broken higher spin symmetry we con-
                                         strain the three point functions of the theories to leading order in N . We show that there
                                         are two families of solutions. One family can be realized as a theory of N fermions with
                                         an O(N ) Chern-Simons gauge field, the other as a N bosons plus the Chern-Simons gauge
                                         field. The family of solutions is parametrized by the ’t Hooft coupling. At special parity
                                         preserving points we get the critical O(N ) models, both the Wilson-Fisher one and the
                                         Gross-Neveu one. Our analysis also fixes the on shell three point functions of Vasiliev’s
                                         theory on AdS4 or dS4 .
                                          Contents
1. Introduction       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .    2
2. Possible divergence of the spin four operator      . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .    5
  2.1. Spectrum of the theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           .   .   .   .   .    5
  2.2. Divergence of the spin four current . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        .   .   .   .   .    6
3. Structures for the three point functions       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .    9
4. Charge non-conservation identities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   12
  4.1. General story . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            .   .   .   .   .   12
  4.2. Constraints on three point functions with non-zero even spins . . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   15
  4.3. Closing the chain. The Quasi-fermion case. . . . . . . . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   19
  4.4. Closing the chain. The Quasi-boson case.         . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   21
  4.5. Three point functions involving scalars. The quasi-fermion case. . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   22
  4.6. Three point functions involving scalars. The quasi-boson case.     . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   23
  4.7. Comments about higher point correlation functions . . . . . . . . . .        .   .   .   .   .   25
5. Final results      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   25
  5.1. Quasi-fermion theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           .   .   .   .   .   26
  5.2. Quasi-boson theory        . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   27
  5.3. The critical point of O(N )      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   28
  5.4. The critical O(N ) fermion theory       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    .   .   .   .   .   30
  5.5. Relation to other Chern-Simons matter theories . . . . . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   30
  5.6. Comments about higher dimensions           . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   31
  5.7. A comment on higher order parity violating terms . . . . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   32
6. Conclusions and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           .   .   .   .   .   33
Appendix A. Why the divergence of the currents should be conformal primaries        .   .   .   .   .   35
Appendix B. Structure of the pseudo-charge conservation identities      . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   37
Appendix C. Compendium of normalizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            .   .   .   .   .   38
Appendix D. Exploring the scalar sector for the quasi-fermion . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   39
  D.1. Fixing c̃0̃,0̃ and nontrivial consistency check . . . . . . . . . . . . .    .   .   .   .   .   40
  D.2. Fixing hs0̃0̃i . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   41
  D.3. Fixing γ0̃0̃0̃ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   42
Appendix E. Exploring the scalar sector for the quasi-boson . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   43
  E.1. Fixing c̃0,0     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   43
  E.2. Fixing hs00i . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           .   .   .   .   .   44
  E.3. Vanishing of the double trace term in the h000i identity . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   45
Appendix F. Impossibility to add any further double trace deformations . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   46
  F.1. Case of quasi-fermion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   .   .   .   .   47
  F.2. Case of quasi-boson       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   48
  F.3. Triple trace deformation       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   48
Appendix G. Motivational introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           .   .   .   .   .   49




                                               1
1. Introduction

       In this paper we study a special class of three dimensional conformal field theories
that have a weakly broken higher spin symmetry. The theories have a structure similar to
what we expect for the CFT dual to a weakly coupled four dimensional higher spin gravity
theory in AdS4 [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9]. We compute the leading order three point functions of
the higher spin operators. We use current algebra methods. Our only assumption is that
the correlation functions defined on the boundary of AdS4 obey all the properties that a
boundary CFT would obey. But we will not need any details regarding this theory other
than some general features which follow from natural expectations for a weakly coupled
bulk dual. This seems a reasonable assumption for Vasiliev’s theory, since Vasiliev’s theory
appears to be local on distances much larger than the AdS radius. This would imply
that the usual definition of boundary correlators is possible [9,10,11]. In order to apply
our analysis to Vasiliev’s theory we need to make the assumption that these boundary
correlators can be defined and that they obey the general properties of a CFT. Thus we
are assuming AdS/CFT, but we are not specifying the precise definition of the boundary
CFT. Since our assumptions are very general, they also apply to theories involving N
scalar or fermions fields coupled to O(N ) or SU (N ) Chern-Simons gauge fields [12,13]. So
our methods are also useful for computing three point functions in these theories as well.
       Our assumptions are the following1 . We have a CFT with a unique stress tensor and
has a large parameter Ñ . In the Chern-Simons examples Ñ ∼ N . In the Vasiliev gravity
theories, 1/Ñ ∼ h̄ sets the bulk coupling constant of the theory. We then assume that
the spectrum of operators has the structure of an approximate Fock space, with single
particle states and multiparticle states. The dimensions of the multiparticle states are
given by the sum of the dimensions of their single particle constituents up to small 1/Ñ
corrections. This Fock space should not be confused with the Fock space of a free theory
in three dimensions. We should think of this Fock space as the Fock space of the weakly
coupled four dimensional gravity theory. In order to avoid this confusion we will call the
“single particle states” “single trace” and the multiparticle states “multiple trace”. In the
Chern-Simons gauge theories this is indeed the case. We also assume that the theory has
the following spectrum of single trace states. It has a single spin two conserved current.
In addition, it has a sequence of approximately conserved currents Js , with s = 4, 6, 8, · · ·.
   1
       These assumptions are not all independent from each other, but we will not give the minimal
set.

                                                 2
These currents are approximately conserved, so that their twist differs from one by a small
amount of order 1/Ñ
                                                               1
                                     τs = ∆s − s = 1 + O(        ).                                (1.1)
                                                              Ñ
     In addition, we have one single trace scalar operator. All connected correlators of
the single trace operators scale as Ñ . This includes the two point function of the stress
tensor. We also assume that the spectrum of single trace operators is such that the higher
spin symmetry can be broken only by double trace operators via effects of order 1/Ñ . In
particular, we assume that there are no twist three single trace operators in the theory.
     With these assumptions, we will find that the three point functions in these theories,
to leading order in Ñ , are constrained to lie on a one parameter family
                    "                                                                                  #
                       λ̃2                          1                          λ̃
 hJs1 Js2 Js3 i = Ñ         hJs1 Js2 Js3 ibos +         hJs1 Js2 Js3 ifer +         hJs1 Js2 Js3 iodd
                     1 + λ̃2                     1 + λ̃2                     1 + λ̃2
                                                                                                    (1.2)
where the subindices      bos and fer indicate the results in the theory of a single real boson

or a single Majorana fermion. The subindex odd denotes an odd structure which will be
defined more clearly below. Here λ̃ is a parameter labeling the family of solutions of the
current algebra constraints. More precise statements will be made below, including the
precise normalization of the currents.
     The class of theories for which our assumptions apply includes Vasiliev higher spin
theories in AdS4 with higher spin symmetry broken by the boundary conditions [1]. It also
applies for theories containing N fermions [12] or N bosons [13] interacting with an SO(N )
or U (N ) Chern-Simons gauge field. We call these theories quasi-fermion and quasi-boson
theories respectively. In such theories 1/Ñ ∝ 1/N is the small parameter. In addition, λ̃ ∼
λ = N/k is an effective ’t Hooft coupling in these theories. We emphasize that the analysis
here is only based on the symmetries and it covers both types of theories, independently
of any conjectured dualities between them. Of course, the results we obtain are consistent
with the proposed dualities between these Chern-Simons theories and Vasiliev’s theories
[7,6,9,12,13].
     We can take the limit of large λ̃ in (1.2) and we find that the the correlators of the
quasi-fermion theory go over to those of the critical O(N ) theory. And we have a similar
statement for the quasi-boson theory.

                                                   3
      Our analysis is centered on studying the spin four single trace operator J4 . We write
the most general form for its divergence, or lack of conservation. With our assumptions
this takes the schematic form

                                    ∂.J4 = a2 JJ ′ + a3 JJ ′ J ′′                        (1.3)

where on the right hand side we have products of two or three single trace operators,
together with derivatives sprinkled on the right hand side. The coefficients a2 and a3
are small quantities of order 1/Ñ and 1/Ñ 2 respectively. We will be able to use this
approximate conservation law in the expression for the three point function in order to get
(1.2). Note that in the case that J4 is exactly conserved, we simply have free boson or free
fermion correlators [14].
      We should emphasize that our discussion applies only to the special theories in [12,13],
but not to more general large N Chern-Simons matter theories. The special feature that
we are using is the lack of single trace operators of twist three. Such operators can appear
in the divergence of the spin four current (1.3). This can give rise to an anomalous
dimension for the higher spin currents already at the level of the classical theory (or large
Ñ approximation). In the theories in [12,13], we do not have a single trace operator that
can appear in the right hand side of (1.3). In the language of the bulk theory, we have the
pure higher spin theory without extra matter2 . In particular, the bulk theory lacks the
matter fields that could give a mass to the higher spin gauge fields via the Higgs mechanism
already at the classical level. Thus the higgsing is occurring via quantum effects involving
two (or three) particle states [15].
      Our analysis can also be viewed as an on shell analysis of the Vasiliev theory with
AdS4 asymptotic boundary conditions. If the higher spin symmetry is unbroken, then we
can use [14] to compute all correlators, just from the symmetry. In this paper we also use
an on shell analysis, but for the case that the higher spin symmetry is broken. As it has
often been emphasized, on shell results in gauge theories can be simpler than what the
fully covariant formalisms would suggest.
      For a more general motivational introduction, see appendix G.
      The paper is organized as follows.

  2
      By “matter” we mean extra multiplets under the higher spin symmetry. The scalar field of
the Vasiliev theory is part of the pure higher spin theory.

                                                 4
    In section two we discuss the most general form of the divergence of the spin four
current.
    In section three we present several facts about three point functions which are neces-
sary for the later analysis.
    In section four we explain how one can use the slightly broken higher spin symmetry
to fix the three point functions.
    In section five we present the results and explain their relation to known microscopic
theories.
    In section six we present conclusions and discussions.
    Several appendices contain technical details used in the main body of the paper.


2. Possible divergence of the spin four operator

2.1. Spectrum of the theory

    We consider theories with a large Ñ expansion. We do not assume that Ñ is an
integer. We assume that the set of operators develops the structure of a Fock space for
large Ñ . Namely, we can talk about single particle operators and multiparticle operators.
In the case of the Chern-Simons matter theories discussed in [12,13], these correspond
to single sum and multiple sum operators (sometimes called single trace or multitrace
operators). The spectrum of single trace operators includes a conserved spin two current,
the stress tensor, J2 µν . We will often suppress the spacetime indices and denote operators
with spin simply by Js . We have approximately conserved single trace operators Js , with
s = 4, 6, 8, · · ·. These operators have twists τ = 1 + O(1/Ñ ). In addition we have a single
scalar operator. We will see that the dimension of this operator has to be either one or
two. We denote the first possibility as j0 and the second as j̃0 . The theory that contains
j̃0 is called the quasi-fermion theory. The theory with j0 is called the quasi-boson theory.
The theory might contain also single particle operators with odd spins. For simplicity, let
us assume that these are not present, but we will later allow their presence and explain
that the correlators of even spin currents are unchanged.
    An example of a theory that obeys these properties is a theory with N massless
Majorana fermions interacting with an O(N ) Chern-Simons gauge field at level k [12]. In
                               P
this theory the scalar is j̃0 = i ψi ψi , which has dimension two, at leading order in N for
any λ = N/k. The name quasi-fermion was inspired by this theory, since we start from
fermions and the Chern-Simons interactions turns them into non-abelian anyons, which for

                                              5
large k, are very close to ordinary fermions. Our discussion is valid for any theory whose
single particle spectrum was described above. We are just calling “quasi-fermion” the case
where the spectrum includes a scalar with dimension two, j̃0 .
    A second example is a theory with N massless real scalars, again interacting with an
O(N ) Chern-Simons gauge field at level k [13]. This theory also allows the presence of
   ~ φ)
a (φ. ~ 3 potential while preserving conformal symmetry, at least to leading order in N .
As higher orders in the 1/N expansion are taken into account this coefficient is fixed, if
we want to preserve the conformal symmetry [13]. Here we will only do computations
to leading order in N , thus, we have two parameters N/k and the coupling of the ( ~
                                                                                  φ. ~
                                                                                     φ)3
potential. We call this case the quasi-boson theory. Again we will not use any of the
microscopic details of its definition. For us the property that defines it is that the scalar
has dimension one, j0 .
    A third example is the critical O(N ) theory (as well as interacting UV Gross-Neveu
fixed point). Namely, we can have N free scalars, perturbed by a potential of the form
  ~ φ)
(φ. ~ 2 , which flows in the IR to a new conformal field theory (after adjusting the coefficient
of the mass term to criticality). This is just the usual large N limit of the Wilson-Fisher
fixed point. This theory has no free parameters. Here the scalar operator j̃0 ∼ φi φi has
dimension two. It starts with dimension one in the UV but it has dimension two in the
IR. The UV theory has a higher spin symmetry. In the IR CFT this symmetry is broken
by 1/N effects. This theory is in the family of what we are calling the quasi-fermion case.
    A fourth example is a Vasiliev theory in AdS4 (or dS4 ) with general boundary condi-
tions which would generically break the higher spin symmetry. Here the bulk coupling is
h̄ ∼ 1/Ñ . Depending on whether the scalar has dimensions one or two, we would have a
quasi-fermion or quasi-boson case.
    We should emphasize that the theories we call quasi-fermion or quasi-boson case are
not specific microscopic theories. They are any theory that obeys our assumptions, where
the scalar has dimension two or one respectively.

2.2. Divergence of the spin four current

    Let us consider the spin four current J4 . We consider the divergence of this current. If
it is zero, then we have a conserved higher spin current and all correlators of the currents
are as in a theory of either free bosons or free fermions [14]. Here we consider the case
that this divergence is nonzero. Our assumptions are that the current is conserved in the
large Ñ limit. This means that in this limit J4 belongs to a smaller multiplet than at finite

                                               6
Ñ . At finite Ñ , J4 combines with another operator to form a full massive multiplet. More
precisely, it combines with the operator that appears in the right hand side of ∇.J4 =
∂µ J µ ν1 ν2 ν3 . In other words, ∇.J4 , should be a conformal primary operator in the large N
limit [16,15], see appendix A. ∇.J4 should be a twist three, spin three primary operator.
According to our assumptions there are no single particle operators of this kind. Note
that in general matter Chern-Simons theories, such as theories with adjoint fields, we can
certainly have single trace operators with twist three and spin three. So, in this respect,
the theories we are considering are very special. In our case, we can only have two particle
or three particle states with these quantum numbers.
      Let us choose the metric
                                      ds2 = dx+ dx− + dy 2                                  (2.1)

and denote the indices of a vector by v± , vy .
      Let us see what is the most general expression we can write down for (∇.J)−−− . Since
the total twist is three, and the total spin is three we can only make this operator out of
the stress tensor, J2 , and the scalar field. Any attempt to include a higher spin field would
have to raise the twist by more than three. A scalar field can only appear if its twist is one
or two. Note that we cannot have two stress tensors. The reason is that we cannot make
a twist three, spin three primary out of two stress tensors. Naively, we could imagine an
expression like J2 y− J2 −− . But this cannot be promoted into a covariant structure, even
if we use the ǫ tensor.3
      Let us consider first the case that the scalar has twist two, j̃0 . The most general
operator that we can write down is
                                                                   
                                                          2
                             ∂µ J µ−−− = a2    ∂− j̃0 j2 − j̃0 ∂− j2 .                      (2.2)
                                                          5

Here we are denoting by js = Js −···− , the all minus components of Js . In (2.2) we have
used the fact that the right hand side should be a conformal primary in order to fix the
relative coefficient. If we started out from the free fermion theory, then this structure
would break parity, since j̃0 is parity odd. Then we have a2 ∝ N/k, at least for large k.
In general j̃0 does not have well defined parity and the theory breaks parity. If we had the
critical O(N) theory, then (2.2) is perfectly consistent with parity, since in that case j̃0 is
parity even.

  3
      We could have promoted it if we had two different spin two currents: ǫ−µν J µ− J˜ν−

                                                 7
     Let us now consider the case where we have a scalar of twist one, j0 . Now there are
more conformal primaries that we can write down

    ∂µ j µ −−− = a2 ǫ−µν 8∂ µ j0 ∂ ν j−− − 6∂ µ j0 ∂− j ν− − 5∂− ∂ µ j0 j ν− − j0 ∂− ∂ µ j ν−
                                                                                             

               + a3 j0 j0 ∂ 3 j0 − 9j0 ∂j0 ∂ 2 j0 + 12∂j0 ∂j0 ∂j0
                                                                 
                                                                                                  (2.3)
                + a′3 [∂j2 j0 j0 − 5j2 ∂j0 j0 ] .

We have only written combinations which are conformal primaries. We have also denoted
∂ ≡ ∂− . The analysis of the broken charge conservation identities will relate a3 and a′3
leaving us with only two parameters (besides Ñ ). This agrees with the two parameters in
the large N limit in the boson plus Chern-Simons theories of [13].
     Here we have concentrated on the case of J4 . Let us briefly discuss the situation
for higher spin currents. We focus, as usual, on the all minus component of the current
∂µ J µ−−...− . This operator has twist τ = ∆ − S = 3 and spin s − 1. Let us examine possible
double particle operators that can appear. The minimum twist of a double trace operator
is 2 = 1 + 1. We should make up the twist by considering other components, or derivatives
other than ∂− , which has twist zero. All of these should arise from a rotationally invariant
structure involving the flat space metric or the ǫ tensor. The only structure that can raise
the twist by one is ǫ−µν . For the quasi-fermion theory we can also use the scalar operator
of twist 2, j̃0 , and one of the twist one currents.
     Matching the scaling dimensions in ∂µ Jsµ ∝ Js1 Js2 (with derivatives sprinkled on the
right hand side) with all minus indices leads to

                                  s + 2 = (s1 + 1) + (s2 + 1) + n∂                                (2.4)

where n∂ ≥ 0 is the number of derivatives which raise the dimension. Thus, we get an
inequality
                          s ≥ s1 + s2 ,        s > s1 , s2 ,    double trace                      (2.5)

where we show that that s > s1 , s2 as follows. For s1 = s, the only operator with the right
twist would be j0 Js y−···− , but this is not really a spin s − 1 operator, namely it does not
come from any covariant structure. (2.5) is a constraint on the spins of the operators that
can appear in the divergence of a current of spin s.
     At the level of triple trace operators the product of three operators has already twist
three. So the only structure which is allowed is ∂− by the twist counting. Matching the
dimensions in ∂µ Jsµ ∝ Js1 Js2 Js3 we get

                           s + 2 = (s1 + 1) + (s2 + 1) + (s3 + 1) + n∂                            (2.6)

                                                    8
and the constraint
                                 s ≥ s1 + s2 + s3 + 1,      triple trace                         (2.7)

Twist counting prohibits having the product of more than three operators.
      Now let us comment on the scaling of the coefficients in (1.3) with Ñ . Let us normalize
the scaling of single particle operators so that their connected n point functions scale like
Ñ . Then if we consider a three point correlator of a given current with the two currents
that appear in the right hand side of its divergence we get

       Ñ ∼ ∂µ hJsµ (x)Js1 (x1 )Js2 (x2 )i = a2 hJs1 (x)Js1 (x1 )ihJs2 (x)Js2 (x2 )i ∼ a2 Ñ 2   (2.8)

with derivatives sprinkled on the right hand side. Thus, we get that a2 ∝ Ñ1 . For a3 the
same argument leads to a3 ∝ Ñ12 . This scaling is the only one that is consistent with the
Ñ counting and is such that it leads to non-zero terms in the leading contribution.



3. Structures for the three point functions

      In this section we constrain the structure of three point functions. When we have
exactly conserved currents the possible three point functions were found in [17] (see also
[18][14]). They were found by imposing conformal symmetry and current conservation.
The three point functions were given by three possible structures. One structure arises
in the free fermion theory and another arises in the free boson theory. We call these the
fermion and boson structures respectively. Finally there is a third “odd” structure which
does not arise in a free theory. For twist one fields this structure is parity odd (it involves
an epsilon tensor). However, for correlators of the form hj̃0 Js1 Js2 i, the fermion structure
is parity odd (it involves an epsilon tensor) and the “odd” structure is parity even. This is
due to the fact that j̃0 is parity odd in the free fermion theory. Alternatively, if we assign
parity minus to j̃0 and parity plus to all the twist one operators, then the “odd” structures
always violate parity4 . The reader should think that when we denote a structure as “odd”
we simply mean “strange” in the sense that it does not arise in a theory of a free boson or
free fermion.
  4
      This is not always the natural parity assignment. For example, in the critical O(N ) theory j̃0
has parity plus and the theory preserves parity. In this theory, we have only the “odd” structure
for the correlators of the form hj̃0 Js1 Js2 i.

                                                    9
    In our case, the currents are not conserved, so we need to revisit these constraints.
For example, the divergence of a current can produce a double trace operator. If these
contract with the two remaining operators, as in (2.8), we get a term that is of the same
order in the 1/Ñ expansion as the original three point function. Notice that only double
trace operators can contribute in this manner to the current non-conservation of a three
point function. We emphasize that we are computing these three point functions to leading
order in the 1/Ñ expansion, where we can set their twist to be one. All statements we
make in this section are about the structure of correlators to leading order in the 1/Ñ
expansion.
    We will show below that even correlation functions (fermion and boson) stay the same
and all new structures appear in the odd piece. Consider the three point function of twist
one operators hJs1 Js2 Js3 i, with si ≥ 2. Let us say that s1 is larger or equal than the other
two spins. Then the Js2 and Js3 currents are conserved inside this three point function,
since the spins appearing in the divergence of a current are always strictly less than those
of the current itself (2.5). On the other hand, in order to get a non-zero contribution we
would need to contract Js1 with one of the two currents that appears in the right hand
side of the divergence of Js2 or Js3 . Thus, we can impose current conservation on Js2 and
Js3 for this three point function. Let us consider the parity even structures first. As we
discussed in [14], for two operators of the same twist and one conserved current, say js3 ,
we have the most general even structure

                                                    min[s1 ,s2 ]
                                1                         X
  hOs1 Os2 js3 i ∼        2τ   −1
                                                                   P32l [hjs1 −l js2 −l js3 ibos + hjs1 −l js2 −l js3 ifer ]
                   |x12 |    0    |x23 ||x13 |
                                                          l=0
                                                                                                                         (3.1)
where Pi are as is [17]. We get this result by considering the light cone limit between
Os1 Os2 and imposing the conservation of js3 [14]. We then take light cone limit js1 js2
and impose conservation of js3 . Then we take the light cone limit js1 js3 and impose
conservation of js2 . From these two operations we would conclude that

                                           min[s1 ,s2 ]
                            1                 X
   hjs1 js2 js3 i =                                       P32l [bl hjs1 −l js2 −l js3 ibos + fl hjs1 −l js2 −l js3 ifer ] ,
                    |x12 ||x23 ||x13 |
                                              l=0
                                           min[s1 ,s3 ]
                              1                               h                                                         i
                                                          P22l b̃l hjs1 −l js2 js3 −l ibos + f˜l hjs1 −l js2 js3 −l ifer .
                                              X
   hjs1 js2 js3 i =
                      |x12 ||x23 ||x13 |
                                              l=0
                                                                                                                         (3.2)

                                                                10
The only consistent solution is b0 = b̃0 , f0 = f˜0 and bl and fl with l 6= 0 are equal to zero.
This can be seen by taking the light cone limit in x12 first, which sets to zero all terms of
the form P32l , with l > 0, as well as the fermion terms. In the second line only the boson
structures survive, but only the l = 0 structure is the same as the one surviving in the first
line. This shows that all b̃l = 0 for l > 0. Repeating this argument we can show it for the
other cases.
    We can now consider also the case when one of the particles has spin zero, or is j0 .
Then any of the expressions in (3.2) only allows the l = 0 term. Thus, the even structures
with only one j0 are the same as in the free boson theory (the free fermion ones are zero).
    For the odd structure the situation is more tricky. Inside the triangle, si ≤ si+1 + si−1
for i = 1, 2, 3, we have the structures that we had before, since (2.5) does not allow any of
the three currents to have a non-zero divergence. However, outside the triangle we have
new structures that obey (2.8) with a non-zero double trace term. Precisely the existence
of these new structures make the whole setup consistent. The current non-conservation
identity has the form of the current conservation one but with a non-zero term in the right
hand side. Since outside the triangle we had no solutions of the homogeneous equations,
this guarantees that the solutions are uniquely fixed in terms of the operators that appear
in the right hand side of the conservation laws. Thus, we have unique solutions for these
structures.
    One interesting example of this phenomenon is the correlator

                                                     S3 Q21
                                                                     Q1 Q2 + 4P32 .
                                                                                
                      hJ4 J2 j0 iodd, nc ∝ a2                                                (3.3)
                                                |x12 ||x13 ||x23 |

where Pi and Qi are defined in [17]. This odd correlator would be zero if all currents were
conserved. However, using the lack of conservation of the J4 current, (2.3), we can derive
(3.3). Clearly only a2 contributes to it.
    As an another example, consider hJ4 J2 j̃0 i. Here we can have structures that are parity
odd and parity even, the fermion and the “odd” structure respectively. Due to the form
of the current non-conservation of J4 , (2.2), we get

                                                 Q21          4
                                                              P3 − 10P32 Q1 Q2 − Q21 Q22
                                                                                         
               hJ4 J2 j̃0 iodd, nc ∝ a2                                                      (3.4)
                                          |x12 ||x13 ||x23 |

This “odd” structure would vanish if J4 were exactly conserved. Of course, we also have
the structure that we get in the free fermion theory for these case, which is parity odd
(while (3.4) is parity even). In fact, any correlator of two twist one currents and one j̃0 ,

                                                     11
which is parity odd will have the same structure as in the free fermion theory since (2.2) (or
its higher spin versions), will not modify it. On the other hand, the parity even ones can
be modified. Again we find that a structure that was forced to be zero when the current
is exactly conserved can become non-zero when the current is not conserved.
    Finally, we should mention that any correlator that involves a current and two scalars
is uniquely determined by conformal symmetry. In this case the current is automatically
conserved. Of course, the three point function of three scalars is also unique.
    In summary, we constrained the possible structures for various three point functions.
These are the boson, fermion and odd structures. When the operator j̃0 is involved we
can only have fermion or odd structures. In the next section we will constrain the relative
coefficients of all of these three point functions.


4. Charge non-conservation identities
4.1. General story
    We use the following technique to constrain the three point function. We start from
a three point function hO1 O2 O3 i. We then insert a J4 current and take its divergence,
which gives us an identity of the form
   h∇.J4 (x)O1 O2 O3 i =a2 hJJ ′ O1 O2 O3 i + a3 hJJ ′ J ′′ O1 O2 O3 i
                                                                                               (4.1)
                        ∼a2 hJO1 ihJ ′ O2 O3 i + a3 hJO1 ihJ ′ O2 ihJ ′′ O3 i + permutations
This equation is schematic since we dropped derivatives that should be sprinkled on the
right hand side. The two point functions in the right hand side are non-zero only if J or
J ′ is the same as one of the operators Oi . Thus the the right hand side is non-zero only
when any of the operators Oi is the same as one of the currents that appears in the right
hand side of the divergence of J4 (1.3)(2.2)(2.3). We have only considered disconnected
contributions in the right hand side because those are the only ones that survive to leading
order in 1/Ñ . Here we used the scaling of the coefficients a2 and a3 with Ñ given in (2.8).
    Given this equation, we can now integrate over x on the left and right hand sides.
We integrate over a region which includes the whole space except for little spheres, Si ,
around each of the points xi where the operators Oi are inserted. The left hand side of
(4.1) contributes only with a boundary term of the form
                                X3 Z
                                   h   nj Jj−−− O1 O2 O3 i                                     (4.2)
                                    i=1   Si

where the integral is over the surface of the little spheres or radii ri around each of the
points and nj is the normal vector to the spheres.

                                                  12
       Fig. 1: The action of the charge is given by the integral of the conserved cur-
       rent over a little sphere around the operator insertion. To derive the pseudo-
       conservation identity we are integrating the divergence of the current over all space
       except for these spheres. The boundary terms give the pseudo-charges, which have
       the same expression in terms of the current as in the conserved case.


    If the current J4 were exactly conserved, these integrals would give the charge acting
on each of the operators. In our case, the charges are not conserved and the integrals
may depend on the radius of the little spheres. This dependence can give rise to divergent
terms going like inverse powers of the radius of the spheres. These terms diverge when
ri → 0. These divergent terms should precisely match similar divergent terms that arise
in the integral of the right hand side of (4.1). After matching all the divergent terms we
are left with the finite terms in the ri → 0 limit. These also have to match between the
left and right hand sides. Demanding that they match we will get interesting constraints.
Notice that, at the order we are working, we do not get any logarithms of ri since the
anomalous dimensions of operators start at higher order of the 1/Ñ expansion. Thus, the
separation of the finite and the divergent terms is always unambiguous.
    Thus, we define a pseudo-charge Q that acts on the operators by selecting the finite
part of the above integrals in the small radius limit
                                      Z
                        [Q, O(0)] =             nj Jj−−− O(0)                                  (4.3)
                                        |x|=r
                                                                      finite as r→0

    This action of this pseudo-charge on single trace operators is determined by the three
point functions we discussed above. It is also constrained by twist and spin conservation to
have a similar structure to the one we had for absolutely conserved currents. For example,
on the twist one operators we have
                                               s+3
                                               X                  ′
                                  [Q, js ] =           cs,s′ ∂ s−s +3 js′                      (4.4)
                                               s′ =0

    In concrete computations we found it useful to work in the metric (2.1) and to cut
out little “slabs” of width ∆x+ around the operators, instead of cutting out little spheres.

                                                   13
       Fig. 2: Instead of spheres as in fig. 1, we can cut out little slabs of width ∆x+
       around the insertion point of every operator. The charge is given by integrating
       current over x− and y at the edges of these slabs. This simplifies some computations
       compared to fig. 1.


    The advantage is that then the integral involves the all minus component of the
current. In addition, minus and y-derivatives can be integrated by parts or be pulled out
of the integral
                                          Z
                                   +
                              Qs (x ) =       dx− dy js (x− , x+ , y).                        (4.5)

    The action of the pseudo-charge on Oi comes from three point functions of the form
hJ4 Oi Ok i. As we mentioned the structures that arise in the boson or fermion theories
will continue to produce three point functions where the charges are conserved. The odd
correlators can give us something new. The odd structures involving all twist ones fields,
such as hj4 js2 js3 i, are parity odd and do not contribute to the action of Q. This can be
seen by setting y2 = y3 = 0. Then the fact that the three point function is odd under the
parity y1 → −y1 implies that the integral over y in (4.5) must vanish. This implies that
commutator must vanish also for arbitrary y2 6= y3 since the two point function structures
that could possibly contribute do not vanish for y2 = y3 . When one of the operators Oi
has twist two, we can get non-vanishing contributions to the action of the pseudo-charge
from odd structures.
    In conclusion, after integrating (4.1) we get an expression of the form
                              Z
   h[Q, O1 ]O2 O3 i + cyclic = d3 x [a2 hJ(x)O1 ihJ ′ (x)O2 O3 i+
                                                                                              (4.6)
                                                ′          ′′
                            + a3 hJ(x)O1 ihJ (x)O2 ihJ (x)O3 i + permutations]finite

                                                    14
where the operators Oi are evaluated at xi . The integral is over the full R3 after subtracting
all the divergent terms that can arise around each of the points xi . This is the main identity
that we will use to relate the various three point functions to each other. We can call it a
pseudo-conservation of the pseudo-charges.


4.2. Constraints on three point functions with non-zero even spins

    In this section we will consider the constraints that arise on three point functions of
operators with spins si ≥ 2. We will consider all their indices to be minus. So we take the
operators Oi in (4.1) to be jsi , with si ≥ 2.
    In this case the action of Q can only produce other twist one fields, which are only
single particle states. As we mentioned above the action of Q is determined by three point
functions of the form hj4 js1 js2 i or hj4 js1 j0 i. Only the even structures contribute to the
charges, and these are the same (up to overall coefficients) as in the free theories, thus the
action of the pseudo-charge is well defined and produces


                         [Q, js ] = cs,s−2 ∂ 5 js−2 + cs,s ∂ 3 js + cs,s+2 ∂js+2            (4.7)


where ∂ = ∂− . We can always choose the following normalization conditions


            c2,0 = 1 ,          c2,4 = 1,    c4,4 = 1,     c4,6 = 1,    cs,s+2 = 1, s ≥ 2   (4.8)


This can be done in all cases, pure fermions, pure bosons, or the interesting theory we
are considering. We are not setting the normalization of two point function to one. The
two point functions are not used for the time being. The stress tensor is normalized in
the canonical way. Notice that, since the normalization of stress tensor is fixed, c2,4 does
not depend on the normalization of j4 and is fixed by conformal invariance to 3 (recall
[Qs , j2 ] = (s − 1)js [14]). Thus, we fix it to one by the rescaling freedom in the definition
of Q4 → 31 Q4 . Then we fix c4,4 = 1 by rescaling j4 itself. And cs,s+2 = 1 by rescaling js+2 .
    Now, in our case, it is clear that if all si ≥ 4, then the right hand side of (4.6) vanishes.
In addition, if one or more, of the si is equal to two, then the following happens. In that
case the two current terms in (2.2), (2.3) could contribute, since we can contract the J2 in

                                                   15
the divergence of J4 with the si that is equal to two. It is useful to recall the two point
functions of various components of the stress tensor

                        (x+ )4         1 4         1
hJ−− (x)J−− (0)i ∝                   =    ∂ −            ,
                    (x+ x− + y 2 )5    4! x+ x− + y 2
                         (x+ )3 y        1 3          1
 hJ−− (x)J−y (0)i ∝ 2 + −         2 5
                                      = ∂−     ∂y + −        ,
                     (x x + y )          4!       x x + y2
                      (x+ )2 (x+ x− − 3y 2 )
                                                                                       
                                                 1    2 2      1        2      1
 hJ−y (x)J−y (0)i ∝ −                         =      ∂− ∂y + −      − 2∂− + −             .
                         (x+ x− + y 2 )5        4!         x x + y2       (x x + y 2 )2
                                                                                      (4.9)
where the equations are true up to a normalization factor common to all three equations.
      If we look at the first term in the right hand side of (4.6) in the case that O1 = j2 , then
we can use the above two point function (4.9). We can integrate by parts all derivatives
so that they act on the two point function. Then we can write them as derivatives acting
on xi and pull them out of the integral5 .
      Now the result depends on whether we are dealing with the quasi-fermion or quasi-
boson cases. In the quasi-boson case, it is possible to check that the particular combination
of currents that appear in the two current term in (2.3) is, after integrating by parts,
∂y J2 −− − ∂− J2 y− . When this is contracted with j2 = J2 −− we get zero after using (4.9).
Thus, the right hand side of (4.6) vanishes in the quasi-boson case.
                                                                   5
      In the quasi-fermion case, we end up having to compute (the ∂− derivative) of an
integral of the form

                             1
               Z
                  d3 x              hj̃0 (x)O2 (x2 )O3 (x3 )i ∝ hj0eff (x1 )O2 (x2 )O3 (x3 )i   (4.10)
                         |x − x1 |2

              1
The factor |x−x 1|
                   2 is exactly the one that makes the integral conformal covariant. It gives

a result that effectively transforms as the three point function with the insertion of an
operator of dimension ∆ = 1 at x1 . We have denoted this in terms of an effective operator,
j0eff , of dimension one. We do not have any real operator of this kind in the theory, this
is just a mnemonic to help us keep track of the resulting integral. The net result can
be expressed by saying that the action of Q on j2 in the quasi-fermion theory can also
produce a j0eff . In the free boson theory the action of Q on j2 produces j0 (plus other

  5
      If we work with the “slabs” described in figure fig. 2, together with the usual iǫ prescription,
it is clear that these operations do not produce boundary terms since we only have ∂− or ∂y
derivatives.

                                                     16
things). This is not true in the free fermion theory, which does not contain a j0 . However,
in the quasi-fermion theory, with the pseudo-conservation property (2.2)(4.6), we get terms
in these identities that would be identically to what we would get if we had allowed a j0eff
in the action of Q on j2 . This term is crucial in order to allow a free boson structure in
the pseudo-conservation identities.
     In other words, we define a new effective pseudo-charge Q̂, which has the same action
as Q on all currents with spin s > 2, but it is

                                [Q̂, j2 ] = c2,0 ∂ 5 j0ef f + c2,2 ∂ 3 j2 + c2,4 ∂j4                          (4.11)

     The net result is that when we consider the pseudo-conservation identities acting on
hjs1 js2 js3 i becomes identical to a charge conservation identity for Q̂. Note also that after
adding j0ef f in (4.11) the action of Q̂ is essentially the same as the action of Q in the
quasi-boson theory. Thus, we can treat these two cases in parallel, after we remember that
j0ef f is not a real operator but just the integral in (4.10).
     Next we write all twist one three point functions as

 hjs1 js2 js3 i = αs1 ,s2 ,s3 hjs1 js2 js3 ibos + βs1 ,s2 ,s3 hjs1 js2 js3 ifer + γs1 ,s2 ,s3 hjs1 js2 js3 iodd (4.12)

     Here the boson and fermion ones are the three point functions for a single real boson
and a single Majorana fermion, in the normalization of the currents set by (4.8). The
normalization of the odd piece is fixed so that the identities we describe below are true. In
the quasi-fermion theory we are also including in (4.12) the case with hj0ef f js1 js2 i, where
only the boson and odd structures are non-zero.
     We now consider the charge conservation identities for various cases. An important
property of these identities is that each identity separates into three independent equations
which relate only the boson structures to each other, the fermion structures to each other
and the odd structures to each other. Each equation involves sums of objects of the form
∂in hjs1 js2 js3 istr , where str runs over boson, fermion and odd. These equations are such
that the coefficient in front of each of the terms is fixed relative to all the other coefficients.
In other words, only an overall constant is left undetermined. See appendix B. This was
proven for the boson and fermion terms in [14]. We have not proved this for the odd case.
However, given the existence of the Chern-Simons matter theories [12,13] we know that at
least one solution definitely exists! For low values of the spins we have explicitly analyzed

                                                         17
the equations and the solution is definitely unique, in the sense that all relative coefficients
are fixed. We think that this is likely to be true for all cases.
    Focusing first on the equations that constrain the boson structures we get that the
equations arising from pseudo-charge conservation are

              Qhj2 j2 j2 i :     c̃2,2 α222 = α224 = α022
              Qhj2 j2 j4 i :     c̃2,2 α224 = c̃4,4 α224 = α244 = c̃4,2 α222 = α226 = α024
                                                                                                          (4.13)
              Qhj2 j4 j4 i :     c̃2,2 α244 = c̃4,4 α244 = α444 = c̃4,2 α224 = α246 = α044
              Qhj2 j2 j6 i :     c̃2,2 α226 = c̃6,6 α226 = α246 = c̃6,4 α224 = α228 = α026

and we can continue in this way. We are defining c̃s,s′ to be the ratio
                                                                cs,s′
                                                 c̃s,s′ =                                                 (4.14)
                                                            cs,s′ boson
                                                             free


with both in the normalization (4.8).
    We now can start solving (4.13). We see that the equations (4.13) fix all the α’s in
terms of α222 and the c’s. In addition, we get multiple equations for the same α’s. This
fixes the c̃’s. For example, we start getting things like

    α224 = c̃2,2 α222
    α244 = c̃4,2 α222 ,        c̃2,2 = c̃4,2 ,       α226 = c̃4,2 α222                                    (4.15)
    α444 = c̃4,2 c̃2,2 α222 ,      c̃2,2 = c̃4,4 ,      α244 = c̃4,2 α222 ,   α246 = c̃4,2 c̃2,2 α222 .

where each line in (4.15) comes from the corresponding line in (4.13). Using the fact that
c̃4,4 = 1 we see that c̃2,2 = 1, and also c̃4,2 = 1, and so on. So all the c̃s,s′ = 1. We also
find that all the α’s are also fixed to be equal to α222 .
    If we did the same for the free fermions we would also obtain the same pattern if we
define
                                                                 cs,s′
                                                 c̃s,s′ =                                                 (4.16)
                                                            cfree
                                                             s,s′
                                                                  fermion


Then we get that all βs1 ,s2 ,s3 = β222 and all c̃s,s′ = 1. One subtlety is that we have defined
the c̃′ s differently for the bosons than for the fermions. So we can only hope to get both
structures present only if
                                           cfree
                                            s,s′
                                                 boson
                                                       = cfree
                                                          s,s′
                                                               fermion
                                                                                                          (4.17)

This can be checked by using form factors (see Appendix C). Of course, the mere existence
of the Chern-Simons matter theories implies that this is true.

                                                            18
      The conclusion from this analysis is that all the α’s are equal to α222 . Analogously,
all β’s are equal to β222 .
      We will also need the coefficients of the two point functions ns . In a theory of a
single free boson or single free fermion, with the normalization conditions (4.8), these are
given by nbos
          s   and nfs er respectively. We do not need their explicit forms, but they can be
computed in the free theories. We can now determine the two point functions in the full
theory by demanding that the stress tensor Ward identities are obeyed. In other words,
from the previous discussion we know that α2ss = α222 and β2ss = β222 . In addition, the
Ward identity of the stress tensor relates this to the two point function. More precisely,

                                   ns = α222 nbos       f er
                                              s + β222 ns                               (4.18)

                  f er
Notice that nbos
             2 = n2    according to formulas (5.1) and (5.7) of [19]6 . Thus we find

                                            n2
                                   ñ2 ≡        = α222 + β222                           (4.19)
                                           nbos
                                            2

      Notice that the analysis so far is equivalently valid for the theories of quasi-bosons
and the theory of quasi-fermions. Of course, in the latter case, whenever a j0 appeared, it
should be interpreted as j0eff .
      Thus, so far, we have written all correlators in terms of three undetermined coefficients
α222 , β222 and γ222 . As an aside we should note that when we solve the equations for the
γs1 s2 s3 we need to use some of the odd correlators that are outside the triangle. These are
possible thanks to the non-conservation of the currents.

4.3. Closing the chain. The Quasi-fermion case.

      In this section we consider current conservation identities in the case that one of the
operators is a twist two fields such as j̃0 or J2 −y .
      Let us start by discussing the possible action of the pseudo-charge Q on J−y . All
single trace operators that could appear are already fixed by the correspondent three
point functions to be the same as in free fermion theory. The most general expression
involving double trace terms takes the form

                                                                    χ
                        [Q, J−y ] = ∂ 4 j̃0 + ∂ 3 J−y + ∂J4−−−y +      j2 j2 .          (4.20)
                                                                    Ñ
  6
      There the formula for the Dirac fermion is written. Here we consider a Majorana one.

                                                19
The double trace term comes with an Ñ1 factor because it enters in the pseudo-conservation
identity with the hjjihjji ∼ Ñ 2 factor.
       We have normalized j̃0 by setting the first coefficient to one7 . One can check that χ
should be set to zero by considering hj2 j2 J−y i pseudo-conservation identity 8 .
       In addition, we write the possible correlators of j̃0 in terms of free fermion correla-
tors, introducing a β0̃s1 s2 . This is the coefficient that multiplies hj̃0 js1 js2 ifer , which is the
correlator in a theory of a single Majorana fermion in the normalization of j̃0 in (4.20).
Note, that these free fermion correlators are parity odd. We also introduce a γ0̃s1 s2 which
multiply the “odd” structures, which are parity even structures involving j̃0 . These struc-
tures are more subtle since they can be affected by the violation of current conservation,
as in (3.4).
       An additional issue we should discuss is the type of contribution we expect from the
right hand side of (4.6) when the operator is J−y . The same reasoning we used around
(4.10), together with (4.9) tells us that we also effectively produce a j0eff . Thus, the net
result is that we simply should add terms involving j0ef f in (4.20), and treat the charge
as conserved. This is necessary for getting all the identities to work. We then find that
β0̃s1 s2 = β222 and γ0̃s1 s2 = γ222 .
       Interestingly, in this case, in order to satisfy the pseudo-charge conservation identities
for the odd part, we need both j̃0 as well as j0ef f .
       Let us now consider the three point function hj0ef f j2 j2 i. We see that its definition
via (4.10) involves a three point function given by β0̃22 and γ0̃22 . But we have just fixed
these coefficients. Thus, going back to the first line (4.13), we note that α022 is really the
coefficient of hj0ef f j2 j2 ibos . We get this structure from doing the integral (4.10) with the
“odd” structure for the three point function. Using that α022 was fixed to α222 we get the
equation
                           α222 = x2 a2 n2 γ0̃22 = x̃2 a2 (α222 + β222 )γ222                    (4.21)

Similarly, the odd structure gives

                           γ222 = x1 a2 n2 β0̃22 = x̃1 a2 (α222 + β222 )β222                    (4.22)

   7
       This is not possible for the critical O(N ) theory since in that case parity prevents j̃0 in the
right hand side. We will obtain this case as a limit. It can also be analyzed directly by considering
the action of Q on j̃0 , etc.
   8
        This double trace structure can arise in a covariant way as [Q, J2 µν ] = ǫ−µρ J ρ− Jν− +
ǫ−νρ J ρ− Jµ− .

                                                  20
where x1 and x2 are two calculable numerical coefficients, given by doing the integral in
(4.10), etc. We used (4.19) and x̃i = xi /nbos
                                           2 .
      These are two equations for four unknowns (α222 , β222 , γ222 , a2 ). So we have two
undetermined coefficients which are Ñ and λ̃. We can define Ñ = ñ2 = α222 + β222 and
            √
λ̃ = a2 Ñ / x̃1 x̃2 . With these definitions we get

                            λ̃2                                1                                          λ̃
        αs1 s2 s3 = Ñ              ,   βs1 s2 s3 = Ñ                ,         γs1 s2 s3 = Ñ                    .   (4.23)
                         (1 + λ̃2 )                        (1 + λ̃2 )                                  (1 + λ̃2 )
Here we are considering three twist one fields. Similar equations are true for correlators
involving one j̃0 field
                                                  1                                       λ̃
                             βs1 s2 0̃ = Ñ                 ,        γs1 s2 0̃ = Ñ                .                  (4.24)
                                              (1 + λ̃2 )                              (1 + λ̃2 )
We will discuss the correlation functions that involve more than one j̃0 separately. In both
equations, (4.23)(4.24), we can choose the (λ̃ independent) numerical normalization of the
odd correlators so that we can replace ∼ by an equality.
      The final conclusion is that we expressed all the correlators of the currents in terms
of just two parameters Ñ and λ̃.
      Since the fermions plus Chern-Simons theory has precisely two parameters, N and k
we conclude that we exhausted all the constraints. Our analysis was based only on general
symmetry consideration and does not allow us to find the precise relation between the
parameters. However, in the ’t Hooft limit we expect9

                         Ñ = N f (λ) ,                    λ̃ = h(λ) = d1 λ + d3 λ3 + · · ·                           (4.25)

where f (λ) = f0 + f2 λ2 + · · ·. Where we used the symmetry of the theory under λ → −λ
(or k → −k), together with parity. Note that the function f encodes how the two point
function of the stress tensor depends on λ.

4.4. Closing the chain. The Quasi-boson case.

      In the quasi-boson theory we will again consider the charge non-conservation identity
on hj2 j2 Jy− i. Again we need to write the most general action of Q on J3− involving double
trace terms. It takes the form
                               [Q, J−y ] = ∂ 4 ∂y j0 + ∂ 3 J−y + ∂J−−−y
                                           χ1          χ2 2           χ3 4                                            (4.26)
                                         +     j2 j2 +      ∂ j0 j2 +    ∂ j0 j0
                                           Ñ          Ñ             Ñ
  9
      For the theory considered in [12] f0 = 2 and d1 = π2 .

                                                                21
We have normalized j0 by setting the first coefficient to one10 .
      Notice also that χi ∼ O( Ñ1 ) to contribute at leading order in Ñ . We fix χ1 = 0 as
in the case of fermions. The presence or absence of χ2,3 is not important for any of the
arguments.
      In addition, we need to consider the contribution of J−y to the right hand side of (4.6).
In other words, we will need to consider the right hand side of (4.6) when the operator Q1
is J−y . Using (4.9), we find (derivatives of) an integral of the form

                          1
              Z
                 d3 x           4
                                  hj0 (x)O2 (x2 )O3 (x3 )i ∼ hj̃0eff (x1 )O2 (x2 )O3 (x3 )i                   (4.27)
                      |x − x1 |

Here we used that, again, this is a conformal integral which behaves as a correlator with
a scalar of weight ∆ = 2 at x1 . We have denoted this by introducing a ficticious operator
j̃0eff . This is not an operator that exists in the theory, but it is appearing in three point
functions in the same way as an operator of this form. Thus, the net effect of the action
of Q on J−y includes also this operator j̃0ef f in the right hand side of (4.20).
      With all these features, we now have a situation which is rather similar to the one we
had in the quasi-fermion case and we can relate the different coefficients

                              β222 =y1 a2 n2 γ022 = ỹ1 a2 (α222 + β222 )γ222 .
                                                                                                              (4.28)
                              γ222 =y2 a2 n2 α022 = ỹ2 a2 (α222 + β222 )α222 .

Again y1 and y2 are some numbers. Defining again Ñ = ñ2 = (α222 + β222 ) and λ̃ =
       √
a2 Ñ / ỹ1 ỹ2 we get

                             1                                λ̃2                                λ̃
        αs1 s2 s3 = Ñ                ,   βs1 s2 s3 = Ñ                ,   γs1 s2 s3 = Ñ                .   (4.29)
                         (1 + λ̃2 )                        (1 + λ̃2 )                        (1 + λ̃2 )

Here at least two of the spins should be bigger than zero, si ≥ 2. We will discuss the
correlation functions that involve more than one j0 separately.

4.5. Three point functions involving scalars. The quasi-fermion case.

      Fixing the three point functions in the scalar sector involves several new subtleties
that were absent before. We describe them in detail in the Appendix D and here sketch
the method and present the results.
 10
      Again, this is not possible in the critical O(N ) Gross-Neveu theory. But we will obtain this
case as a limit. It can also be analyzed directly through a slightly longer route.

                                                            22
     We have already discussed how to fix three point functions which include one scalar
operator. We used the pseudo-conservation identity on hJ−y js1 js2 i to get (4.24).
     To proceed it is necessary to specify how Q acts on j̃0 . As explained in Appendix D
the result is
                                                         1
                              [Q, j̃0 ] = ∂ 3 j̃0 +             ∂ [∂− j−y − ∂3 j−− ]    (4.30)
                                                      1 + λ̃2
here the interesting new ingredient is a 1+1λ̃2 factor. This is obtained by inserting arbitrary
coefficients and fixing them by analyzing the hj4 j2 j̃0 i three point function.
     To fix the correlators with two scalars we consider the pseudo-charge conservation
identity that is generated by acting with Q on hj̃0 j̃0 js i. This identity involves tricky
relations (see Appendix D) between different three point functions. After the dust settles
we get that
                                      βs0̃0̃ = β222 ,                γs0̃0̃ = γ222      (4.31)

The last step is to consider the action of Q on hj̃0 j̃0 j̃0 i WI to get

                                                      γ0̃0̃0̃ = 0.                      (4.32)

Note that β0̃0̃0̃ = 0 by definition, since this correlator vanishes in the free fermion theory
(due to parity).
     From these three point function it is also possible to extract the normalization of the
two point function hj̃0 j̃0 i. This is two point function is related by a Ward identity to
hj2 j̃0 j̃0 i. We then get

                                            n0̃                             1
                             ñ0̃ ≡    free fermion
                                                    = β20̃0̃ = β222 = Ñ                (4.33)
                                      n0̃                                1 + λ̃2

     This can be used, together with (2.2), to compute the anomalous dimension for the
spin four current, as explained in appendix A.

4.6. Three point functions involving scalars. The quasi-boson case.

     For the quasi-boson sector the story is almost identical. We put details of the analysis
in the Appendix E and here again sketch the general idea and present the results.
     We have already discussed above how to fix three point functions which include one
scalar operator. Then the charge conservation identity on hj2 js1 js2 i fixes

                                  α0s1 s2 = α222 ,               γ0s1 s2 = γ222 .       (4.34)

                                                          23
For the action of the charge on the scalar we get

                                                               1
                                  [Q, j0 ] = ∂ 3 j0 +               ∂j2 .                 (4.35)
                                                            1 + λ̃2

By considering the pseudo-conservation of hjs j0 j0 i when s > 2 we get

                               αs00 = β222 ,                 γs00 = γ222 .                (4.36)

We now need to consider the pseudo-conservation identities for hj2 j0 j0 i and hj0 j0 j0 i. A
new feature of these two cases is that the triple trace terms in (2.3) contribute. Analyzing
these we obtain that (4.36) is also true for s = 2. The triple trace terms contribute as
follows. Let us first consider the pseudo-conservation identity for hj0 j0 j0 i. The triple trace
non-conservation term takes the form
                                        3
                                        X
                               a3 n30         ∂i3 hj0 (x1 )j0 (x2 )j0 (x3 )i.             (4.37)
                                        i=1

where n0 is the coefficient in the two point function for the scalar. Thus, we get the
equation
                                                  1
                                 α000 =                  α222 + z1 a3 n30                 (4.38)
                                               1 + λ̃2
where z1 is a numerical constant and b3 is the coefficient in (2.3). Notice that the double
trace deformation does not influence this computation. This fact is established in the
Appendix C.
    The triple trace term in the pseudo-conservation identity for hj2 j0 j0 i is

                                a′3 n2 n20 ∂15 hj0 (x1 )j0 (x2 )j0 (x3 )i.                (4.39)

leading to
                                     1
                             α000 =       α222 + z2 a′3 n20 n2 + ...               (4.40)
                                  1 + λ̃2

with z2 a numerical constant and the dots stands for the contribution of the double trace
non-conservation piece whose coefficients are already known.
    Importantly, we conclude that two triple trace deformations are not independent.
In other words, a3 and a′3 are related by equating (4.40) and (4.38). Thus, we recover
the known counting of marginal deformation of free boson in d = 3, namely there are
two parameters. Microscopically, one corresponds to the Chern-Simons coupling and the
                        ~ φ)
second one to adding a (φ. ~ 3 operator.

                                                      24
     On the Vasiliev theory side, the freedom to add this φ6 deformation translates into the
fact that we can choose a non-linear boundary conditions for the scalar which preserves the
conformal symmetry. These were discussed in a similar situation in [20]. In our context, we
have a scalar of mass (mRAdS )2 = −2) which at infinity decays as φ = α/r + β/r 2 . Then
the boundary condition that corresponds to adding the λ6 φ6 deformation is β = λ6 α2 [20].
     Also the whole effect of the presence of the triple trace deformations, at the level of
three point functions, is to change hj0 j0 j0 i.
     Finally, the two point function of j0 can be fixed by using the usual stress tensor Ward
identity via hj2 j0 j0 i. We obtain

                                           n0                     1
                              ñ0 ≡    free boson
                                                  = α222 = Ñ                          (4.41)
                                      n0                        1 + λ̃2

Recall that the normalization of j0 was given by setting c2,0 = 1 in (4.8).

4.7. Comments about higher point correlation functions

     We can wonder whether we can determine higher point correlation functions. It seems
possible to use the same logic. Namely, inserting ∇.J4 into an n point function and then
integrating as in (4.6). This relates the action of Q on an n point function to integrals
of disconnected correlators. These integrals involve also n point functions. (Recall that
for three point functions the integrals involved other three point functions). When the
charge is conserved this is expected to fix the connected correlation uniquely to that of
the free theory. This was done explicitly in [14] for the action of Q on hj0 j0 j0 j0 i. Now
that the right hand side is non-zero, we still expect this to fix uniquely the correlator,
though we have not tried to carry this out explicitly. It is not totally obvious that this
will fix the correlators because the integral terms also involve n point functions. But it
seems reasonable to conjecture that this procedure would fix the leading order connected
correlator for all n point functions of single particle operators. It would be interesting to
see whether this is indeed true!



5. Final results

     In this section we summarize the results for the three point functions.
    The normalization of the stress tensor is the canonical one. The normalization of the
charge is Q = 31 j4 . This sets c2,4 = 1 in (4.7). The normalization of j4 is fixed by setting
                R


                                                   25
c4,4 = 1. Then all other operators are normalized by setting cs,s+2 = 1. The operator j̃0
is normalized by setting c2,0̃ = 1 in (4.20).
    We have the two point functions

                                                              (x+
                                                                12 )
                                                                     2s
                                     hjs (x1 )js (x2 )i = ns            .                                   (5.1)
                                                             |x12 |4s+2

For three point functions

  hjs1 (x1 )js2 (x2 )js3 (x3 )i = αs1 s2 s3 hjs1 (x1 )js2 (x2 )js3 (x3 )ibos +
                                                                                                            (5.2)
                + βs1 s2 s3 hjs1 (x1 )js2 (x2 )js3 (x3 )ifer + γs1 s2 s3 hjs1 (x1 )js2 (x2 )js3 (x3 )iodd

where the bos and fer denote the three point functions in the theory of free boson and
free fermion in the normalization of currents described above. Their functional form can
be found in [17]. The odd generating functional for the spins inside the triangle can be
found in appendix B of [14]. Outside the triangle the odd correlation functions are the
ones that satisfy the double trace deformed non-conservation equations. We do not know
their explicit form in general but nevertheless we know that they exist and know how the
dependence on the coupling will enter. We fix the numerical normalization of the odd
pieces to be such that the pseudo-charge conservation identities are obeyed. In a similar
fashion we define the correlators involving a j̃0 (j0 ) operator, except that there is no free
boson (fermion) structure.


5.1. Quasi-fermion theory

    The interacting theory two point functions are given by

                  λ̃2                       1
       ns = Ñ          nfree
                         s
                              boson
                                    + Ñ         nfree
                                                  s
                                                       fermion
                                                               = Ñ nfree
                                                                     s
                                                                          boson
                                                                                ,           s ≥ 2,
                1 + λ̃2                  1 + λ̃2
                                                                                                            (5.3)
                   1
       n0̃ = Ñ         nfree
                         0̃
                              fermion
                1 + λ̃2


where nfree
       s
            boson
                  and nfree
                       s
                            fermion
                                    are two point functions computed in the theory of single
free boson or single fermion with normalization of operators such that (4.8) (and (4.20))
holds. We also used in the first line the fact that nfree
                                                     s
                                                          boson
                                                                = nfree
                                                                   s
                                                                        fermion
                                                                                in the normal-
ization that we adopted. This is explained in the appendix C.

                                                      26
    The three point functions in the interacting theory are then given by
                              λ̃2                            1                              λ̃
            αs1 s2 s3 = Ñ          ,      βs1 s2 s3 = Ñ          ,     γs1 s2 s3 = Ñ
                            1 + λ̃2                       1 + λ̃2                         1 + λ̃2
                               1                               λ̃
             βs1 s2 0̃ = Ñ         ,        γs1 s2 0̃ = Ñ
                            1 + λ̃2                         1 + λ̃2                                 (5.4)
                               1
              βs1 0̃0̃ = Ñ
                            1 + λ̃2
               γ0̃0̃0̃ = 0

All coefficients not explicitly written do not appear because there is no corresponding
structure. The two parameters are defined as follows. We take the stress tensor to have a
canonical normalization. We then set
                                                        n2
                                             Ñ =            ,
                                                    n2 boson
                                                     free

                                                    α222                                            (5.5)
                                              2
                                            λ̃ =            .
                                                    β222

From the bounds on energy correlators discussed in [14] it follows that λ̃2 ≥ 0. Note that
one would then find that λ̃ ∝ a2 Ñ , with a2 defined in (2.2). We have also computed the
anomalous dimension of the spin four current (see appendix A)

                                                    32 1       λ̃2
                                        τ4 − 1 =                                                    (5.6)
                                                   21π 2 Ñ (1 + λ̃2 )
5.2. Quasi-boson theory

    The interacting theory two point functions are given by
                 1                       λ̃2
      ns = Ñ         nfree
                       s
                            boson
                                  + Ñ         nfree
                                                s
                                                     fermion
                                                             = Ñ nfree
                                                                   s
                                                                        boson
                                                                              ,            s ≥ 2,
              1 + λ̃2                  1 + λ̃2                                                      (5.7)
                 1
      n0 = Ñ         nfree
                       0
                            boson
              1 + λ̃2
and the three point functions are
                              1                           λ̃2                               λ̃
            αs1 s2 s3 = Ñ         ,    βs1 s2 s3 = Ñ          ,        γs1 s2 s3 = Ñ
                           1 + λ̃2                     1 + λ̃2                            1 + λ̃2
                              1                              λ̃
             αs1 s2 0 = Ñ         ,       γs1 s2 0 = Ñ
                           1 + λ̃2                       1 + λ̃2                                    (5.8)
                              1
              αs1 00 = Ñ
                           1 + λ̃2
                                1
               α000 = Ñ               + z1 a3 n30
                                  2
                           (1 + λ̃ ) 2


                                                     27
were we have separated out the correlators involving the scalar. Two of the parameters
are defined by (taking into account that stress tensor has a canonical normalization)

                                                     n2
                                         Ñ =     free boson
                                                             ,
                                                 n2
                                                                                                (5.9)
                                           2  β222
                                         λ̃ =      .
                                              α222

Again one can see that λ̃2 ≥ 0 from the bounds on energy correlators discussed in [14]. A
third parameter can be introduced which is the combination involving a3 that shifts the
three scalar correlator in (5.8). Again we find that λ̃ ∝ a2 Ñ in (2.3). Thus we find a three
parameter family of solutions, as expected to leading order in the large N limit.

5.3. The critical point of O(N )

     The critical point of O(N ) is a theory that we obtain from the free boson theory by
adding a j02 interaction and flowing to the IR, while tuning the mass of the scalars to
criticality. Then the operator j0 in the IR gets to have dimension two, for large N . Thus,
we can view it as a j̃0 scalar operator of dimension two. This is a theory that fits into
the quasi-fermion case. Namely the divergence of J4 is given by (2.2). By the way, if
we assume that the IR limit has a scalar operator of dimension different from one, then
since (2.2) is the only expression we can write down for the divergence of the current, we
conclude that the operator has to have dimension two. Notice that in this case j̃0 is parity
even and (2.2) is consistent with parity. Thus, we could in principle do the same analysis
as above. The only point where something different occurs is at (4.20) where j̃0 cannot
appear in the right hand side, since it is inconsistent with the parity of the theory. In
addition, all parity odd correlators should be set to zero. In this case, parity implies that

                                           [Q, j̃0 ] = ∂ 3 j̃0                                 (5.10)

In principle, we have an arbitrary coefficient in this equation but the coefficient is then fixed
by considering various charge conservation identities we mention below. When we write
the conservation identity for hj2 j2 j2 i we will get the correlator hj̃0 j2 j2 i as the integral term
in the right hand side. Again, considering the ward identity on this last one will require
hj̃0 j̃0 j2 i in the right hand side. In this fashion one can determine the solution. Note that
in this case there is only one parameter which is Ñ .

                                                  28
    Interestingly, we can get these correlators by taking the large λ̃ limit of (5.3)(5.4). At
the level of three point functions of currents the limit is simple to take, namely we see that
for any s ≥ 2
                                   hs1 s2 s3 i → hs1 s2 s3 ibos                         (5.11)

so that all three point functions become purely boson ones. For j̃0 , due to (5.3) it is
necessary to rescale the operator and define a new operator j̃ˆ = λ̃j̃ . The two point
                                                                       0    0

function of j̃ˆ0 remains finite. This also has the nice feature of removing j̃ˆ0 from the right
hand side of (4.20). The three point functions of the form hj̃ˆ j j i loose their β structure
                                                                  0 s1 s2

and remain only with the parity preserving γ0̃s1 s2 structure. The three point structures
involving two scalars survive through a β structure, after rescaling the operator. And γ0̂0̂0̂
stays being equal to zero, which is consistent with the large N limit of the critical O(N )
theory. This three point function becomes non-zero at higher orders in the 1/N expansion.
    Notice that at λ̃ = ∞ the three point functions become parity invariant. However the
parity of the operator j̃0 got flipped compared to the one at λ̃ = 0.
    This suggests that the large λ̃ limit of the fermions plus Chern-Simons matter theory
should agree with the critical O(N ) theory, at least in the large N limit. This was conjec-
tured in [12]. But this conjecture appears to require a funny relation between the N ’s and
k ′ s of both theories. In other words, if we start with the quasi-fermion theory with N and
k and take the limit where λ, defined in [12], goes to one, then the conjecture would say
that this should be the same as the critical O(N ′ ) theory with some k ′ in the limit that
k ′ → ∞. But the behavior of the free energy in [12] would require that

                               N ′ ∝ N (λ − 1)[− log(λ − 1)]3                           (5.12)

as λ → 1. Here the proportionality is just a numerical constant. This formula is derived
as follows. First notice that [12] derived a formula for the free energy, in the large N limit,
for a theory of N fermions with a Chern-Simons coupling k. The conjecture is that this
matches a critical bosonic O(N ′ ) theory perturbed by a Chern-Simons coupling k ′ . When
λ → 1 we expect that k ′ → ∞. So we can compute the free energy of the critical bosonic
O(N ′ ) ignoring the Chern-Simons coupling. The free energy of the O(N ′ ) theory with no
Chern-Simons coupling goes like N ′ , for large N ′ [21]. Matching the two expressions for
the free energy we get the relation (5.12). At first sight, (5.12) seems incompatible with the
fact that N ′ should be an integer. However, we should recall that (5.12) is only supposed
to be true in the large N (and N ′ ) limit. Thus, it could be that there is an integer valued

                                               29
function of N and k which reduces to the right hand side of (5.12) in the large N limit.
Note that if this were true, we would also find the same function in the two point function
of the stress tensor, the function f discussed in (4.25). Of course, here we are assuming
that our λ̃ → ∞ limit is the same as the λ → 1 limit in [12].

5.4. The critical O(N ) fermion theory

    Starting from N free fermions, we can add a perturbation j̃02 . This is the three
dimensional Gross-Neveu model [22]. This is an irrelevant perturbation. And one can
wonder whether there is a UV fixed point that leads in the IR to the free fermion plus this
perturbation. In the large N limit, it is easy to see that such a fixed point exists and it is
given by a theory were the operator j̃0 in the UV has dimension one [23]. Thus it has the
properties of the quasi-boson theory. Again, this is a theory that is parity symmetric. In
[23] this theory was argued to be renormalizable to all orders in the 1/N expansion.
    We can now take the large g limit of the quasi-boson results (5.7)(5.8). Again, we
need to rescale ĵ0 = λ̃j0 . Only the βs1 ,s2 ,s3 survive in this limit. With one scalar operator,
we get only the γ0s1 s2 structure surviving, which is consistent with parity since now ĵ0 is
parity odd.
    Notice that, after the rescaling of the scalar operator, α0̂0̂0̂ still goes to zero if we hold
a3 fixed. This is necessary because the three point function of hĵ0 ĵ0 ĵ0 i should be zero by
parity.
    In principle, we could also introduce, in the large N limit, a parity breaking interaction
of the from ĵ 3 which would lead to a non-zero three point function. This could be obtained
by rescaling a3 in (5.8), so that a finite term remains.

5.5. Relation to other Chern-Simons matter theories

    Thoughout this paper we have focused on theories where the only single trace operators
are given by even spin currents, plus a scalar operator. This is definitely the case for
theories with N bosons or N fermions coupled to an O(N ) Chern-Simons theory.
    If instead we consider a theory of N complex fermions coupled to a U (N ) or SU (N )
Chern-Simons gauge field, then we have additional single trace operators. We still have
the same spectrum for even spins, but we also have additional odd spin currents. However,
the theory has a charge conjugation symmetry under which the odd spin currents get a
minus sign. Thus, the odd spin currents cannot appear in the right hand side of [Q, js ]
where s is even. These odd spin currents can (and do) appear in the right hand side of

                                               30
        Fig. 3: The analysis of three point functions can be summarized by this picture.
        The quasi-fermion theory is the top line and the quasi-boson is the bottom line. At
        the two end points we have the free boson or fermion theory on one side and the
        interacting O(N ) theories on the other. This is a statement about the three point
        functions. It would be interesting to understand whether we have a full duality
        between the two theories. Notice that the duality would relate a theory of fermions
        with a theory with scalars. This duality would be a form of bosonization in three
        dimensions. We also expect an RG flow connecting the quasi-boson theory on the
        top line and the quasi-fermion theory on the bottom line for general values of the
        Chern-Simons coupling.



∇.J4 in bilinear combinations. However, since we only considered insertions of J4 into
correlators involving operators with even spin, these extra terms do not contribute. Thus,
the whole analysis in the paper goes through, for these Chern-Simons theories. Our results
give the three point functions of even spin currents11 . Presumably a similar analysis can
be done for correlators of odd spin currents, but we will not do this here. It is also worth
mentioning that these theories do not have a single trace twist three operator which could
appear in the right hand side of ∇.J4 . Thus the higher spin symmetry breaking only
happens through double trace operators.


5.6. Comments about higher dimensions

      We can consider the extension of the small breaking ansatz that we explored for
d = 3 to higher dimensions. For simplicity we limit ourself to the case of almost conserved
currents which are symmetric traceless tensors. We assume that the presence of a conserved
J4 will again fix all three point functions12 . Thus, we are interested in the vector-like
scenarios when the conservation of J4 is broken at N1 .

 11
      The result for the anomalous dimension (5.6) would be changed by the presence of the odd
spin currents.
 12
      Though we have not proved this, the discussion of [14] looks almost identical in higher
dimensions for symmetric traceless tensors.

                                                31
      To analyze this possibility we consider ∂µ J µ−−− in an arbitrary number of dimensions.
This operator has twist d while the conserved currents has twist d − 2. Matching also the
spin we get that we can write the following equation

                             ∂µ J µ−−− = a∂− OJ−− + bO∂− J−− .                          (5.13)

where ab is fixed by the condition that the right hand side is a primary operator. The
scalar operator O has scaling dimension ∆ = 2 by matching the quantum numbers.
      First, notice that the unitarity bound for the scalar operators is d−2
                                                                          2 . And, thus, if we
restrict our attention to unitary theories, the equation (5.13) can be only valid in d ≤ 6.
      We also need to check that there exists a three point function hJ4 J2 Oi that reproduces
(5.13). Imposing the conservation of J2 leads tho the result (5.13) as long as ∆O 6=
d − 2. When d = 4, and ∆O = 2, the correlator hJ4 J2 Oi obeys J4 current conservation
automatically once we impose the J2 current conservation 13 .
      Thus, we conclude that the scenario that we considered in d = 3 is impossible to
realize in d = 414 . In d = 5 it seems possible to realize the scenario via the UV fixed
             ~ φ)
point of a −(φ. ~ 2 theory. This is a sick theory because the potential is negative, but one
would probably not see the problem in 1/N perturbation theory. In d = 6 we do not know
whether there is any example.

5.7. A comment on higher order parity violating terms

      The parity breaking terms in Vasiliev’s theories are characterized by a function θ(X) =
θ0 + θ2 X 2 + · · · [1]. The computations we have done are sensitive to θ0 . At tree level, the
term proportional to θ2 would start contributing to a planar five point function, but not to
lower point functions [12]. However, if we start with θ = 0 and we tried to add θ2 (keeping
θ0 = 0), we run into the following issues. For θ0 = 0 we can choose boundary conditions
that preserve the higher spin symmetry. That symmetry fixes all n point functions [14].
Thus, if turning on θ2 modifies a five point function, then it must be breaking the higher
spin symmetry. But if we break the higher spin symmetry we need to modify a three or
four point function at the same order. (To see this, we can just consider the correlator of

 13
      We thank David Poland for providing us with the Mathematica code to analyze the relevant
three point functions in the case of higher dimensions.
 14
      Notice that in d = 4 we can write also j− j−− . However, in this case J4 is automatically
conserved as soon as we impose conservation of J2 and J1 .

                                               32
J4 together with the currents that appear in the right hand side of (1.3)). However, θ2
would only contribute to the five point function. Thus, our conclusion is that the function
θ(X) is either constrained to be constant, or it’s non-constant part can be removed by a
field redefinition. In this argument we have assumed that these deformations of Vasiliev’s
theory in AdS4 also lead to boundary correlators that obey all the properties of a CFT.


6. Conclusions and discussion

      In this paper we have computed the three point correlation functions in conformal field
theories with a large Ñ approximation, where the higher spin symmetry is broken by 1/Ñ
effects. Equivalently, we have performed an on shell analysis of Vasiliev theories on AdS4 ,
constraining the boundary three point correlators. These constraints also apply to the
dS4 case, where they can be viewed as computing possible non-gaussianities in Vasiliev’s
theory. From the dS4 point of view we are computing the leading non-gaussianities of the
de Sitter wavefunction15 .
      We restricted the theories to contain a single trace spectrum with only one spin two
current (the stress tensor) and only one scalar. The scalar can only have dimensions either
one or two at leading order in Ñ . This defines two classes of correlators which we called
quasi-fermion (scalar of dimension two) and quasi-bosons, where the scalar has dimension
one. These are the only possible dimensions that enable the 1/Ñ breaking of the higher
spin symmetry. The final three point functions depend on an overall constant, Ñ , which is
also the two point function of the stress tensor. Thus we can view 1/Ñ as the coupling of
the bulk theory. In addition, they depend on an extra parameter which selects the relative
weights of the three possible structures in the correlators. The final results are given in
(5.4), (5.8). These results apply, in particular, to theories of N bosons or N fermions
coupled to an SO(N ) Chern-Simons gauge field. Here Ñ scales with N and the extra
parameter λ̃ is a function of N/k, where k is the Chern-Simons level, see (4.25).
      These results also apply to Vasiliev’s theories which have parity breaking terms in the
Lagrangian [1]. It also applies to Vasiliev’s theories with boundary conditions that break
the higher spin symmetry, but preserve conformal invariance.
      At strong coupling the quasi-fermion three point functions go into the three point
functions of the critical O(N ) theory. This suggests that there should be a duality between
 15
      Of course, for gravitons these match the particular structures discussed in [19], but with
particular coefficients.

                                              33
the small k limit of the Chern-Simons theories and the critical O(N ) theory [12]. However,
the thermal partition function computed in [12] suggests that if this duality is true, the
connection between the values of N and k of the two theories is rather intricate, see (5.12).
It would be nice to further understand this issue, and to find the correct duality, if there
is one. Naively, if our methods actually fix all n point functions, then all leading order
correlators would be consistent with the duality. This duality would be a three dimensional
version of bosonization.
    Our method was based on starting with the simplest possible even spin higher spin
current, J4 , and writing the most general form for its divergence. We then noted that the
violation of conservation of the J4 current leads to constraints on three point functions,
which we solved. These equations were mostly identical to the ones one would get in the
conserved case, except when acting on correlators with spins two or lower. In these cases
we obtained some relations which eliminated some of the free parameters and left only
two parameters in the quasi-fermion theory and three parameters in the quasi-boson case.
These parameters match with the free parameters that we have in large N Chern-Simons
models.
    Since we only considered the current J4 one can wonder whether it is possible to add
other deformation parameters which affect current conservation for higher spin currents
but not J4 . We argue in appendix F that this is not possible.
    An interesting extension of these results would be to carry out this procedure for
higher point functions. This is in principle conceptually straightforward, but it seems
computationally difficult. Note that this analysis amounts to an on-shell study of the
Vasiliev theory. We study the physical, gauge invariant, observables of this theory with
AdS4 or dS4 boundary conditions. As it has often been emphasized, the on shell analysis
of gauge theories can be simpler than doing computations in a fully Lorentz invariant
formulation.
    The methods discussed in this paper could be viewed as on-shell methods to compute
correlation functions in certain matter plus Chern-Simons theories. Note that we did not
have any gauge fixing issues, since we never considered gauge non-invariant quantities.
These methods apply only to the special class of theories that do not contain a twist three,
spin three single trace operator that can directly Higgs the J4 higher spin symmetry already
at leading order in N . It would also be interesting to consider cases where this Higgsing
can happen already for single trace operators. If the mixing with this other operator is
small, which occurs in weakly coupled theories, we can probably generalize the discussion

                                             34
of this paper. We would only need to add the twist three single trace operator in the right
hand side of the divergence of the current, ∇.J4 . This would lead to an on shell method for
computing correlators. Something in this spirit was discussed in [24], [25]. This Higgsing
mechanism, named “La Grande Bouffe” in [26] is also important for understanding the
emergence of a more ordinary looking string theory in AdS from the higher spin system.
    Our analysis also works for higher spin theories on de-Sitter space. In that case, we
are constraining the wavefunction of the universe. It is valid for the proposed examples
of dS-CFT [27,28], as well as further examples that one might propose by looking at the
parity violating versions of the Vasiliev theory. To consider these cases one should set
Ñ < 0 in our formulas . Of course, the constraints hold whether we know the CFT dual
or not!
    We have restricted our analysis to the case of AdS4 /CF T3 . Recently, examples of
AdS3 /CF T2 theories with higher spin symmetry have been considered. See for example
[29,30,31,32,33,34]. In lower dimensions the higher spin symmetry appears less restrictive,
so one would need a more sophisticated analysis than the one presented in this paper. On
the other hand, in higher dimensions the higher spin symmetry is more constraining. The
higher dimensional case will hopefully be discussed separately.
    We have used conformal symmetry in an important way, it would also be interesting
to study non-conformal cases. For example, we can expect to constrain the flows between
the top and bottom lines of figure 3.
    Acknowledgments
    We would like to thank N. Arkani-Hamed, D. Gross, S. Giombi, T. Hartman, K.
Hinterbichler, D. Poland, S. Rychkov, N. Seiberg, P. Sundell, X. Yin and E. Witten for
discussions.
    This work was supported in part by U.S. Department of Energy grant #DE-FG02-
90ER40542. The work of AZ was supported in part by the US National Science Foundation
under Grant No. PHY-0756966 and by the Department of Energy under Grant No.#DE-
FG02-91ER40671.



Appendix A. Why the divergence of the currents should be conformal primaries

    In this appendix we show that the divergence of an operator with spin becomes a
conformal primary when τ − 1 → 0. What happens is that the large representation
with twist τ and spin s is splitting into a representation with τ = 1 and spin s plus a

                                            35
representation with τ = 3 and spin s − 1. This second representation is what appears in
the right hand side of the divergence of Js as τ → 1. This is well known fact, that was
used in the past in [16,24,25,15]. Here we recall its proof for completeness.
    Let us normalize the current to one, hJs |Js i. Let us define
                                          ∂.Js = αOs−1                                  (A.1)
where Os−1 is also normalized to one. Then we have
                              h∂J|∂Ji ∝ (τ − 1)hJ|Ji = τ − 1
                                                                                        (A.2)
                              h∂J|∂Ji = α2
Where in the first line we converted the derivative in the bra into a special conformal
generator in the ket, and then commuted it through the derivative in the ket using the
conformal algebra. We ignored numerical factors. In the second line we used (A.1). The
conclusion is that
                                           τ − 1 ∝ α2                                   (A.3)
We now act on both sides of (A.1) with the special conformal generator Kν . On the
left we use the conformal algebra to evaluate the answer. We then get that αKµ Os−1 ∝
(τ − 1)Jµ ∝ α2 Jµ . The conclusion is that hKµ Os−1 |Kµ Os−1 i ∝ α2 . Thus we see that,
to leading order in α, the operator Os−1 is a conformal primary. Of course this is true
regardless of whether Os−1 is a single trace or multitrace operator, as long as τ − 1 is very
small.
    Finally, note that if we know α appearing in (A.1) then we can compute the anomalous
dimension τ − 1 of the current via the same formulas.
    In particular, in the quasi-fermion theory we have argued around (4.23) that a2 ∼
λ̃/Ñ . This together with the value of the j̃0 two point function (4.33) implies that for the
spin four current we have
                                          32 1 λ̃2
                                  τ4 − 1 =                                              (A.4)
                                         21π 2 Ñ 1 + λ̃2
This formula should be applied to O(N ) theory.
    For general group and arbitrary spin s we expect the following formula to be true
                                    1 λ̃2           1    λ̃2
                            τs − 1 = as       + bs                                      (A.5)
                                   Ñ 1 + λ̃2      Ñ (1 + λ̃2 )2
where as and bs are some fixed numbers.
    In principle these arguments allow us to fix the overall numerical coefficient. However,
as a shortcut, we have used the formula for the anomalous dimensions for the critical O(N )
theory given in eqn. (2.20) of [35]. Thus, we fixed the overall coefficient in (A.4) so that
                                                     16 s−2
the λ̃ → ∞ limit matches [35]. This also fixes as = 3π 2 2s−1 .



                                               36
Appendix B. Structure of the pseudo-charge conservation identities

    In this appendix we recall how the various coefficients that appear in the charge con-
servation identity are fixed. Assume that we consider only twist one three point functions,
and that the spins are all non-zero. Then we can use (4.7), perhaps including a j0eff op-
erator when it acts on j2 . Then the action of Q on hjs1 js2 js3 i gives an expression of the
form
                                                       
           X
                rbos,1,i ∂ 3−i hjs1 +i js2 js3 ibos + cyclic + [bos → fer] + [bos → odd]   (B.1)
        i=0,±2


Here we have the set of coefficients rtype,a,i . Here type goes over bos, fer, odd. a labels
the point and runs over 1,2,3. Finally i runs over ±2, 0. In total there are up to 33 = 27
coefficients. These coefficients result from multiplying the cs,s′ in (4.7) and the α, β and
γ in (4.12).
    These equations split into three sets of equations, one for each type. In each set of
equations the coefficients in front of different three point functions are all fixed up to an
overall constant, except in the cases where the corresponding three point structure vanishes
automatically, where, obviously, the corresponding coefficient is not fixed.
    For the boson and fermion types this follows from the discussion in appendix J of [14].
One simply needs to take successive light-cone limits of the three possible pairs of particles
to argue that the coefficients are all uniquely fixed.
    For the odd structure the situation is more subtle since some of the equations do
not have any non-zero solutions if we restrict to structures inside the triangle rule si ≤
si+1 + si−1 . However, there are non-zero solutions once we take into account that the
current non-conservation allows solutions outside the triangle. We have checked this in
some cases, and we think it is likely to be true in general, but we did not prove it. We
know that there is at least one solution with non-zero coefficients, which is the one that
the Chern-Simons construction would produce. Thus, in order to show that the solution is
unique, we would need to show that there is no solution after we set one of the coefficients
to zero. We leave this problem for the future.

                                                  37
Appendix C. Compendium of normalizations

      Here we would like to present more details on the normalization convention that we
chose for the currents. Noticed that we have set them by the choice (4.8). Here we will
check that with (4.8) the coefficients of all the terms in (4.7) are the same for the single
free boson and single free fermion theory. This is related to the fact that the higher spin
algebra is the same for bosons and fermions in three dimensions (see, for example, [8]).
      In this appendix we do computations in the free theories. Then it is convenient to
consider the matrix elements of the currents in Fourier space. As explained in the Appendix
J of [14] it is convenient to introduce a combination of the two momenta that appear in
the on shell matrix elements of a current with two on shell fermions or bosons . The idea
is roughly to change ∂ m ψ−
                          1
                            → (z + z̄)2m+1 , ∂ k ψ−
                                                  2
                                                    → (−1)k (z − z̄)2k+1 . Where the indices
1 and 2 denote the two fermion fields that make up the current. Then currents take a form

                                      js = αs z 2s − z̄ 2s
                                                          
                                                                                      (C.1)

where we introduced normalization factor αs explicitly.
      The charge generated by j4 that we consider in the main text is given then by
                                                     h 3      i
                                       6          6         3
                              
                        Q = αQ (z + z̄) − (z − z̄) ∝ ∂x− + ∂x−                        (C.2)
                                                                  1   2



where we again introduced the normalization factor for the charge. We have written the
action of the charge on the two free fields that make the current. Also notice that α2 is
fixed in a canonical way.
      Now we can start fixing the normalizations. We start from c2,4 = 1. Using [Q, j2 ] we
get
                                                    α4
                                          αQ =                                        (C.3)
                                                   12α2
then we consider [Q, j4 ] to fix c4,4 = 1, c4,6 = 1. It gives

                                              3
                                        α4 =    α2
                                             10
                                              2                                     (C.4)
                                                3
                                        α6 =       α2
                                               10

simple analysis further shows that
                                                      
                                                  3
                                       αs =                αs−2                       (C.5)
                                                  10

                                                  38
this follows from the formula (J.12) in [14] which can be written as
                              ′
                          s+s
                           X−2                          ′
 [Qs , js′ ] =(2s − 2)!             α̃r (s, s′ )∂ s+s −r−1 jr
                            r=0
              h                 i                      1                           1
                                                                                                   
          ′             s+s′ +r
 α̃r (s, s ) = 1 + (−1)                                               ±                              .
                                           Γ(r + s − s′ )Γ(s + s′ − r) Γ(r + s + s′ )Γ(s − s′ − r)
                                                                                                 (C.6)
Notice that in this normalization c2,2 is also fixed to one automatically. Here the ± sign
corresponds to the boson or fermion case.
    The case of bosons is almost identical. It is important that that the term with ± in
(C.6) is zero for all terms α̃r (4, s′ ) with r, s′ ≥ 2. These are all the cases where we can
compare the normalization between fermions and bosons. This implies that all constants
cs,s and cs,s±2 that appear in (4.7), are the same in the free boson or free fermion theories.
The case when one of the spins is zero, corresponds to the appearance of the scalar operator
of twist one j0 which is only present in the free boson theory.
    Moreover, using the formulas above and the results of [36] one can check that in the
normalization we are using nfree
                            s
                                 boson
                                       = nfree
                                          s
                                               fermion
                                                       . More precisely, one can first relate
the normalization used in [36] to the normalization here and then used the results of [36]
for two point functions to get that

                                  nfree
                                   s
                                        boson
                                              = nfree
                                                 s
                                                      fermion
                                                              = α2s Γ(1 + 2s)
                                                 1              3                                 (C.7)
                                          α2 =       , αs = ( )αs−2 .
                                                16π             10
We used this result in the main text.
    After we fix all normalizations of currents in this way we can compute all three point
functions in the free fermion theory hjs1 js2 js3 ifer (as well as in the theory of free boson to
get hjs1 js2 js3 ibos ). These are the solutions that we use in the main text, for example, in
(4.12).


Appendix D. Exploring the scalar sector for the quasi-fermion

    In this appendix we explain how the scalar sector correlation functions could be re-
covered. We start from writing the general form of the variation of the scalar operator j̃0
under the action of Q

                          [Q, j̃0 ] =c̃0̃,0̃ c0̃,0̃ ∂ 3 j̃0 + c̃0̃,2 c0̃,2 ∂ (∂− Jy− − ∂y J−− )
                                                                                                  (D.1)
                           [Q, 0̃] =c̃0̃,0̃ c0̃,0̃ ∂ 3 0̃ + c̃0̃,2 c0̃,2 ∂ 2⊥ 2

                                                              39
where remember coefficients c are the ones we would get in the theory of free fermion
with the normalization of the operators that we chose. The interesting part is a deviation
from the free theory which we denoted by c̃ following the notations used in the main text.
On the second line we introduce a shortened notation where we replaced js → s and in
addition, we also introduced the symbol ∂ 2⊥ to denote the combination of derivatives and
indices of J2 that appear in the first line.
       To fix some of the coefficients we use the h420̃i three point function. It has two different
structures: fermion and odd ones and we have already determined their coefficients. It is
easy to see that it leads to the identities

                                                              γ420̃ ∝ λ̃n0̃
                                                                                                                   (D.2)
                                                      c̃0̃,2 c0̃,2 n2 = β420̃

In the first line we took the divergence of the J4 current and compared to (2.2). In the
second line we integrated the current to get the charge acting on j̃0 . From the first line
we get that ñ0̃ = 1+1λ̃2 where we used the fact that at λ̃ = 0 it should be equal to 1. The
second equation then fixes
                                                                      1
                                                        c̃0̃,2 =           .                                       (D.3)
                                                                   1 + λ̃2

D.1. Fixing c̃0̃,0̃ and nontrivial consistency check

       Here we fix c̃0̃,0̃ by considering the pseudo-conservation identities for h0̃s1 s2 i where
both s1 and s2 are larger than 2 for simplicity. We will encounter a rather intricate
structure for this identity.
       We schematically write relevant terms in pseudo-conservation identities with their λ̃
scaling

               1                                  λ̃
  c̃0̃,0̃           h∂ 3 0̃s1 s2 ifer + c̃0̃,0̃         h∂ 3 0̃s1 s2 iodd +
            1 + λ̃2                             1 + λ̃2
                                                                                                           !
                                                                                      2
       1               1                              λ̃                             λ̃
                             h∂ 2⊥ 2s1 s2 ifer +             h∂ 2⊥ 2s1 s2 iodd +             h∂ 2⊥ 2s1 s2 ibos +
  1 + λ̃2          1 + λ̃2                         1 + λ̃2                         1 + λ̃2
     1                                λ̃
          h0̃ standard termsifer +         h0̃ standard termsiodd =
  1 + λ̃2                          1 + λ̃2
                                                                                                    !
        λ̃               1         1                      λ̃                     λ̃2
                  Z
  =           ∂x−                        h2s1 s2 ifer +         h2s1 s2 iodd +         h2s1 s2 ibos
     1 + λ̃2 1       |x − x1 |4 1 + λ̃2                 1 + λ̃2                1 + λ̃2
                                                                                                 (D.4)

                                                                40
Here, except for the terms involving ∂ 2⊥ 2 all components of the currents are minus, as
are all derivatives. Now let’s start looking for a solution. All λ̃ dependence is explicit in
this equation. Note that the equations contain terms with various λ̃ dependence. First we
match the double poles at λ̃2 = −1. This requires the following two identities
                                                  1
                                          Z
                     2⊥
                  h∂ 2s1 s2 iodd = ∂x−                    (h2s1 s2 ifer − h2s1 s2 ibos ) ,
                                        1     |x − x1 |4
                                                                                                         (D.5)
                1
          Z
      ∂x−              h2s1 s2 iodd = −h∂ 2⊥ 2s1 s2 ifer + h∂ 2⊥ 2s1 s2 ibos .
        1   |x − x1 |4
 The second line can also be used to make all terms of the fer terms work. This would
work nicely if we set c̃0̃,0̃ = 1, which is what we wanted to argue. In fact, replacing the
second line, we get all the parity odd pieces in the full equation work out. By parity odd
we mean the terms that are odd under y → −y.
     We are then left with all terms that are even under y → −y. After using the first
equation in (D.5) we are left with the condition
                                                                  1
                                                                     Z
                 3
              h∂ 0̃s1 s2 iodd + h0̃ standard termsiodd = ∂x−             h2s1 s2 ibos   (D.6)
                                                         1    |x − x1 |4
     To summarize, in this subsection we fixed c̃0̃,0̃ = 1 and presented the self-consistency
relations (D.5)(D.6) that are necessary for the whole construction to work. We checked
one of the (D.5) in the light cone limit and it indeed works. It would be nice to check these
identities more fully.

D.2. Fixing hs0̃0̃i
     To fix these three point functions we consider pseudo-conservation identities that we
get from hs0̃0̃i. Notice that we already know that h20̃0̃i and h40̃0̃i functions are given by
β222 . The first follows from the stress tensor Ward identity and the two point function.
The second follows from the action of the charge Q on j̃0 , with c̃0̃,0̃ = 1 that we derived
above.
     Starting from this we can build the induction. Consider first pseudo-conservation
identity for h40̃0̃i. We get schematically
                         1
                                 h∂ 5 20̃0̃ifer + h∂ 3 40̃0̃ifer +
                                                                
β60̃0̃ h∂60̃0̃ifer +
                       1 + λ̃2
                                                                                                 !
   1         1                        λ̃
                  h4∂ 2⊥ 20̃ifer +          h4∂ 2⊥ 20̃iodd + h4∂ 3 0̃0̃ifer + λ̃h4∂ 3 0̃0̃iodd       + x2 ↔ x3
1 + λ̃2   1 + λ̃2                  1 + λ̃ 2
                                                                                          !
     λ̃                1            1                    λ̃
               Z
 =         ∂x−                           h420̃ifer +           h420̃iodd + [x2 ↔ x3 ] ,
   1 + λ̃2 2       |x − x1 |4 1 + λ̃2                  1 + λ̃2
                                                                                                         (D.7)

                                                         41
Again, matching the double poles at λ̃2 = −1 requires
                                                 1
                                          Z
                         2⊥
                      h4∂ 20̃iodd =∂x−                  h420̃ifer ,
                                        2    |x − x1 |4
                                                                                                              (D.8)
                                                    1
                                             Z
                          2⊥
                       h4∂ 20̃ifer = − ∂x−                 h420̃iodd .
                                           2    |x − x1 |4
Then replacing these identities in the equations implies that the odd piece cancels and the
fermion piece works if
                                                Ñ
                                           β60̃0̃ = β222 =
                                                      .                             (D.9)
                                              1 + λ̃2
Then we proceed by induction. Considering pseudo-charge conservation identities for hs0̃0̃i
we get a similar story. Double pole matching leads to
                                                 1
                                          Z
                           2⊥
                        hs∂ 20̃iodd =∂x−                hs20̃ifer ,
                                        2    |x − x1 |4
                                                                                                             (D.10)
                                                    1
                                             Z
                            2⊥
                         hs∂ 20̃ifer = − ∂x−               hs20̃iodd ,
                                           2    |x − x1 |4
and the fermion piece fixes
                                                                     Ñ
                                           βs0̃0̃ = β222 =                 .                                 (D.11)
                                                                   1 + λ̃2
     This fixes the three point function involving two j̃0 operators.

D.3. Fixing γ0̃0̃0̃
     To fix the last three point function we consider the WI h0̃0̃0̃i. We get schematically
the equation
                                                 λ̃n0                                  1
                                                                  X            Z
         γ0̃0̃0̃ (∂13 + ∂23 + ∂33 )h0̃0̃0̃iodd =      β20̃0̃             ∂x−                  h20̃0̃ifer .   (D.12)
                                                  Ñ              perm
                                                                          1        |x − x1 |4

     The right hand side of this equation can be computed explicitly using the star-triangle
identity (see, for example, [37]). More precisely, each term in the right hand side of (D.12)
can be rewritten (thanks to our sandwich geometry as we can pull out the derivatives) as
      1                            Z                   1
                2     2
         ∂ − ∂x− + ∂x− − 6∂x− ∂x−
      3/2 x1
                                       d3 x                                + perm. (D.13)
    x23          2     3      2   3         |x − x1 | |x − x2 |3 |x − x3 |
                                                     2


The integral is finite and is given by x2x23
                                          x2
                                             . By taking the derivatives and summing over
                                                  12    13
permutations which come from different contractions in (D.12) one can check that the sum
is actually zero. Thus we are forced to set

                                                       γ0̃0̃0̃ = 0.                                          (D.14)

This is nicely consisted with the critical O(N ) limit.

                                                             42
Appendix E. Exploring the scalar sector for the quasi-boson

     Now we would like to go through the same analysis but for the quasi-boson theory.
     We start by writing the general form of the variation of the scalar operator j0 under
the action of Q
                                        [Q, j0 ] = c̃0,0 c0,0̃ ∂ 3 j0 + c̃0,2 c0,2 ∂j2             (E.1)

Recall that coefficients c are the ones we would get in the theory of free boson with the
normalization of the operators that we chose. The interesting part is a deviation from the
free theory which we denoted by c̃ following the notations used in the main text.
     First we consider the h420i three point function. It has two different structures: boson
and odd ones. This leads to the identities

                                                        γ420 ∝ λ̃n0
                                                                                                   (E.2)
                                                c̃0,2 c0,2 n2 = α420 = α222

In the first line we simply have taken the divergence of J4 and used (2.3). In the second
line we have integrated J4 around j0 . From the first line we get that ñ0 = 1+1λ̃2 where we
used the fact that at λ̃ = 0 it should be equal to 1. The second equation then fixes

                                                                       1
                                                       c̃0,2 =               .                     (E.3)
                                                                   1 + λ̃2

E.1. Fixing c̃0,0

     To fix c̃0,0 we are analogously considering the pseudo-conservation identities for h0s1 s2 i
where both s1 and s2 are larger than 2 for simplicity.
     We schematically write relevant terms in pseudo-conservation identities with their λ̃
scaling

             1                                    λ̃
   c̃0,0             h∂ 3 0s1 s2 ibos + c̃0,0               h∂ 3 0s1 s2 iodd +
           1 + λ̃2                              1 + λ̃2
                                                                                         !
      1             1                      λ̃                      λ̃2
                         h∂2s1 s2 ibos +         h∂2s1 s2 iodd +         h∂2s1 s2 ifer       +
   1 + λ̃2       1 + λ̃2                 1 + λ̃2                 1 + λ̃2
                                                                                                   (E.4)
       1                                               λ̃
              h0 standard termsibos +                          h0 standard termsiodd =
   1 + λ̃2                                        1 + λ̃2
          λ̃                    1
                        Z                                                                     
                                           2⊥                 2⊥               2 2⊥
    =                                    h∂ 2s1 s2 ibos + λ̃h∂ 2s1 s2 iodd + λ̃ h∂ 2s1 s2 ifer
      (1 + λ̃2 )2           |x − x1 |2

                                                                  43
Again we match the double poles at λ̃2 = −1 to obtain

                                             1
                                                  Z
                                                      h∂ 2⊥ 2s1 s2 ibos − h∂ 2⊥ 2s1 s2 ifer
                                                                                            
                             h∂2s1 s2 iodd =       2
                                         |x − x1 |
                                                                                                         (E.5)
                                             1
                                       Z
      −h∂2s1 s2 ibos + h∂2s1 s2 ifer =               h∂ 2⊥ 2s1 s2 iodd
                                         |x − x1 |2

Now using these equations, we find that the all the even pieces under y → −y work properly
only if c̃0,0 = 1. Then the odd piece reduces to the condition

                                                                             1
                                                                     Z
                    3
                h∂ 0s1 s2 iodd + h0 standard termsiodd =                           2
                                                                                     h∂ 2⊥ 2s1 s2 ifer   (E.6)
                                                                         |x − x1 |

We have not checked explicitly whether (E.6) and (E.5) are true, but they should be for
consistency.

E.2. Fixing hs00i

      To fix these three point functions we consider pseudo-conservation identities that we
get from hs00i. Notice that we already know that h200i and h400i functions are given by
α222 . This follows from the stress tensor Ward identity and from the action of Q on j0 ,
together with the normalization of j0 .
      Starting from this we can build the induction. Consider first pseudo-conservation
identity for h400i. We get schematically

                               1
                                 h∂ 5 200ibos + h∂ 3 400ibos +
                                                            
  α600 h∂600ibos +
                         1 + λ̃2
                                                           !
         1             1                   λ̃
  +                         h4∂20ibos +          h4∂20iodd +
      1 + λ̃2       1 + λ̃2              1 + λ̃2
                                                                                                         (E.7)
         1              3              λ̃         3
  +             h4∂ 00ibos +                   h4∂ 00iodd + [x2 ↔ x3 ] =
      1 + λ̃2                        1 + λ̃2
                                                                                                !
      λ̃                    1            1                      λ̃
                Z
  =                                           h4∂ 2⊥ 20ibos +         h4∂ 2⊥ 20iodd + [x2 ↔ x3 ] ,
    1 + λ̃2             |x − x1 |2    1 + λ̃2                 1 + λ̃2

      Again looking at the double pole at λ̃2 = −1 we get the equations

                                                              1
                                                      Z
                                     h4∂20ibos = −                   h4∂ 2⊥ 20iodd ,
                                                          |x − x1 |2
                                                                                                         (E.8)
                                                            1
                                                 Z
                                     h4∂20iodd =                  h4∂ 2⊥ 20ibos
                                                       |x − x1 |2

                                                          44
This implies that α600 = α222 .
    By induction through the identities

                                               1
                                       Z
                       hs∂20ibos = −                  hs∂ 2⊥ 20iodd ,
                                           |x − x1 |2
                                                                                              (E.9)
                                             1
                                    Z
                       hs∂20iodd =                2
                                                    hs∂ 2⊥ 20ibos
                                        |x − x1 |

we get that
                                                  αs00 = α222 .                              (E.10)

    Again, we did not verify the identities (E.9) but they are necessary for consistency.

E.3. Vanishing of the double trace term in the h000i identity

    When we studied the pseudo-charge conservation identity for the triple scalar corre-
lator hj0 j0 j0 i in the main text we said that the double trace term in the divergence of J 4 ,
(2.3), vanishes. Here we prove that assertion.
    We start from the following integral
                                   Z
              I(x1 , x2 , x3 ) = a2 d3 xhj0 (x)j0 (x1 )ih∂ 2⊥J2 (x)j0 (x2 )j0 (x3 )i         (E.11)

where operator j0 (x)∂ 2⊥ J2 (x) comes from an insertion of the double trace term in (2.3).
After some algebra one can re-express this as the following integral
                                                    Z                   1
   I(x1 , x2 , x3 ) ∼ ∂x− ∂x− − ∂x− ∂x− ∂y3 − ∂x− ∂y2     d3 x          2
                        1   2     3    2         3             |x − x1 | |x − x2 ||x − x3 |
                                                                                       (E.12)
written in this way it is manifestly finite. However, we rewrite it again as follows
                                                                                      
                                                             1 +
   I(x1 , x2 , x3 ) ∼ ∂x− ∂x− − ∂x− y23 ∂x− J(x1 , x2 , x3 ) − x23 ∂y3 J(x1 , x2 , x3 )   (E.13)
                        1   2     3          3                2

where
                                                                       1
                                              Z
                      J(x1 , x2 , x3 ) =          d3 x                                       (E.14)
                                                         |x − x1 |2 |x − x2 |3 |x − x3 |
is the conformally invariant integral. It is divergent, however, the difference in (E.13) is,
of course, finite. We can take this integral using the well-known star-triangle identity. We
regularize the integral as
                                                                         1
                                          Z
                   Jδ (x1 , x2 , x3 ) =       d3+δ x                                         (E.15)
                                                         |x − x1 |2+δ |x − x2 |3 |x − x3 |

                                                         45
using the star-triangle formula, expanding in δ and plugging into (E.12) we see that the
divergent piece cancels and the finite piece is given by
                           1                      x+ y + x+ y + x+ y
                                                       1 23      2 31      3 12
      I(x1 , x2 , x3 ) ∼        ∂x− ∂x− − ∂x− ∂x−            2          2
                                                                                    . (E.16)
                         |x23 |   1   2     1   3  |x1 − x2 | |x1 − x3 | |x2 − x3 |
The total contribution to the pseudo-charge conservation identity is given by the sum of
three terms which is zero
                       I(x1 , x2 , x3 ) + I(x2 , x3 , x1 ) + I(x3 , x1 , x2 ) = 0.      (E.17)
Thus, double trace non-conservation does not contribute to the h000i pseudo-charge con-
servation identity.


Appendix F. Impossibility to add any further double trace deformations
      Our whole analysis was based on studying the possible terms that appear in the
divergence of the spin four current J4 . We could wonder whether we can add further
double terms to the divergence of higher spin currents which are not fixed by the analysis
we have already done. In other words, these would be terms that appear for higher spin
currents but not for the spin four current. This would only be possible via the odd terms,
which are the only ones that could have a non-conserved current. We suspect that all odd
terms are fixed by the J4 pseudo-conservation identities, but we did not prove it. Therefore
we will do a separate analysis to argue that we cannot continuously deform the divergence
of the higher spin currents once we have fixed the J4 one.
      Let us imagine that it is possible to introduce an additional parameter for the breaking
of some higher spin current. We will focus first on possible double trace terms. Consider
the lowest spin s at which the new term enters16
                                      ∇.Js = qJs1 Js2 + rest                             (F.1)
By assumption s > 4. The rest denotes terms that are required by J4 non-conservation.
This extra term contributes to the hJs Js1 Js2 iodd three point function. Consider then
pseudo-conservation identity for the J4 current on hjs−2 js1 js2 i. For s1 , s2 < s − 2 we get
                          0 = qhjs js1 js2 iodd + rest = qhjs js1 js2 iodd               (F.2)
where by “rest” we denote the terms that were present when q = 0. These sum up to zero
by construction so we have to conclude that q = 0.
      The argument slightly changes when one of the spins is equal to s − 2. Below we
discuss this case separately for the quasi-boson and quasi-fermion.
 16
    This expression is schematic. We require and ǫ tensor in the right hand side if the two
operators Js1 and Js2 have twist one.

                                                   46
F.1. Case of quasi-fermion

      In this case if, say, s1 = s − 2 we have two possibilities for s2 : 2 or 0̃. So we write
schematically
                                      ∇.Js = q(ǫJs−2 J2 + ∂Js−2 J˜0 ) + rest                         (F.3)

where ǫ is the three dimension Levi-Civita tensor.                           This modifies the correlators
hJs Js−2 J2 iodd and hJs Js−2 j̃0 iodd . Consider now pseudo-conservation of the J4 current
for hjs−2 js−2 j2 i we get

                                   q (∂1 hjs js−2 j2 iodd + ∂2 hjs−2 js j2 iodd ) = 0.               (F.4)

To check this identity it is convenient to introduce in the formula above the dependence
on the insertion of j2 (x) and consider the integral

                                     1
                      Z
             ∂x−          d3 x              (∂1 hs s − 2 2(x)iodd + ∂2 hs − 2 s 2(x)iodd ) = 0       (F.5)
                  3              |x − x3 |4

      Using formula (D.5) we get that it is equivalent to the identity

                                   ∂1 hs s − 2 ∂ 2⊥ 2ifer + ∂2 hs − 2 s ∂ 2⊥ 2ifer
                                                                                                     (F.6)
                             −∂1 hs s − 2 ∂ 2⊥ 2ibos − ∂2 hs − 2 s ∂ 2⊥ 2ibos = 0

We now take a light cone limit hs1 s2 ∂ 2⊥ 2i.                     More specifically we take the limits
limy→0 y|y| limx+ →0 and limy→0 y 2 limx+ →0 , which pick out the boson and fermion pieces
respectively. Then one can check that (F.6) does not have a solution.
      The next case to consider is hs − 2 s − 2 0̃i. In this case we have
                                                                           
                                  q ∂1 hs s − 2 0̃iodd + ∂2 hs − 2 s 0̃iodd = 0.                     (F.7)

Again we introduce the explicit dependence on the insertion point 0̃(x) and integrate to
get
                                 1
                  Z
                      d3 x
                                                                                          
              q                         ∂ 1 hs s − 2 0̃(x)i odd + ∂ 2 hs − 2 s 0̃(x)i odd   =0       (F.8)
                             |x − x3 |2
Using (4.10) this becomes

                                   q [∂1 hs s − 2 0ibos + ∂2 hs − 2 s 0ibos ] = 0.                   (F.9)

This identity does not hold and we conclude that q = 0.

                                                           47
F.2. Case of quasi-boson

    In this case if, say, s1 = s − 2 we have two possibilities for s2 : 2 or 0. So we write
schematically
                                 ∇.Js = q(ǫJs−2 J2 + ǫ∂ 2 Js−2 J0 ) + rest                 (F.10)

We modify the correlators hJs Js−2 J2 iodd and hJs Js−2 j0 iodd . Consider now the J4 pseudo-
conservation identity for hjs−2 js−2 j2 i. The argument is then identical to the fermion
one. We conclude that the first term in (F.10) is not possible. Then we consider the J4
pseudo-conservation on hjs−2 js−2 j0 i. In this case we have


                               q (∂1 hjs js−2 j0 iodd + ∂2 hjs−2 js j0 iodd ) = 0.         (F.11)


we introduce the explicit dependence on the insertion point 0(x) and integrate to get

                               1
                Z
                    d3 x              (∂1 hs s − 2 0(x)iodd + ∂2 hs − 2 s 0(x)iodd ) = 0   (F.12)
                           |x − x3 |4

Using (4.27) we find
                                 ∂1 hs s − 2 0̃ifer + ∂2 hs − 2 s 0̃ifer = 0.              (F.13)

This identity does not hold and we conclude that q = 0.


F.3. Triple trace deformation

    Here we would like to analyze the new triple trace deformations.


                                        ∇.Js = qJs1 Js2 Js3 + rest.                        (F.14)


First notice that this deformation does not affect any of three point functions. Thus, it
does not affect any of the identities that we got using J4 . Thus, if our assumption that the
identities for the three point functions fix the odd pieces completely is correct then any of
these terms will not affect any of our conclusions.
    Applying arguments similar to the above ones for pseudo-conservation of J4 on
hjs−2 js1 js2 js3 i we expect to find that we cannot add the q deformation. However, we
did not perform a complete analysis.

                                                       48
Appendix G. Motivational introduction

      In this appendix we give a longer motivational introduction for the study of the con-
straints imposed by the higher spin symmetry.
      As it is well known, the structure of theories with massless particles with spin is highly
constrained. For example, massless particles of spin one lead to the Yang Mills theory,
at leading order in derivatives. Similarly massless particles of spin two lead to general
relativity. We also need the assumption that the leading order interaction at low energies
is such that the particles are charged under the gauge symmetries or that gravitons couple
to energy in the usual way.
      Now for massive spin one particles, what can we say? If we assume that we have
a weakly interacting theory for energies much bigger than the mass of the particle, and
we assume a local bulk lagrangian without other higher spin particles, then we find that
the theory should contain at least a Yang-Mills field plus a Higgs particle. We can then
view the theory as having a spontaneously broken gauge symmetry. Notice that we are
assuming that the theory is weakly coupled.
      Now consider a theory that has massless particles with higher spin, s > 2. If we
are in flat space and the S-matrix can be defined, then we expect that the Coleman-
Mandula theorem should forbid any interaction [38,39]17 . Here we are assuming that the
couplings of the higher spin fields are such that particles are charged under the higher spin
transformations. This is the case if we have a graviton in the theory, the same vertex that
makes sure that the graviton couples to the energy of the higher spin particle also implies
that the particles transforms under a higher spin charge.
      Now we can consider theories that contain massive particles with spin s > 2. We
assume that we have a weakly coupled theory at all energies, even at very high energies.
In other words, we assume a suitable decay of the amplitudes at high energy (such as the
one we have in string theory). Then it is likely that the theory in question is a full string
theory. In other words, we can propose the following conjecture:

 17
      The Coleman-Mandula theorem assumes that we have a finite number of states below a
certain mass shell. For the purpose of this discussion we assume that it still applies...

                                                 49
      A Lorentz invariant theory in three or more dimensions, which is weakly coupled 18 ,
contains a massive particle with spin s > 2, and has amplitudes with suitably bounded
behavior at high energies, should be a string theory.19
      Of course, there are many string compactifications, so we do not expect this to fix the
theory uniquely. This is precisely the problem that the old dual models literature tried to
solve, and string theory was found as a particular solution. The above conjecture is just
that it is the only solution. As an analogy, in gauge theories with a spontaneously broken
symmetry we can have many realizations of the Higgs mechanism. However, the paradigm
of spontaneously broken gauge symmetry constrains the theories in an important way. In
string theories, or theories with higher spin massive particles, we also expect that their
structure is constrained by the spontaneous breaking of the higher spin symmetry. For
example, we expect that once we have a higher spin particle, we have infinitely many of
them. It is notoriously difficult to study infinite dimensional symmetries. It is even more
difficult if there is no unbroken phase that is easy to study. These ideas were discussed in
[40,41] (see [42] for a recent discussion containing many further references).
      Here is where the AdS case appears a bit simpler. In AdS space, as opposed to flat
space, it is possible to have a theory which is interacting (in AdS) but that nevertheless
realizes the unbroken higher spin symmetry [1,2,3]. The fact that these theories exist
can be understood from AdS/CFT, they are duals to free theories [4,5,6,7,8,9]. In any
example of AdS/CFT that has a coupling constant on the boundary we can take the zero
coupling limit. In this limit, the boundary theory has single trace operators sitting at the
twist bound. These are all states that are given by bilinears in the fields. Furthermore,
this forms a closed subsector under the OPE [43]. Thus we can always find a Vasiliev-
type theory as a consistent truncation of the zero coupling limit of the full theory. The
Vasiliev-type theories contain only the higher spin fields (perhaps plus a scalar). They are
analogous to the Yang Mills theory without an elementary Higgs particle. For example,

 18
      The weak coupling assumption is important. In fact, the reader might think of the following
apparent counter example. Consider the scattering of higher spin excited states of hydrogen
atoms. These are higher spin states, but they are not strings! However, these states are not
weakly coupled to each other in the particle physics sense.
 19
      One probably needs to assume some interactions between the massive spin particles which
makes sure that the particles are “charged” under the higher spin symmetry. This would be
automatically true if we also include an m = 0, s = 2 graviton. This should also apply to theories
like large N QCD, which have a conserved stress tensor leading to massless graviton in the bulk.

                                               50
if we take the zero λ limit of the N = 4 super Yang-Mills theory, we get a certain theory
with higher spin symmetry. Besides the higher spin currents, this theory contains lots of
other states that are given by single trace operators which contain more than two field
insertions, say four, six, fields in the trace. Here the Vasiliev-like theory is the restriction
to the bilinears.
    In AdS4 we can realize the dream of constraining the theory from its symmetries.
If the higher spin symmetry is unbroken, we can determine all the correlation functions
on the AdS boundary. This can be done not only at tree level, but for all values of the
bulk coupling constant (1/N ). This is one way of reading the results of [14]. Here we are
assuming that the AdS theory is such that we can define boundary correlators obeying the
usual axioms of a CFT. In other words, we are assuming the AdS/CFT correspondence.
    In Vasiliev-type theories the higher spin symmetry can be broken only by two (or
three) particle states, which is what we study in this article.
    Finally, one would like to study theories that, besides the higher spin fields, also
contain enough extra fields that can Higgs the higher spin symmetry at the classical level.
In such theories the mass of the higher spin particles would be nonzero and finite even
for very small bulk coupling. First one needs to understand what kind of “matter” can
be added to the Vasiliev theory and still preserve the higher spin symmetry. Since the
higher spin symmetry is highly constraining, it is likely that the only “matter” that we
can add is what results from large N gauge theories. As far as we know, this is an
unproven speculation, and it is closely related to the conjecture above. Note that such
gauge theories have a Hagedorn density of states, so that the bulk theories would look
more like ordinary string theories. Once, this problem is understood, one could consider a
case where the Higgs mechanism can be introduced with a small parameter (as in N = 4
SYM, for example). Here we will have single trace terms in the divergence of the higher
spin currents. This breaking mechanism will be constrained by the higher spin symmetry.
Understanding how it is constrained when the coupling is small will probably give us clues
for how the mechanism works for larger values of the coupling. In addition, it could give
us a way to do perturbation theory for correlators in gauge theories in a completely on
shell fashion.
    Whether this idea is feasible or not, it remains to be seen...




                                              51
                                        References

 [1] M. A. Vasiliev, In *Shifman, M.A. (ed.): The many faces of the superworld* 533-610.
     [hep-th/9910096].
 [2] M. A. Vasiliev, Phys. Lett. B 567, 139 (2003). [hep-th/0304049].
 [3] M. A. Vasiliev, [arXiv:1203.5554 [hep-th]].
 [4] B. Sundborg, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 102, 113 (2001). [hep-th/0103247].
 [5] E. Witten, Talk at the John Schwarz 60-th Birthday Symposium,                         //
     http://theory.caltech.edu/jhs60/witten/1.html.
 [6] E. Sezgin and P. Sundell, Nucl. Phys. B 644, 303 (2002), [Erratum-ibid. B 660, 403
     (2003)]. [hep-th/0205131]
 [7] I. R. Klebanov, A. M. Polyakov, Phys. Lett. B550, 213-219 (2002). [hep-th/0210114].
 [8] E. Sezgin and P. Sundell, JHEP 0507, 044 (2005). [hep-th/0305040].
 [9] S. Giombi and X. Yin, JHEP 1009, 115 (2010). [arXiv:0912.3462 [hep-th]].
[10] S. Giombi and X. Yin, JHEP 1104, 086 (2011). [arXiv:1004.3736 [hep-th]].
[11] S. Giombi and X. Yin, [arXiv:1105.4011 [hep-th]].
[12] S. Giombi, S. Minwalla, S. Prakash, S. P. Trivedi, S. R. Wadia, X. Yin, [arXiv:1110.4386
     [hep-th]].
[13] O. Aharony, G. Gur-Ari, R. Yacoby, [arXiv:1110.4382 [hep-th]].
[14] J. Maldacena and A. Zhiboedov, [arXiv:1112.1016 [hep-th]].
[15] L. Girardello, M. Porrati and A. Zaffaroni, Phys. Lett. B 561, 289 (2003). [hep-
     th/0212181].
[16] W. Heidenreich, J. Math. Phys. 22, 1566 (1981).
[17] S. Giombi, S. Prakash, X. Yin, [arXiv:1104.4317 [hep-th]].
[18] M. S. Costa, J. Penedones, D. Poland, S. Rychkov, [arXiv:1107.3554 [hep-th]].
[19] J. M. Maldacena, G. L. Pimentel, JHEP 1109, 045 (2011). [arXiv:1104.2846 [hep-th]].
[20] T. Hertog and K. Maeda, JHEP 0407, 051 (2004). [hep-th/0404261].
[21] S. Sachdev, Phys. Lett. B 309, 285 (1993). [hep-th/9305131].
[22] D. J. Gross and A. Neveu, Phys. Rev. D 10, 3235 (1974)..
[23] B. Rosenstein, B. J. Warr and S. H. Park, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 1433 (1989).
[24] D. Anselmi, Nucl. Phys. B 541, 369 (1999). [hep-th/9809192].
[25] J. Henn, C. Jarczak and E. Sokatchev, Nucl. Phys. B 730, 191 (2005). [hep-
     th/0507241].
[26] M. Bianchi, J. F. Morales and H. Samtleben, JHEP 0307, 062 (2003). [hep-
     th/0305052].
[27] D. Anninos, T. Hartman and A. Strominger, [arXiv:1108.5735 [hep-th]].
[28] G. S. Ng and A. Strominger, [arXiv:1204.1057 [hep-th]].
[29] M. R. Gaberdiel and R. Gopakumar, Phys. Rev. D 83, 066007 (2011). [arXiv:1011.2986
     [hep-th]].

                                             52
[30] M. R. Gaberdiel and T. Hartman, JHEP 1105, 031 (2011). [arXiv:1101.2910 [hep-th]].
[31] M. R. Gaberdiel, R. Gopakumar, T. Hartman and S. Raju, JHEP 1108, 077 (2011).
     [arXiv:1106.1897 [hep-th]].
[32] C. -M. Chang and X. Yin, [arXiv:1106.2580 [hep-th]].
[33] K. Papadodimas and S. Raju, Nucl. Phys. B 856, 607 (2012). [arXiv:1108.3077 [hep-
     th]].
[34] C. -M. Chang and X. Yin, [arXiv:1112.5459 [hep-th]].
[35] W. Ruhl, [hep-th/0607197].
[36] D. Anselmi, Class. Quant. Grav. 17, 1383 (2000). [hep-th/9906167].
[37] D. I. Kazakov, Phys. Lett. B 133, 406 (1983).
[38] S. R. Coleman, J. Mandula, Phys. Rev. 159, 1251-1256 (1967).
[39] R. Haag, J. T. Lopuszanski, M. Sohnius, Nucl. Phys. B88, 257 (1975).
[40] D. J. Gross, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 1229 (1988)..
[41] G. W. Moore, In *Boston 1993, Proceedings, Supersymmetry and unification of fun-
     damental interactions, SUSY 93* 540-550. [hep-th/9308052].
[42] A. Sagnotti, [arXiv:1112.4285 [hep-th]].
[43] A. Mikhailov, [hep-th/0201019].




                                          53
